The Miami bid depended on whether the stadium underwent renovations .
With their NFC-best 15 -- 1 regular season record , the Panthers clinched home-field advantage throughout the NFC playoffs for the first time in franchise history .
Other key receivers included veteran Jerricho Cotchery -LRB- 39 receptions for 485 yards -RRB- , rookie Devin Funchess -LRB- 31 receptions for 473 yards and five touchdowns -RRB- , and second-year receiver Corey Brown -LRB- 31 receptions for 447 yards -RRB- .
Carolina 's offensive line also featured two Pro Bowl selections : center Ryan Kalil and guard Trai Turner .
Fellow lineman Mario Addison added 6 1/2 sacks .
Although the team had a 7 -- 0 start , Manning led the NFL in interceptions .
With the defense carrying the team despite the issues with the offense , the Broncos finished the regular season with a 12 -- 4 record and earned home-field advantage throughout the AFC playoffs .
Tight end Owen Daniels was also a big element of the passing game with 46 receptions for 517 yards .
Overall , the offense ranked 19th in scoring with 355 points and did not have any Pro Bowl selections .
Cornerbacks Aqib Talib -LRB- three interceptions -RRB- and Chris Harris , Jr. -LRB- two interceptions -RRB- were the other two Pro Bowl selections from the defense .
His prediction turned out to be accurate .
Elway stated , `` We 've had Super Bowl success in our white uniforms . ''
Additional funding will be provided by the city council , which has announced plans to set aside seed funding for the event .
Unlike NBC and Fox , CBS does not have a Spanish-language outlet of its own that could broadcast the game -LRB- though per league policy , a separate Spanish play-by-play call was carried on CBS 's second audio program channel for over-the-air viewers -RRB- .
ESPN Deportes broadcast pre-game and post-game coverage , while Martin , Allegre , and Sutcliffe contributed English-language reports for ESPN 's SportsCenter and Mike & Mike .
As of January 26 , the advertisements had not yet sold out .
CBS mandated that all advertisers purchase a package covering time on both the television and digital broadcasts of the game , meaning that for the first time , digital streams of the game would carry all national advertising in pattern with the television broadcast .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The flagship stations of each station in the markets of each team will carry their local play-by-play calls .
As KOA and WBT are both clear-channel stations , the local broadcasts will be audible over much of the western United States after sunset -LRB- for Denver -RRB- and the eastern United States throughout the game -LRB- for Carolina -RRB- .
In accordance with contractual rules , the rest of the stations in the Broncos and Panthers radio networks will either carry the Westwood One feed or not carry the game at all .
In late November 2015 , reports surfaced stating that `` multiple acts '' would perform during the halftime show .
After a punt from both teams , Carolina got on track with a 9-play , 73-yard scoring drive .
After a Denver punt , Carolina drove to the Broncos 45-yard line .
Carolina got off to another strong start after the kickoff , with Newton completing a 42-yard pass to Corey Brown .
Although several players dove into the pile to attempt to recover it , Newton did not and his lack of aggression later earned him heavy criticism .
Carolina had two more drives , but failed to get a first down on each one .
Ware had five total tackles and two sacks .
Ward had seven total tackles , a fumble recovery , and an interception .
Newton completed 18 of 41 passes for 265 yards , with one interception .
He was also the team 's leading rusher with 45 yards on six carries .
Brown caught four passes for 80 yards , while Ginn had four receptions for 74 .
Ealy was the top defensive performer for Carolina with four total tackles , three sacks , a forced fumble , a fumble recovery , and an interception .
Defensive End Charles Johnson had four total tackles , a sack , and a forced fumble .
Super Bowl 50 featured numerous records from individuals and teams .
Their 194 yards and 11 first downs were both the lowest totals ever by a Super Bowl winning team .
Only seven other teams had ever gained less than 200 yards in a Super Bowl , and all of them had lost .
Kony Ealy tied a Super Bowl record with three sacks .
Denver was just 1-of-14 on third down , while Carolina was barely better at 3-of-15 .
Manning became the oldest quarterback ever to win a Super Bowl at age 39 , and the first quarterback ever to win a Super Bowl with two different teams , while Gary Kubiak became the first head coach to win a Super Bowl with the same franchise he went to the Super Bowl with as a player .
In the 19th century the Krasiński Palace Garden was remodelled by Franciszek Szanior .
Within the central area of the park one can still find old trees dating from that period : maidenhair tree , black walnut , Turkish hazel and Caucasian wingnut trees .
The Monument of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising is also situated here .
The unique character and history of the park is reflected in its landscape architecture -LRB- pavilions , sculptures , bridges , cascades , ponds -RRB- and vegetation -LRB- domestic and foreign species of trees and bushes -RRB- .
What makes this park different from other green spaces in Warsaw is the presence of peacocks and pheasants , which can be seen here walking around freely , and royal carps in the pond .
The Wilanów Palace Park , dates back to the second half of the 17th century .
It covers the area of 43 ha .
Its central French-styled area corresponds to the ancient , baroque forms of the palace .
The eastern section of the park , closest to the Palace , is the two-level garden with a terrace facing the pond .
The park around the Królikarnia Palace is situated on the old escarpment of the Vistula .
The park has lanes running on a few levels deep into the ravines on both sides of the palace .
Warsaw 's prewar Jewish population of more than 350,000 constituted about 30 percent of the city 's total population .
World War II changed the demographics of the city , and to this day there is much less ethnic diversity than in the previous 300 years of Warsaw 's history .
It is surrounded by green .
As the university garden it is open to the public every day .
Among the events worth particular attention are : the International Frédéric Chopin Piano Competition , the International Contemporary Music Festival Warsaw Autumn , the Jazz Jamboree , Warsaw Summer Jazz Days , the International Stanisław Moniuszko Vocal Competition , the Mozart Festival , and the Festival of Old Music .
From the mid-1930s , the Great Theatre building housed the Upati Institute of Dramatic Arts -- the first state-run academy of dramatic art , with an acting department and a stage directing department .
Several commemorative events take place every year .
By the 19th century this tradition had become a festive event , and it continues today .
The city council organize concerts and other events .
They are now playing in the 4th league -LRB- 5th tier in Poland -RRB- - the bottom professional league in the National -- Polish Football Association -LRB- PZPN -RRB- structure .
In 1653 the poet Zygmunt Laukowski asks the question :
The origin of the legendary figure is not fully known .
The second mermaid reached the mouth of the Vistula River and plunged into its waters .
No one will ever see the Warsaw I knew .
Let me just write about it .
Let this Warsaw not disappear forever , he commented .
It was also ranked as one of the most liveable cities in Central Europe .
Today Warsaw is considered an `` Alpha -- '' global city , a major international tourist destination and a significant cultural , political and economic hub .
The city is a significant centre of research and development , BPO , ITO , as well as of the Polish media industry .
It has been said that Warsaw , together with Frankfurt , London , Paris and Barcelona is one of the cities with the highest number of skyscrapers in the European Union .
Warsaw has also been called `` Eastern Europe 's chic cultural capital with thriving art and club scenes and serious restaurants '' .
After the Third Partition of Poland in 1795 , Warsaw was incorporated into the Kingdom of Prussia .
In 1806 during the Napoleonic Wars , the city became the official capital of the Grand Duchy of Warsaw , a puppet state of the First French Empire established by Napoleon Bonaparte .
In accordance with the decisions of the Congress of Vienna , the Russian Empire annexed Warsaw in 1815 and it became part of the `` Congress Kingdom '' .
Only in 1918 did it regain independence from the foreign rule and emerge as a new capital of the independent Republic of Poland .
The German invasion in 1939 , the massacre of the Jewish population and deportations to concentration camps led to the uprising in the Warsaw ghetto in 1943 and to the major and devastating Warsaw Uprising between August and October 1944 .
Most notably , the city required painstaking rebuilding after the extensive damage it suffered in World War II , which destroyed 85 % of its buildings .
On 9 November 1940 , the city was awarded Poland 's highest military decoration for heroism , the Virtuti Militari , during the Siege of Warsaw -LRB- 1939 -RRB- .
Buildings represent examples of nearly every European architectural style and historical period .
Folk etymology attributes the city name to a fisherman , Wars , and his wife , Sawa .
According to legend , Sawa was a mermaid living in the Vistula River with whom Wars fell in love .
See also the Vršovci family which had escaped to Poland .
A native or resident of Warsaw is known as a Varsovian -- in Polish warszawiak -LRB- male -RRB- , warszawianka -LRB- female -RRB- , warszawiacy -LRB- plural -RRB- .
The first fortified settlements on the site of today 's Warsaw were located in Bródno -LRB- 9th/10th century -RRB- and Jazdów -LRB- 12th/13th century -RRB- .
14th-century Warsaw 's economy rested on mostly crafts and trade .
In the following years the town expanded towards the suburbs .
Several private independent districts were established , the property of aristocrats and the gentry , which were ruled by their own laws .
Three times between 1655 -- 1658 the city was under siege and three times it was taken and pillaged by the Swedish , Brandenburgian and Transylvanian forces .
Poland stopped by itself the full brunt of the Red Army and defeated an idea of the `` export of the revolution '' .
The city would become the centre of urban resistance to Nazi rule in occupied Europe .
When the fighting ended , almost all survivors were massacred , with only a few managing to escape or hide .
Eventually the Home Army fighters and civilians assisting them were forced to capitulate .
They were transported to PoW camps in Germany , while the entire civilian population was expelled .
The city resumed its role as the capital of Poland and the country 's centre of political and economic life .
Many of the historic streets , buildings , and churches were restored to their original form .
Let Thy Spirit descend and renew the face of the land !
This land !
It is located in the heartland of the Masovian Plain , and its average elevation is 100 metres -LRB- 330 ft -RRB- above sea level .
The highest point on the left side of the city lies at a height of 115.7 metres -LRB- 379.6 ft -RRB- -LRB- `` Redutowa '' bus depot , district of Wola -RRB- , on the right side -- 122.1 metres -LRB- 400.6 ft -RRB- -LRB- `` Groszówka '' estate , district of Wesoła , by the eastern border -RRB- .
6.5 m -LRB- 21.3 ft -RRB- above Vistula level -RRB- .
It is 20 to 25 m -LRB- 65.6 to 82.0 ft -RRB- high in the Old Town and Central district and about 10 m -LRB- 32.8 ft -RRB- in the north and south of Warsaw .
It goes through the city and plays an important role as a landmark .
The pattern of the Vistula terraces is asymmetrical .
They consist of still quite natural streams and lakes as well as the pattern of drainage ditches .
The right side of Warsaw has a different pattern of geomorphological forms .
Aeolian sand with a number of dunes parted by peat swamps or small ponds cover the highest terrace .
Most of the historical buildings were thoroughly reconstructed .
Among the first structures of the early baroque the most important are St. Hyacinth 's Church -LRB- 1603 -- 1639 -RRB- and Sigismund 's Column -LRB- 1644 -RRB- .
The economic growth during the first years of Congress Poland caused a rapid rise architecture .
The Neoclassical revival affected all aspects of architecture , the most notable are the Great Theater -LRB- 1825 -- 1833 -RRB- and buildings located at Bank Square -LRB- 1825 -- 1828 -RRB- .
Some 19th-century buildings in the Praga district -LRB- the Vistula 's right bank -RRB- have been restored although many have been poorly maintained .
The oldest park in Praga , the Praga Park , was established in 1865 -- 1871 and designed by Jan Dobrowolski .
The flora of the city may be considered very rich in species .
Bielany Forest nature reserve is connected with Kampinos Forest .
It is home to rich fauna and flora .
Within the forest there are three cycling and walking trails .
During the first years after the war , the population growth was c. 6 % , so shortly the city started to suffer from the lack of flats and of areas for new houses .
Eight years later , in 1909 , there were 281,754 Jews -LRB- 36.9 % -RRB- , 18,189 Protestants -LRB- 2.4 % -RRB- and 2,818 Mariavites -LRB- 0.4 % -RRB- .
This led to construction of hundreds of places of religious worship in all parts of the town .
After the war , the new communist authorities of Poland discouraged church construction and only a small number were rebuilt .
A city is also a commune -- but with the city charter .
Both cities and communes are governed by a mayor -- but in the communes the mayor is vogt -LRB- wójt in Polish -RRB- , however in the cities -- burmistrz .
An example of such entitlement is a car registration : a gmina can not register cars , this is a powiat 's task -LRB- i.e. a registration number depends on what powiat a car had been registered , not gmina -RRB- .
In this case we say about city county or powiat grodzki .
Such cities are for example Lublin , Kraków , Gdańsk , Poznań .
In Warsaw , its districts additionally have some of powiat 's entitlements -- like already mentioned car registration .
For example , the district Wola has its own evidence and the district Ursynów -- its own -LRB- and the cars from Wola have another type of registration number than these from Ursynów -RRB- .
Bills passed by a simple majority are sent to the mayor -LRB- the President of Warsaw -RRB- , who may sign them into law .
Generally , in Poland , the mayors of bigger cities are called presidents -- i.e. such cities , which have over 100,000 people or these , where already was president before 1990 .
Between 1975 and 1990 the Warsaw Presidents was simultaneously the Warsaw Voivode .
Since 2002 the President of Warsaw is elected by all of the citizens of Warsaw .
Warsaw 's ever-growing business community has been noticed globally , regionally , and nationally .
MasterCard Emerging Market Index has noted Warsaw 's economic strength and commercial center .
Foreign investors ' financial participation in the city 's development was estimated in 2002 at over 650 million euro .
The GDP per capita in Warsaw amounted to PLN 94 000 in 2008 -LRB- c. EUR 23 800 , USD 33 000 -RRB- .
Warsaw leads the region of East-Central Europe in foreign investment and in 2006 , GDP growth met expectations with a level of 6.1 % .
It also has one of the fastest growing economies , with GDP growth at 6.5 percent in 2007 and 6.1 percent in the first quarter of 2008 .
The last two models listed were also sent abroad and assembled in a number of other countries , including Egypt and Colombia .
The license for the production of the Aveo expired in February 2011 and has since not been renewed .
Currently the company is defunct .
The city limits cover 516.9 square kilometres -LRB- 199.6 sq mi -RRB- , while the metropolitan area covers 6,100.43 square kilometres -LRB- 2,355.39 sq mi -RRB- .
Through generations of assimilation and mixing with the native Frankish and Roman-Gaulish populations , their descendants would gradually merge with the Carolingian-based cultures of West Francia .
The Norman dynasty had a major political , cultural and military impact on medieval Europe and even the Near East .
They adopted the Gallo-Romance language of the Frankish land they settled , their dialect becoming known as Norman , Normaund or Norman French , an important literary language .
The Normans are noted both for their culture , such as their unique Romanesque architecture and musical traditions , and for their significant military accomplishments and innovations .
Norman cultural and military influence spread from these new European centres to the Crusader states of the Near East , where their prince Bohemond I founded the Principality of Antioch in the Levant , to Scotland and Wales in Great Britain , to Ireland , and to the coasts of north Africa and the Canary Islands .
In the course of the 10th century , the initially destructive incursions of Norse war bands into the rivers of France evolved into more permanent encampments that included local women and personal property .
The treaty offered Rollo and his men the French lands between the river Epte and the Atlantic coast in exchange for their protection against further Viking incursions .
The territory was roughly equivalent to the old province of Rouen , and reproduced the Roman administrative structure of Gallia Lugdunensis II -LRB- part of the former Gallia Lugdunensis -RRB- .
Earlier Viking settlers had begun arriving in the 880s , but were divided between colonies in the east -LRB- Roumois and Pays de Caux -RRB- around the low Seine valley and in the west in the Cotentin Peninsula , and were separated by traditional pagii , where the population remained about the same with almost no foreign settlers .
Rollo 's contingents who raided and ultimately settled Normandy and parts of the Atlantic coast included Danes , Norwegians , Norse -- Gaels , Orkney Vikings , possibly Swedes , and Anglo-Danes from the English Danelaw under Norse control .
The Norman language was forged by the adoption of the indigenous langue d'oïl branch of Romance by a Norse-speaking ruling class , and it developed into the regional language that survives today .
The Normans thereafter adopted the growing feudal doctrines of the rest of France , and worked them into a functional hierarchical system in both Normandy and in England .
The new Norman rulers were culturally and ethnically distinct from the old French aristocracy , most of whom traced their lineage to Franks of the Carolingian dynasty .
Many Normans of Italy , France and England eventually served as avid Crusaders under the Italo-Norman prince Bohemund I and the Anglo-Norman king Richard the Lion-Heart .
Opportunistic bands of Normans successfully established a foothold in Southern Italy -LRB- the Mezzogiorno -RRB- .
Probably as the result of returning pilgrims ' stories , the Normans entered the Mezzogiorno as warriors in 1017 at the latest .
The Normans fought so valiantly that Prince Guaimar III begged them to stay , but they refused and instead offered to tell others back home of the prince 's request .
The two most prominent Norman families to arrive in the Mediterranean were descendants of Tancred of Hauteville and the Drengot family , of whom Rainulf Drengot received the county of Aversa , the first Norman toehold in the south , from Duke Sergius IV of Naples in 1030 .
The Hauteville family achieved princely rank by proclaiming prince Guaimar IV of Salerno `` Duke of Apulia and Calabria '' .
The Kingdom of Sicily lasted until 1194 , when it was transferred to the House of Hohenstaufen through marriage .
Institutionally , the Normans combined the administrative machinery of the Byzantines , Arabs , and Lombards with their own conceptions of feudal law and order to forge a unique government .
The Kingdom of Sicily thus became characterized by Norman , Byzantine Greek , Arab , Lombard and `` native '' Sicilian populations living in harmony , and its Norman rulers fostered plans of establishing an Empire that would have encompassed Fatimid Egypt as well as the Crusader states in the Levant .
Norman mercenaries were first encouraged to come to the south by the Lombards to act against the Byzantines , but they soon fought in Byzantine service in Sicily .
They were prominent alongside Varangian and Lombard contingents in the Sicilian campaign of George Maniaces in 1038 -- 40 .
There is debate whether the Normans in Greek service actually were from Norman Italy , and it now seems likely only a few came from there .
It is also unknown how many of the `` Franks '' , as the Byzantines called them , were Normans and not other Frenchmen .
By then however , there were already Norman mercenaries serving as far away as Trebizond and Georgia .
They were based at Malatya and Edessa , under the Byzantine duke of Antioch , Isaac Komnenos .
Later , many took up service with the Armenian state further south in Cilicia and the Taurus Mountains .
From 1073 to 1074 , 8,000 of the 20,000 troops of the Armenian general Philaretus Brachamius were Normans -- formerly of Oursel -- led by Raimbaud .
The known trade between Amalfi and Antioch and between Bari and Tarsus may be related to the presence of Italo-Normans in those cities while Amalfi and Bari were under Norman rule in Italy .
The Raoulii were descended from an Italo-Norman named Raoul , the Petraliphae were descended from a Pierre d'Aulps , and that group of Albanian clans known as the Maniakates were descended from Normans who served under George Maniaces in the Sicilian expedition of 1038 .
Having obtained the consent of pope Gregory VII and acting as his vassal , Robert continued his campaign conquering the Balkan peninsula as a foothold for western feudal lords and the Catholic Church .
They joined the fleet that had previously conquered Corfu and attacked Dyrrachium from land and sea , devastating everything along the way .
Under these harsh circumstances , the locals accepted the call of emperor Alexius I Comnenus to join forces with the Byzantines against the Normans .
The Albanian forces could not take part in the ensuing battle because it had started before their arrival .
Immediately before the battle , the Venetian fleet had secured a victory in the coast surrounding the city .
Forced to retreat , Alexius ceded the command to a high Albanian official named Comiscortes in the service of Byzantium .
The Normans were now free to penetrate into the hinterland ; they took Ioannina and some minor cities in southwestern Macedonia and Thessaly before appearing at the gates of Thessalonica .
Dissension among the high ranks coerced the Normans to retreat to Italy .
They lost Dyrrachium , Valona , and Butrint in 1085 , after the death of Robert .
This time , the Albanians sided with the Normans , dissatisfied by the heavy taxes the Byzantines had imposed upon them .
With their help , the Normans secured the Arbanon passes and opened their way to Dibra .
The lack of supplies , disease and Byzantine resistance forced Bohemond to retreat from his campaign and sign a peace treaty with the Byzantines in the city of Deabolis .
The Normans were in contact with England from an early date .
Not only were their original Viking brethren still ravaging the English coasts , they occupied most of the important ports opposite England across the English Channel .
His stay in Normandy -LRB- until 1016 -RRB- influenced him and his sons by Emma , who stayed in Normandy after Cnut the Great 's conquest of the isle .
He also brought many Norman counsellors and fighters , some of whom established an English cavalry force .
This concept never really took root , but it is a typical example of the attitudes of Edward .
He invited his brother-in-law Eustace II , Count of Boulogne to his court in 1051 , an event which resulted in the greatest of early conflicts between Saxon and Norman and ultimately resulted in the exile of Earl Godwin of Wessex .
The nobility of England were part of a single Normans culture and many had lands on both sides of the channel .
Early Norman kings of England , as Dukes of Normandy , owed homage to the King of France for their land on the continent .
They considered England to be their most important holding -LRB- it brought with it the title of King -- an important status symbol -RRB- .
Eventually , the Normans merged with the natives , combining languages and traditions .
In the course of the Hundred Years ' War , the Norman aristocracy often identified themselves as English .
The Anglo-Norman language became distinct from the Latin language , something that was the subject of some humour by Geoffrey Chaucer .
The Anglo-Norman language was eventually absorbed into the Anglo-Saxon language of their subjects -LRB- see Old English -RRB- and influenced it , helping -LRB- along with the Norse language of the earlier Anglo-Norse settlers and the Latin used by the church -RRB- in the development of Middle English .
Initially the Normans maintained a distinct culture and ethnicity .
Yet , with time , they came to be subsumed into Irish culture to the point that it has been said that they became `` more Irish than the Irish themselves . ''
Both cultures intermixed , borrowing from each other 's language , culture and outlook .
Norman descendants today can be recognised by their surnames .
Names such as French , -LRB- De -RRB- Roche , Devereux , D'Arcy , Treacy and Lacy are particularly common in the southeast of Ireland , especially in the southern part of County Wexford where the first Norman settlements were established .
Other Norman names such as Furlong predominate there .
Another common Norman-Irish name was Morell -LRB- Murrell -RRB- derived from the French Norman name Morel .
Other names beginning with Fitz -LRB- from the Norman for son -RRB- indicate Norman ancestry .
These included Fitzgerald , FitzGibbons -LRB- Gibbons -RRB- dynasty , Fitzmaurice .
Other families bearing such surnames as Barry -LRB- de Barra -RRB- and De Búrca -LRB- Burke -RRB- are also of Norman extraction .
Normans came into Scotland , building castles and founding noble families who would provide some future kings , such as Robert the Bruce , as well as founding a considerable number of the Scottish clans .
Having spent time at the court of Henry I of England -LRB- married to David 's sister Maud of Scotland -RRB- , and needing them to wrestle the kingdom from his half-brother Máel Coluim mac Alaxandair , David had to reward many with lands .
The process was continued under David 's successors , most intensely of all under William the Lion .
The Norman-derived feudal system was applied in varying degrees to most of Scotland .
Scottish families of the names Bruce , Gray , Ramsay , Fraser , Ogilvie , Montgomery , Sinclair , Pollock , Burnard , Douglas and Gordon to name but a few , and including the later royal House of Stewart , can all be traced back to Norman ancestry .
Even before the Norman Conquest of England , the Normans had come into contact with Wales .
In these original ventures , the Normans failed to make any headway into Wales .
Subsequent to the Conquest , however , the Marches came completely under the dominance of William 's most trusted Norman barons , including Bernard de Neufmarché , Roger of Montgomery in Shropshire and Hugh Lupus in Cheshire .
Norman words , such as baron -LRB- barwn -RRB- , first entered Welsh at that time .
The legendary religious zeal of the Normans was exercised in religious wars long before the First Crusade carved out a Norman principality in Antioch .
They were major foreign participants in the Reconquista in Iberia .
Bohemond was the de facto leader of the Crusade during its passage through Asia Minor .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Although not part of a planned operation , the conquest had much more permanent results than initially expected .
On 1 May 1191 , Richard 's fleet arrived in the port of Limassol on Cyprus .
He ordered Isaac to release the prisoners and the treasure .
Isaac refused , so Richard landed his troops and took Limassol .
The local barons abandoned Isaac , who considered making peace with Richard , joining him on the crusade , and offering his daughter in marriage to the person named by Richard .
But Isaac changed his mind and tried to escape .
Richard then proceeded to conquer the whole island , his troops being led by Guy de Lusignan .
By 1 June , Richard had conquered the whole island .
His exploit was well publicized and contributed to his reputation ; he also derived significant financial gains from the conquest of the island .
Richard left for Acre on 5 June , with his allies .
Before his departure , he named two of his Norman generals , Richard de Camville and Robert de Thornham , as governors of Cyprus .
The marriage was celebrated with great pomp and splendor .
The rapid Anglo-Norman conquest proved more important than it seemed .
The island occupied a key strategic position on the maritime lanes to the Holy Land , whose occupation by the Christians could not continue without support from the sea .
Their troops were gathered in Normandy , Gascony and were later reinforced by Castilian colonists .
Norman architecture typically stands out as a new stage in the architectural history of the regions they subdued .
In the visual arts , the Normans did not have the rich and distinctive traditions of the cultures they conquered .
The church was utilised by the dukes as a unifying force for their disparate duchy .
The chief monasteries taking part in this `` renaissance '' of Norman art and scholarship were Mont-Saint-Michel , Fécamp , Jumièges , Bec , Saint-Ouen , Saint-Evroul , and Saint-Wandrille .
These centres were in contact with the so-called `` Winchester school '' , which channeled a pure Carolingian artistic tradition to Normandy .
In the final decade of the 11th and first of the 12th century , Normandy experienced a golden age of illustrated manuscripts , but it was brief and the major scriptoria of Normandy ceased to function after the midpoint of the century .
The former , with their violence , caused the wanton destruction of many Norman edifices ; the latter , with its assault on religion , caused the purposeful destruction of religious objects of any type , and its destabilisation of society resulted in rampant pillaging .
In Britain , Norman art primarily survives as stonework or metalwork , such as capitals and baptismal fonts .
In southern Italy , however , Norman artwork survives plentifully in forms strongly influenced by its Greek , Lombard , and Arab forebears .
Of the royal regalia preserved in Palermo , the crown is Byzantine in style and the coronation cloak is of Arab craftsmanship with Arabic inscriptions .
Lombard Salerno was a centre of ivorywork in the 11th century and this continued under Norman domination .
Finally should be noted the intercourse between French Crusaders traveling to the Holy Land who brought with them French artefacts with which to gift the churches at which they stopped in southern Italy amongst their Norman cousins .
For this reason many south Italian churches preserve works from France alongside their native pieces .
Fécamp Abbey and Saint-Evroul Abbey were centres of musical production and education .
It is still the most common form of pitch representation in English - and German-speaking countries today .
Also at Fécamp , the staff , around which neumes were oriented , was first developed and taught in the 11th century .
Under the German abbot Isembard , La Trinité-du-Mont became a centre of musical composition .
There they continued the tradition of singing .
He soon struck out on his own with financial backers , setting up laboratories and companies to develop a range of electrical devices .
Đuka had never received a formal education .
Tesla 's progenitors were from western Serbia , near Montenegro. :12
Nikola completed `` Lower '' or `` Primary '' School , followed by the `` Lower Real Gymnasium '' or `` Normal School . ''
Tesla said that this contact with nature made him stronger , both physically and mentally .
During his first year , Tesla never missed a lecture , earned the highest grades possible , passed nine exams -LRB- nearly twice as many required -RRB- , started a Serbian culture club , and even received a letter of commendation from the dean of the technical faculty to his father , which stated , `` Your son is a star of first rank . ''
He was `` mortified when -LSB- his -RSB- father made light of -LSB- those -RSB- hard won honors . ''
During his second year , Tesla came into conflict with Professor Poeschl over the Gramme dynamo , when Tesla suggested that commutators were n't necessary .
Tesla said that he `` conquered -LSB- his -RSB- passion then and there , '' but later he was known to play billiards in the US .
When exam time came , Tesla was unprepared and asked for an extension to study , but was denied .
He never graduated from the university and did not receive grades for the last semester .
He spent his spare time playing cards with local men on the streets .
Tesla 's work for Edison began with simple electrical engineering and quickly progressed to solving more difficult problems .
Tesla was offered the task of completely redesigning the Edison Company 's direct current generators .
In 1885 , he said that he could redesign Edison 's inefficient motor and generators , making an improvement in both service and economy .
:54 -- 57 :64 This has been noted as an odd statement from an Edison whose company was stingy with pay and who did not have that sort of cash on hand .
The investors showed little interest in Tesla 's ideas for new types of motors and electrical transmission equipment and also seemed to think it was better to develop an electrical utility than invent new systems .
During this time , he questioned the value of his education .
The two men were experienced in setting up companies and promoting inventions and patents for financial gain .
Based on Tesla 's patents and other ideas they agreed to back him financially and handle his patents .
The motor used polyphase current which generated a rotating magnetic field to turn the motor -LRB- a principle Tesla claimed to have conceived in 1882 -RRB- .
He found the time there frustrating because of conflicts between him and the other Westinghouse engineers over how best to implement AC power .
This World 's Fair devoted a building to electrical exhibits .
Over several years there had been a series of proposals and open competitions on how best to utilize power generated by the falls with many systems being proposed by several US and European companies including two-phase and three-phase AC , high-voltage DC , and even compressed air .
Adams pumped Tesla for information about the current state of all the competing systems .
In 1897 , Westinghouse explained his financial difficulties to Tesla in stark terms , saying that if things continue the way they were he would no longer be in control of Westinghouse Electric and Tesla would have to `` deal with the bankers '' to try to collect future royalties .
His early experiments were with Crookes tubes , a cold cathode electrical discharge tube .
Tesla is quoted by The New York Times as saying , `` I am in too much grief to talk .
What can I say ? ''
Tesla 's demonstrations and principles were written about widely through various media outlets .
Tesla tried to sell his idea to the U.S. military as a type of radio-controlled torpedo , but they showed little interest .
Remote radio control remained a novelty until World War I and afterward , when a number of countries used it in military programs .
Tesla took the opportunity to further demonstrate `` Teleautomatics '' in an address to a meeting of the Commercial Club in Chicago , while he was travelling to Colorado Springs , on 13 May 1899 .
This was the beginning of years of patent battles over radio with Tesla 's patents being upheld in 1903 , followed by a reverse decision in favor of Marconi in 1904 .
The court declared that their decision had no bearing on Marconi 's claim as the first to achieve radio transmission , just that since Marconi 's claim to certain patents were questionable , he could not claim infringement on those same patents -LRB- there are claims the high court was trying to nullify a World War I claim against the U.S. government by the Marconi Company via simply restoring Tesla 's prior patent -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The 1978 book Colorado Springs Notes , 1899 -- 1900 contains descriptions of Tesla 's experiments .
People walking along the street observed sparks jumping between their feet and the ground .
Sparks sprang from water line taps when touched .
Horses in a livery stable bolted from their stalls after receiving shocks through their metal shoes .
He mentioned them in a letter to reporter Julian Hawthorne at the Philadelphia North American on 8 December 1899 and in a December 1900 letter about possible discoveries in the new century to the Red Cross Society where he referred to messages `` from another world '' that read `` 1 ... 2 ... 3 ... '' .
Tesla wrote another plea to Morgan , but it was also fruitless .
Morgan still owed Tesla money on the original agreement , and Tesla had been facing foreclosure even before construction of the tower began .
-LSB- improper synthesis ? -RSB-
Tesla continued the project for another nine months .
In July 1903 , Tesla wrote to Morgan that in addition to wireless communication , Wardenclyffe would be capable of wireless transmission of electric power .
On 14 October 1904 , Morgan finally replied through his secretary , stating , `` It will be impossible for -LSB- me -RSB- to do anything in the matter , '' after Tesla had written to Morgan when the financier was meeting with the Archbishop of Canterbury in an attempt to appeal to his Christian spirit .
The whole room will thus , Mr. Tesla claims , be converted into a health-giving and stimulating electromagnetic field or ` bath . ' ''
:266
-LSB- improper synthesis ? -RSB-
Accounts on how this came about vary .
It has been described as being couched in the form of a `` consulting fee '' to get around Tesla 's aversion to accept charity , or by one biographer -LRB- Marc Seifer -RRB- , as a type of unspecified settlement .
While crossing a street a couple of blocks from the hotel , Tesla was unable to dodge a moving taxicab and was thrown heavily to the ground .
Tesla did n't raise any question as to who was at fault and refused medical aid , only asking to be taken to his hotel via cab .
Tesla was bedridden for some months and was unable to continue feeding pigeons from his window ; soon , they failed to come .
He at once resumed the pigeon-feeding walks on a much more limited scale , but frequently had a messenger act for him .
Tesla tried to interest the US War Department , the United Kingdom , the Soviet Union , and Yugoslavia in the device .
Tesla 's remains were taken to the Frank E. Campbell Funeral Home at Madison Ave. and 81st St. A long-time friend and supporter of Tesla , Hugo Gernsback , commissioned a sculptor to create a death mask , now displayed in the Nikola Tesla Museum .
After the funeral , Tesla 's body was taken to the Ferncliff Cemetery in Ardsley , New York , where it was later cremated .
The following day , a second service was conducted by prominent priests in the Trinity Chapel -LRB- today 's Serbian Orthodox Cathedral of Saint Sava -RRB- in New York City .
`` The meal was required to be ready at eight o'clock ... He dined alone , except on the rare occasions when he would give a dinner to a group to meet his social obligations .
Now , is n't that wonderful ?
By what process does the mind get at all this ? ''
He said that he had been visited by a specific injured white pigeon daily .
Tesla stated ,
During his early life , Tesla was repeatedly stricken with illness .
He typically did not make drawings by hand but worked from memory .
Beginning in his childhood , Tesla had frequent flashbacks to events that had happened previously in his life. :33
Swezey recalled one morning when Tesla called him at 3 a.m. : `` I was sleeping in my room like one dead ... Suddenly , the telephone ring awakened me ... -LSB- Tesla -RSB- spoke animatedly , with pauses , -LSB- as he -RSB- ... work -LSB- ed -RSB- out a problem , comparing one theory to another , commenting ; and when he felt he had arrived at the solution , he suddenly closed the telephone . ''
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Tesla , though polite and soft-spoken , did not have any known relationships .
However , when he did engage in a social life , many people spoke very positively and admiringly of Tesla .
:80
Tesla was a good friend of Francis Marion Crawford , Robert Underwood Johnson , Stanford White , Fritz Lowenstein , George Scherff , and Kenneth Swezey .
Twain notably described Tesla 's induction motor invention as `` the most valuable patent since the telephone . ''
Tesla occasionally attended dinner parties held by Viereck and his wife .
:249 Tesla believed that atoms are immutable -- they could not change state or be split in any way .
He stated that the theory was `` worked out in all details '' and that he hoped to soon give it to the world .
Further elucidation of his theory was never found in his writings. :309
His advocacy of it was , however , to push it further .
He believed that women would become the dominant sex in the future .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
A computational problem is understood to be a task that is in principle amenable to being solved by a computer , which is equivalent to stating that the problem may be solved by mechanical application of mathematical steps , such as an algorithm .
More precisely , it tries to classify problems that can or can not be solved with appropriately restricted resources .
In turn , imposing restrictions on the available resources is what distinguishes computational complexity from computability theory : the latter theory asks what kind of problems can , in principle , be solved algorithmically .
In computational complexity theory , a problem refers to the abstract question to be solved .
For example , consider the problem of primality testing .
The instance is a number -LRB- e.g. 15 -RRB- and the solution is `` yes '' if the number is prime and `` no '' otherwise -LRB- in this case `` no '' -RRB- .
Stated another way , the instance is a particular input to the problem , and the solution is the output corresponding to the given input .
As in a real-world computer , mathematical objects other than bitstrings must be suitably encoded .
A decision problem can be viewed as a formal language , where the members of the language are instances whose output is yes , and the non-members are those instances whose output is no .
The objective is to decide , with the aid of an algorithm , whether a given input string is a member of the formal language under consideration .
If the algorithm deciding this problem returns the answer yes , the algorithm is said to accept the input string , otherwise it is said to reject the input .
An example of a decision problem is the following .
The problem consists in deciding whether the given graph is connected , or not .
However , this is not really the case , since function problems can be recast as decision problems .
Deciding whether a given triple is a member of this set corresponds to solving the problem of multiplying two numbers .
In particular , larger instances will require more time to solve .
For instance , in the problem of finding whether a graph is connected , how much more time does it take to solve a problem for a graph with 2n vertices compared to the time taken for a graph with n vertices ?
Turing machines are not intended as a practical computing technology , but rather as a thought experiment representing a computing machine -- anything from an advanced supercomputer to a mathematician with a pencil and paper .
Indeed , this is the statement of the Church -- Turing thesis .
Furthermore , it is known that everything that can be computed on other models of computation known to us today , such as a RAM machine , Conway 's Game of Life , cellular automata or any programming language can be computed on a Turing machine .
The ability to make probabilistic decisions often helps algorithms solve problems more efficiently .
One way to view non-determinism is that the Turing machine branches into many possible computational paths at each step , and if it solves the problem in any of these branches , it is said to have solved the problem .
Clearly , this model is not meant to be a physically realizable model , it is just a theoretically interesting abstract machine that gives rise to particularly interesting complexity classes .
For examples , see non-deterministic algorithm .
A Turing machine M is said to operate within time f -LRB- n -RRB- , if the time required by M on each input of length n is at most f -LRB- n -RRB- .
A decision problem A can be solved in time f -LRB- n -RRB- if there exists a Turing machine operating in time f -LRB- n -RRB- that solves the problem .
Analogous definitions can be made for space requirements .
Other complexity measures used in complexity theory include communication complexity , circuit complexity , and decision tree complexity .
Since some inputs of size n may be faster to solve than others , we define the following complexities :
This solves the problem of sorting a list of integers that is given as the input .
If we assume that all possible permutations of the input list are equally likely , the average time taken for sorting is O -LRB- n log n -RRB- .
The best case occurs when each pivoting divides the list in half , also needing O -LRB- n log n -RRB- time .
The complexity of an algorithm is usually taken to be its worst-case complexity , unless specified otherwise .
The phrase `` all possible algorithms '' includes not just the algorithms known today , but any algorithm that might be discovered in the future .
To show a lower bound of T -LRB- n -RRB- for a problem requires showing that no algorithm can have time complexity lower than T -LRB- n -RRB- .
Thus , a typical complexity class has a definition like the following :
The corresponding set of function problems is FP .
Some important complexity classes of decision problems defined in this manner are the following :
ALL is the class of all decision problems .
Thus there are pairs of complexity classes such that one is properly included in the other .
It captures the informal notion of a problem being at least as difficult as another problem .
This means an algorithm for multiplying two integers can be used to square an integer .
Thus we see that squaring is not more difficult than multiplication , since squaring can be reduced to multiplication .
This motivates the concept of a problem being hard for a complexity class .
For complexity classes larger than P , polynomial-time reductions are commonly used .
If a problem X is in C and hard for C , then X is said to be complete for C .
This is because a polynomial-time solution to Π1 would yield a polynomial-time solution to Π2 .
Similarly , because all NP problems can be reduced to the set , finding an NP-complete problem that can be solved in polynomial time would mean that P = NP .
The question of whether P equals NP is one of the most important open questions in theoretical computer science because of the wide implications of a solution .
The P versus NP problem is one of the Millennium Prize Problems proposed by the Clay Mathematics Institute .
They are some of the very few NP problems not known to be in P or to be NP-complete .
The answer is not known , but it is believed that the problem is at least not NP-complete .
Since it is widely believed that the polynomial hierarchy does not collapse to any finite level , it is believed that graph isomorphism is not NP-complete .
The integer factorization problem is in NP and in co-NP -LRB- and even in UP and co-UP -RRB- .
If the problem is NP-complete , the polynomial time hierarchy will collapse to its first level -LRB- i.e. , NP will equal co-NP -RRB- .
However , the best known quantum algorithm for this problem , Shor 's algorithm , does run in polynomial time .
Unfortunately , this fact does n't say much about where the problem lies with respect to non-quantum complexity classes .
If P is not equal to NP , then P is not equal to PSPACE either .
In complexity theory , problems that lack polynomial-time solutions are considered to be intractable for more than the smallest inputs .
In fact , the Cobham -- Edmonds thesis states that only those problems that can be solved in polynomial time can be feasibly computed on some computational device .
Problems that are known to be intractable in this sense include those that are EXPTIME-hard .
For small n , say 100 , and assuming for the sake of example that the computer does 1012 operations each second , the program would run for about 4 × 1010 years , which is the same order of magnitude as the age of the universe .
Even with a much faster computer , the program would only be useful for very small instances and in that sense the intractability of a problem is somewhat independent of technological progress .
Nevertheless , a polynomial time algorithm is not always practical .
If its running time is , say , n15 , it is unreasonable to consider it efficient and it is still useless except on small instances .
What intractability means in practice is open to debate .
Saying that a problem is not in P does not imply that all large cases of the problem are hard or even that most of them are .
Also , in 1965 Edmonds defined a `` good '' algorithm as one with running time bounded by a polynomial of the input size .
Somewhat earlier , Boris Trakhtenbrot -LRB- 1956 -RRB- , a pioneer in the field from the USSR , studied another specific complexity measure .
As he remembers :
This can be achieved by ensuring that different representations can be transformed into each other efficiently .
The field really began to flourish in 1971 when the US researcher Stephen Cook and , working independently , Leonid Levin in the USSR , proved that there exist practically relevant problems that are NP-complete .
Teachers , like other professionals , may have to continue their education after they qualify , a process known as continuing professional development .
A teacher 's professional duties may extend beyond formal teaching .
In some education systems , teachers may have responsibility for student discipline .
In many situations teachers in publicly funded schools must be members in good standing with the college , and private schools may also require their teachers to be college peoples .
In other areas these roles may belong to the State Board of Education , the Superintendent of Public Instruction , the State Education Agency or other governmental bodies .
In still other areas Teaching Unions may be responsible for some or all of these duties .
When deciding what teaching method to use teachers consider students ' background knowledge , environment , and their learning goals as well as standardized curricula as determined by the relevant authority .
Understanding the pedagogy of the students in a classroom involves using differentiated instruction as well as supervision to meet the needs of all students in the classroom .
Pedagogy can be thought of in two manners .
First , teaching itself can be taught in many different ways , hence , using a pedagogy of teaching styles .
Second , the pedagogy of the learners comes into play when a teacher assesses the pedagogic diversity of his/her students and differentiates for the individual students accordingly .
Co-teachers work in sync with one another to create a climate of learning .
Private schools in these and most other states may also use it .
It requires the pupil to remain in school at a given time in the school day -LRB- such as lunch , recess or after school -RRB- ; or even to attend school on a non-school day , e.g. `` Saturday detention '' held at some schools .
-LSB- verification needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
It 's not clear , however that this stereotypical view reflects the reality of East Asian classrooms or that the educational goals in these countries are commensurable with those in Western countries .
Although , officially , schools have extremely rigid codes of behavior , in practice many teachers find the students unmanageable and do not enforce discipline at all .
The result of this is that motivated students , facing demanding university entrance examinations , receive disproportionate resources .
Given the emphasis on attainment of university places , administrators and governors may regard this policy as appropriate .
One of the difficulties in this approach is that teachers may have repeatedly covered a curriculum until they begin to feel bored with the subject which in turn bores the students as well .
Teachers that exhibit enthusiasm can lead to students who are more likely to be engaged , interested , energetic , and curious about learning the subject matter .
The concept of mere exposure indicates that the teacher 's enthusiasm may contribute to the student 's expectations about intrinsic motivation in the context of learning .
Also , enthusiasm may act as a `` motivational embellishment '' ; increasing a student 's interest by the variety , novelty , and surprise of the enthusiastic teacher 's presentation of the material .
Students may become more intrinsically motivated by catching onto the enthusiasm and energy of the teacher .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Their ability to create effective learning environments that foster student achievement depends on the kind of relationship they build with their students .
Useful teacher-to-student interactions are crucial in linking academic success with personal achievement .
Students who receive this positive influence show stronger self-confidence and greater personal and academic success than those without these teacher interactions .
Effective teachers have been shown to invite student participation and decision making , allow humor into their classroom , and demonstrate a willingness to play .
A teacher must enjoy teaching .
If they do not enjoy what they are doing , the students will be able to tell .
They also must enjoy being around their students .
A teacher who cares for their students is going to help that individual succeed in their life in the future .
For example , a teacher talking about chemistry needs to enjoy the art of chemistry and show that to their students .
It is therefore logical to conclude that information on the percentage of abuses by teachers in the United Kingdom is not explicitly available and therefore not necessarily reliable .
`` The sample was drawn from a list of 80,000 schools to create a stratified two-stage sample design of 2,065 8th to 11th grade students `` Its reliability was gauged at 95 % with a 4 % margin of error .
There are many similarities and differences among teachers around the world .
The high school student follows an education specialty track , obtain the prerequisite `` student-teaching '' time , and receive a special diploma to begin teaching after graduation .
This is not always the case with adult further learning institutions but is fast becoming the norm in many countries as security concerns grow .
Salary ranges from $ 40,000 / year to $ 90,000 / yr .
Salaries for primary teachers in Ireland depend mainly on seniority -LRB- i.e. holding the position of principal , deputy principal or assistant principal -RRB- , experience and qualifications .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Promotion to Principal Teacher positions attracts a salary of between # 34,566 and # 44,616 ; Deputy Head , and Head teachers earn from # 40,290 to # 78,642 .
Additionally , the requirements for substitute/temporary teachers are generally not as rigorous as those for full-time professionals .
The Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that there are 1.4 million elementary school teachers , 674,000 middle school teachers , and 1 million secondary school teachers employed in the U.S.
US teachers are generally paid on graduated scales , with income depending on experience .
Salaries vary greatly depending on state , relative cost of living , and grade taught .
Salaries also vary within states where wealthy suburban school districts generally have higher salary schedules than other districts .
The median salary for all primary and secondary teachers was $ 46,000 in 2004 , with the average entry salary for a teacher with a bachelor 's degree being an estimated $ 32,000 .
Median salaries for preschool teachers , however , were less than half the national median for secondary teachers , clock in at an estimated $ 21,000 in 2004 .
For high school teachers , median salaries in 2007 ranged from $ 35,000 in South Dakota to $ 71,000 in New York , with a national median of $ 52,000 .
Some contracts may include long-term disability insurance , life insurance , emergency/personal leave and investment options .
The American Federation of Teachers ' teacher salary survey for the 2006-07 school year found that the average teacher salary was $ 51,009 .
High school teachers had the highest median salary earning $ 41,855 .
Many teachers take advantage of the opportunity to increase their income by supervising after-school programs and other extracurricular activities .
In addition to monetary compensation , public school teachers may also enjoy greater benefits -LRB- like health insurance -RRB- compared to other occupations .
Merit pay systems are on the rise for teachers , paying teachers extra money based on excellent classroom evaluations , high test scores and for high success at their overall school .
In keeping with the individualistic nature of most Protestant denominations , the emphasis on being guided in spiritual development is small , with a heavy emphasis placed on heavy reading and personal , Spirit-enlightened interpretation of the Holy Bible .
Further , additional spiritual guidance is offered by those holding the office of Patriarch , which is supposed by Latter-day Saints to grant certain gifts of the Spirit , such as the ability to prophesy , to its holders .
This guidance is generally offered during a ceremony called the patriarchal blessing .
He proposed an academic discussion of the power and usefulness of indulgences in his Ninety-Five Theses of 1517 .
Those who identify with these , and all of Luther 's wider teachings , are called Lutherans even though Luther insisted on Christian or Evangelical as the only acceptable names for individuals who professed Christ .
His family moved to Mansfeld in 1484 , where his father was a leaseholder of copper mines and smelters and served as one of four citizen representatives on the local council .
The religious scholar Martin Marty describes Luther 's mother as a hard-working woman of `` trading-class stock and middling means '' and notes that Luther 's enemies later wrongly described her as a whore and bath attendant .
He had several brothers and sisters , and is known to have been close to one of them , Jacob .
He sent Martin to Latin schools in Mansfeld , then Magdeburg in 1497 , where he attended a school operated by a lay group called the Brethren of the Common Life , and Eisenach in 1498 .
The three schools focused on the so-called `` trivium '' : grammar , rhetoric , and logic .
Luther later compared his education there to purgatory and hell .
Philosophy proved to be unsatisfying , offering assurance about the use of reason but none about loving God , which to Luther was more important .
Reason could not lead men to God , he felt , and he thereafter developed a love-hate relationship with Aristotle over the latter 's emphasis on reason .
Human beings could learn about God only through divine revelation , he believed , and Scripture therefore became increasingly important to him .
During a thunderstorm , a lightning bolt struck near him .
Saint Anna , I will become a monk ! ''
He came to view his cry for help as a vow he could never break .
Luther himself seemed saddened by the move .
Those who attended a farewell supper walked him to the door of the Black Cloister .
`` This day you see me , and then , not ever again , '' he said .
The benefits of good works could be obtained by donating money to the church .
He published a short commentary on Galatians and his Work on the Psalms .
He began to teach that salvation or redemption is a gift of God 's grace , attainable only through faith in Jesus as the Messiah .
`` This one and firm rock , which we call the doctrine of justification , '' he wrote , `` is the chief article of the whole Christian doctrine , which comprehends the understanding of all godliness . ''
Luther based his position on predestination on St. Paul 's epistle to the Ephesians 2:8 -- 10 .
Against the teaching of his day that the righteous acts of believers are performed in cooperation with God , Luther wrote that Christians receive such righteousness entirely from outside themselves ; that righteousness not only comes from Christ but actually is the righteousness of Christ , imputed to Christians -LRB- rather than infused into them -RRB- through faith .
`` That is why faith alone makes someone just and fulfills the law , '' he wrote .
`` Faith is that which brings the Holy Spirit through the merits of Christ . ''
First , the Dominican theologian Sylvester Mazzolini drafted a heresy case against Luther , whom Leo then summoned to Rome .
The Elector Frederick persuaded the pope to have Luther examined at Augsburg , where the Imperial Diet was held .
The prophecies concerning the Antichrist soon became the center of controversy .
The hearings degenerated into a shouting match .
More than his writing the 95 Theses , Luther 's confrontation with the church cast him as an enemy of the pope .
Luther slipped out of the city at night , unbeknownst to Cajetan .
In June and July 1519 , he staged a disputation with Luther 's colleague Andreas Karlstadt at Leipzig and invited Luther to speak .
From that moment , he devoted himself to Luther 's defeat .
That autumn , Johann Eck proclaimed the bull in Meissen and other towns .
He is sometimes also quoted as saying : `` Here I stand .
I can do no other '' .
It also made it a crime for anyone in Germany to give Luther food or shelter .
Frederick III had him intercepted on his way home in the forest near Wittenberg by masked horsemen who were made to appear as armed highwaymen .
In November , Luther wrote The Judgement of Martin Luther on Monastic Vows .
So too was the Little Horn of Daniel 7 , coming up among the divisions of Rome , explicitly applied .
Luther made his pronouncements from Wartburg in the context of rapid developments at Wittenberg , of which he was kept fully informed .
After secretly visiting Wittenberg in early December 1521 , Luther wrote A Sincere Admonition by Martin Luther to All Christians to Guard Against Insurrection and Rebellion .
Luther next set about reversing or modifying the new church practices .
Despite his victory in Wittenberg , Luther was unable to stifle radicalism further afield .
There had been revolts by the peasantry on a smaller scale since the 15th century .
Revolts broke out in Franconia , Swabia , and Thuringia in 1524 , even drawing support from disaffected nobles , many of whom were in debt .
Gaining momentum under the leadership of radicals such as Müntzer in Thuringia and Michael Gaismair in Tyrol , the revolts turned into war .
Lastly , Luther charged the rebels with blasphemy for calling themselves `` Christian brethren '' and committing their sinful acts under the banner of the Gospel .
`` Suddenly , and while I was occupied with far different thoughts , '' he wrote to Wenceslaus Link , `` the Lord has plunged me into marriage . ''
Luther had written to George Spalatin on 30 November 1524 , `` I shall never take a wife , as I feel at present .
Before marrying , Luther had been living on the plainest food , and , as he admitted himself , his mildewed bed was not properly made for months at a time .
They embarked on what appeared to have been a happy and successful marriage , though money was often short .
By 1526 , Luther found himself increasingly occupied in organising a new church .
According to Bainton : `` Luther 's dilemma was that he wanted both a confessional church based on personal faith and experience and a territorial church including all in a given locality .
If he were forced to choose , he would take his stand with the masses , and this was the direction in which he moved . ''
He also did not wish to replace one controlling system with another .
The elector authorised a visitation of the church , a power formerly exercised by bishops .
At times , Luther 's practical reforms fell short of his earlier radical pronouncements .
For example , the Instructions for the Visitors of Parish Pastors in Electoral Saxony -LRB- 1528 -RRB- , drafted by Melanchthon with Luther 's approval , stressed the role of repentance in the forgiveness of sins , despite Luther 's position that faith alone ensures justification .
The Eisleben reformer Johannes Agricola challenged this compromise , and Luther condemned him for teaching that faith is separate from works .
The Instruction is a problematic document for those seeking a consistent evolution in Luther 's thought and practice .
Some reformers , including followers of Huldrych Zwingli , considered Luther 's service too papistic ; and modern scholars note the conservatism of his alternative to the Catholic mass .
Luther 's service , however , included congregational singing of hymns and psalms in German , as well as of parts of the liturgy , including Luther 's unison setting of the Creed .
To reach the simple people and the young , Luther incorporated religious instruction into the weekday services in the form of the catechism .
He also provided simplified versions of the baptism and marriage services .
The catechisms provided easy-to-understand instructional and devotional material on the Ten Commandments , the Apostles ' Creed , the Lord 's Prayer , baptism , and the Lord 's Supper .
He rewrote each article of the Creed to express the character of the Father , the Son , or the Holy Spirit .
Luther 's goal was to enable the catechumens to see themselves as a personal object of the work of the three persons of the Trinity , each of which works in the catechumen 's life .
The Father creates , the Son redeems , and the Spirit sanctifies , a divine unity with separate personalities .
Luther 's treatment of the Apostles ' Creed must be understood in the context of the Decalogue -LRB- the Ten Commandments -RRB- and the Lord 's Prayer , which are also part of the Lutheran catechical teaching .
Others had translated the Bible into German , but Luther tailored his translation to his own doctrine .
For in that very passage he is dealing with the main point of Christian doctrine , namely , that we are justified by faith in Christ without any works of the Law .
In 1524 Luther developed his original four-stanza psalm paraphrase into a five-stanza Reformation hymn that developed the theme of `` grace alone '' more fully .
Along with Erhart Hegenwalt 's hymnic version of Psalm 51 , Luther 's expanded hymn was also adopted for use with the fifth part of Luther 's catechism , concerning confession .
Luther wrote `` Ach Gott , vom Himmel sieh darein '' -LRB- `` Oh God , look down from heaven '' -RRB- .
He transformed A solus ortus cardine to `` Christum wir sollen loben schon '' -LRB- `` We should now praise Christ '' -RRB- and Veni Creator Spiritus to `` Komm , Gott Schöpfer , Heiliger Geist '' -LRB- `` Come , Holy Spirit , Lord God '' -RRB- .
His `` Gelobet seist du , Jesu Christ '' -LRB- `` Praise be to You , Jesus Christ '' -RRB- became the main hymn for Christmas .
He wrote for Pentecost `` Nun bitten wir den Heiligen Geist '' , and adopted for Easter `` Christ ist erstanden '' -LRB- Christ is risen -RRB- , based on Victimae paschali laudes .
`` Mit Fried und Freud ich fahr dahin '' , a paraphrase of Nunc dimittis , was intended for Purification , but became also a funeral hymn .
He paraphrased the Te Deum as `` Herr Gott , dich loben wir '' with a simplified form of the melody .
Luther 's hymns inspired composers to write music .
He affirmed the continuity of one 's personal identity beyond death .
Zwingli , for example , denied Jesus ' ability to be in more than one place at a time but Luther stressed the omnipresence of his human nature .
Citing Jesus ' words `` The flesh profiteth nothing '' -LRB- John 6.63 -RRB- , Zwingli said , `` This passage breaks your neck '' .
`` Do n't be too proud , '' Luther retorted , `` German necks do n't break that easily .
This is Hesse , not Switzerland . ''
On his table Luther wrote the words `` Hoc est corpus meum '' -LRB- `` This is my body '' -RRB- in chalk , to continually indicate his firm stance .
He wrote , `` All the articles of our Christian faith , which God has revealed to us in His Word , are in presence of reason sheerly impossible , absurd , and false . ''
However , though seemingly contradictorily , he also wrote in the latter work that human reason `` strives not against faith , when enlightened , but rather furthers and advances it '' , bringing claims he was a fideist into dispute .
Contemporary Lutheran scholarship , however , has found a different reality in Luther .
Luther rather seeks to separate faith and reason in order to honor the separate spheres of knowledge that each applies to .
Bernhard Lohse , for example , has demonstrated in his classic work `` Fides und Ratio '' that Luther ultimately sought to put the two together .
More recently , Hans-Peter Grosshans has demonstrated that Luther 's work on Biblical Criticism stresses the need for external coherence in the right exegetical method .
This means that for Luther it is more important that the Bible is reasonable according to the reality outside of the scriptures than that the Bible makes sense to itself , that it has internal coherence .
The right tool for understanding the world outside of the Bible for Luther is none other than reason , which for him is the field of science , philosophy , history and empirical observation .
Here a different picture is presented of a Luther who deeply valued both faith and reason , and held them in dialectical partnership .
In it , he takes a hardline against Judaism , writing that synagogues and Jewish homes should be destroyed , their money confiscated , and liberty curtailed .
These statements and their influence on antisemitism have contributed to his controversial status .
At the time of the Marburg Colloquy , Suleiman the Magnificent was besieging Vienna with a vast Ottoman army .
Luther had argued against resisting the Turks in his 1518 Explanation of the Ninety-five Theses , provoking accusations of defeatism .
He consistently rejected the idea of a Holy War , `` as though our people were an army of Christians against the Turks , who were enemies of Christ .
This is absolutely contrary to Christ 's doctrine and name '' .
On the other hand , in keeping with his doctrine of the two kingdoms , Luther did support non-religious war against the Turks .
In 1526 , he argued in Whether Soldiers can be in a State of Grace that national defence is reason for a just war .
He made clear , however , that the spiritual war against an alien faith was separate , to be waged through prayer and repentance .
Around the time of the Siege of Vienna , Luther wrote a prayer for national deliverance from the Turks , asking God to `` give to our emperor perpetual victory over our enemies '' .
Based on this sermon and others by Agricola , Luther suspected that Agricola was behind certain anonymous antinomian theses circulating in Wittenberg .
Philip solicited the approval of Luther , Melanchthon , and Bucer , citing as a precedent the polygamy of the patriarchs .
The theologians were not prepared to make a general ruling , and they reluctantly advised the landgrave that if he was determined , he should marry secretly and keep quiet about the matter .
As a result , on 4 March 1540 , Philip married a second wife , Margarethe von der Saale , with Melanchthon and Bucer among the witnesses .
However , Philip was unable to keep the marriage secret , and he threatened to make Luther 's advice public .
Luther told him to `` tell a good , strong lie '' and deny the marriage completely , which Philip did during the subsequent public controversy .
Brecht argues that Luther 's mistake was not that he gave private pastoral advice , but that he miscalculated the political implications .
Luther wrote about the Jews throughout his career , though only a few of his works dealt with them directly .
But Luther believed that all human beings who set themselves against God were equally guilty .
As early as 1516 , he wrote that many people `` are proud with marvelous stupidity when they call the Jews dogs , evildoers , or whatever they like , while they too , and equally , do not realize who or what they are in the sight of God '' .
When his efforts at conversion failed , he grew increasingly bitter toward them .
In his 2010 book Bonhoeffer : Pastor , Martyr , Prophet , Spy , Christian author Eric Metaxas claimed that Luther 's attitude towards Jews `` unraveled along with his health . ''
Citing Deuteronomy 13 , wherein Moses commands the killing of idolaters and the burning of their cities and property as an offering to God , Luther called for a `` scharfe Barmherzigkeit '' -LRB- `` sharp mercy '' -RRB- against the Jews `` to see whether we might save at least a few from the glowing flames . ''
Luther advocated setting synagogues on fire , destroying Jewish prayerbooks , forbidding rabbis from preaching , seizing Jews ' property and money , and smashing up their homes , so that these `` envenomed worms '' would be forced into labour or expelled `` for all time '' .
`` God 's anger with them is so intense , '' Luther concluded , `` that gentle mercy will only tend to make them worse , while sharp mercy will reform them but little .
Therefore , in any case , away with them ! ''
Luther 's influence persisted after his death .
Reinhold Lewin writes that anybody who `` wrote against the Jews for whatever reason believed he had the right to justify himself by triumphantly referring to Luther . ''
Heinrich Himmler wrote admiringly of his writings and sermons on the Jews in 1940 .
It was publicly exhibited in a glass case at the Nuremberg rallies and quoted in a 54-page explanation of the Aryan Law by Dr. E.H. Schulz and Dr. R. Frercks .
Sasse applauded the burning of the synagogues and the coincidence of the day , writing in the introduction , `` On 10 November 1938 , on Luther 's birthday , the synagogues are burning in Germany . ''
At the heart of scholars ' debate about Luther 's influence is whether it is anachronistic to view his work as a precursor of the racial antisemitism of the Nazis .
Biographer Martin Brecht points out that `` There is a world of difference between his belief in salvation and a racial ideology .
Uwe Siemon-Netto agreed , arguing that it was because the Nazis were already anti-Semites that they revived Luther 's work .
Hans J. Hillerbrand agreed that to focus on Luther was to adopt an essentially ahistorical perspective of Nazi antisemitism that ignored other contributory factors in German history .
Similarly , Roland Bainton , noted church historian and Luther biographer , wrote `` One could wish that Luther had died before ever -LSB- On the Jews and Their Lies -RSB- was written .
Luther had been suffering from ill health for years , including Ménière 's disease , vertigo , fainting , tinnitus , and a cataract in one eye .
James Mackinnon writes that it concluded with a `` fiery summons to drive the Jews bag and baggage from their midst , unless they desisted from their calumny and their usury and became Christians . ''
And so often they do . ''
Their livelihood was threatened by Count Albrecht of Mansfeld bringing the industry under his own control .
The controversy that ensued involved all four Mansfeld counts : Albrecht , Philip , John George , and Gerhard .
When he went to his bed , he prayed , `` Into your hand I commit my spirit ; you have redeemed me , O Lord , faithful God '' -LRB- Ps .
He thanked God for revealing his Son to him in whom he had believed .
His companions , Justus Jonas and Michael Coelius , shouted loudly , `` Reverend father , are you ready to die trusting in your Lord Jesus Christ and to confess the doctrine which you have taught in his name ? ''
A distinct `` Yes '' was Luther 's reply .
A year later , troops of Luther 's adversary Charles V , Holy Roman Emperor entered the town , but were ordered by Charles not to disturb the grave .
Famous images from this period include the woodcuts by Hans Brosamer -LRB- 1530 -RRB- and Lucas Cranach the Elder and Lucas Cranach the Younger -LRB- 1546 -RRB- .
With over 22 million people , southern California contains roughly 60 percent of California 's population .
Companies such as Volcom , Quiksilver , No Fear , RVCA , and Body Glove are all headquartered here .
Some of the world 's biggest extreme sports events , including the X Games , Boost Mobile Pro , and the U.S. Open of Surfing are all in southern California .
Southern California is also important to the world of yachting .
The San Diego Yacht Club held the America 's Cup , the most prestigious prize in yachting , from 1988 to 1995 and hosted three America 's Cup races during that time .
`` Southern California '' is not a formal geographic designation , and definitions of what constitutes southern California vary .
This definition coincides neatly with the county lines at 35 ° 47 ′ 28 ″ north latitude , which form the northern borders of San Luis Obispo , Kern , and San Bernardino counties .
The last attempt , the Pico Act of 1859 , was passed by the California State Legislature and signed by the State governor John B. Weller .
This territory was to include all the counties up to the then much larger Tulare County -LRB- that included what is now Kings , most of Kern , and part of Inyo counties -RRB- and San Luis Obispo County .
However , the secession crisis following the election of Abraham Lincoln in 1860 led to the proposal never coming to a vote .
The dominant areas are Los Angeles , Orange County , San Diego , and Riverside-San Bernardino , each of which is the center of its respective metropolitan area , composed of numerous smaller cities and communities .
Newly developed exurbs formed in the Antelope Valley north of Los Angeles , the Victor Valley and the Coachella Valley with the Imperial Valley .
Also , population growth was high in the Bakersfield-Kern County , Santa Maria and San Luis Obispo areas .
Summers are hot and dry , while winters are a bit warm or mild and wet .
Serious rain can occur unusually .
Only several hundred are greater than magnitude 3.0 , and only about 15 -- 20 are greater than magnitude 4.0 .
Each region is further divided into many culturally distinct areas but as a whole combine to create the southern California atmosphere .
North of Greater Los Angeles are the Santa Barbara , San Luis Obispo , and Bakersfield metropolitan areas .
Other industries include software , automotive , ports , finance , tourism , biomedical , and regional logistics .
These include Carmel Valley , Del Mar Heights , Mission Valley , Rancho Bernardo , Sorrento Mesa , and University City .
Following a lengthy legal battle with the European Commission , which deemed the exclusivity of the rights to be against the interests of competition and the consumer , BSkyB 's monopoly came to an end from the 2007 -- 08 season .
In February 2015 , Sky bid # 4.2 bn for a package of 120 premier league games across the three seasons from 2016 .
This represented an increase of 70 % on the previous contract and was said to be # 1bn more than the company had expected to pay .
The move has been followed by staff cuts , increased subscription prices -LRB- including 9 % in Sky 's family package -RRB- and the dropping of the 3D channel .
Initially BSkyB provided Sky Travel to the service .
This changed as from 1 July 2007 , and now customers that have Sky + and subscribe to any BSkyB subscription package get Sky + included at no extra charge .
In February 2011 BSkyB discontinued the non-HD variant of its Multiroom box , offering a smaller version of the SkyHD box without Sky + functionality .
As of 31 March 2008 , Sky had 3,393,000 Sky + users .
There are tight controls over use of VideoGuard decoders ; they are not available as stand-alone DVB CAMs -LRB- conditional-access modules -RRB- .
The receivers , though designed and built by different manufacturers , must conform to the same user interface look-and-feel as all the others .
Some of the channels did broadcast either in the clear or soft encrypted -LRB- whereby a Videocrypt decoder was required to decode , without a subscription card -RRB- prior to their addition to the Sky Multichannels package .
Michael Grade criticized the operations in front of the Select Committee on National Heritage , mainly for the lack of original programming on many of the new channels .
Sky provides television and broadband internet services and fixed line telephone services to consumers and businesses in the United Kingdom .
Its corporate headquarters are based in Isleworth .
The Sky Q set top boxes introduce a new user interface , Wi-Fi hotspot functionality , Power-line and Bluetooth connectivity and a new touch-sensitive remote control .
Sky News , amongst other channels , provides a pseudo-video on demand interactive service by broadcasting looping video streams .
On Thursday 18 May 2006 , and continuing through the weekend before launch , people were reporting that BSkyB had either cancelled or rescheduled its installation .
However , industry sources believe BSkyB will be forced to shelve plans to withdraw its channels from Freeview and replace them with subscription channels , due to possible lost advertising revenue .
Unofficial CAMs are now available to view the service , although use of them breaks the user 's contract with Sky and invalidates the user 's rights to use the card .
BSkyB joined forces with the BBC to make a counter bid .
Murdoch described sport as a `` battering ram '' for pay-television , providing a strong customer base .
A few weeks after the deal , ITV went to the High Court to get an injunction as it believed their bid details had been leaked before the decision was taken .
ITV also asked the Office of Fair Trading to investigate since it believed Rupert Murdoch 's media empire via its newspapers had influenced the deal .
A few days later neither action took effect , ITV believed BSkyB was telephoned and informed of its # 262m bid , and Premier League advised BSkyB to increase its counter bid .
Third-party channels which opt for encryption receive discounts ranging from reduced price to free EPG entries , free carriage on a BSkyB leased transponder , or actual payment for being carried .
At this time the use of the Sky Digital brand made an important distinction between the new service and Sky 's analogue services .
Key selling points were the improvement in picture and sound quality , increased number of channels and an interactive service branded Open ... .
Virgin Media has nevertheless made a number of statements over the years , suggesting that more linear HD channels are on the way .
Culturally , Melbourne is home to a number of museums , art galleries and theatres and is also described as the `` sporting capital of Australia '' .
The ground is also considered the `` spiritual home '' of Australian cricket and Australian rules football , and hosts the grand final of the Australian Football League -LRB- AFL -RRB- each year , usually drawing crowds of over 95,000 people .
Victoria includes eight public universities , with the oldest , the University of Melbourne , having been founded in 1853 .
Immigrants arrived from all over the world to search for gold , especially from Ireland and China .
Prior to the 2006 election , the Legislative Council consisted of 44 members elected to eight-year terms from 22 two-member electorates .
The Liberals ' main support lies in Melbourne 's more affluent eastern and outer suburbs , and some rural and regional centres .
The Nationals are strongest in Victoria 's North Western and Eastern rural regional areas .
Victoria is also home of 152,775 Muslims and 45,150 Jews .
Hinduism is the fastest growing religion .
Amongst those who declare a religious affiliation , church attendance is low .
Geographically the smallest state on the Australian mainland , Victoria is bordered by Bass Strait and Tasmania to the south , -LSB- note 1 -RSB- New South Wales to the north , the Tasman Sea to the east , and South Australia to the west .
Victoria was officially created a separate colony in 1851 , and achieved self-government in 1855 .
The Victorian gold rush in the 1850s and 1860s significantly increased both the population and wealth of the colony , and by the Federation of Australia in 1901 , Melbourne had become the largest city and leading financial centre in Australasia .
Melbourne also served as capital of Australia until the construction of Canberra in 1927 , with the Federal Parliament meeting in Melbourne 's Parliament House and all principal offices of the federal government being based in Melbourne .
In 2003 -- 04 , Victorian farmers produced more than 3 million tonnes of wheat and 2 million tonnes of barley .
It is also a leader in stone fruit production .
The main vegetable crops include asparagus , broccoli , carrots , potatoes and tomatoes .
Except at cool mountain elevations , the inland monthly temperatures are 2 -- 7 °C -LRB- 4 -- 13 °F -RRB- warmer than around Melbourne -LRB- see chart -RRB- .
Victorian schools are either publicly or privately funded .
Independent schools are usually affiliated with Protestant churches .
Victoria also has several private Jewish and Islamic primary and secondary schools .
Private schools also receive some public funding .
In addition , Victoria has four government selective schools , Melbourne High School for boys , MacRobertson Girls ' High School for girls , the coeducational schools John Monash Science School , Nossal High School and Suzanne Cory High School , and The Victorian College of the Arts Secondary School .
Students at these schools are exclusively admitted on the basis of an academic selective entry test .
There are extensive semi-arid plains to the west and northwest .
Most notable is the Murray River system .
Other rivers include : Ovens River , Goulburn River , Patterson River , King River , Campaspe River , Loddon River , Wimmera River , Elgin River , Barwon River , Thomson River , Snowy River , Latrobe River , Yarra River , Maribyrnong River , Mitta River , Hopkins River , Merri River and Kiewa River .
Temperature extremes for the state are listed in the table below :
Victoria is currently governed by the Labor Party , with Daniel Andrews the current Premier .
Local government is concentrated in 79 municipal districts , including 33 cities , although a number of unincorporated areas still exist , which are administered directly by the state .
Later discoveries occurred at many sites across Victoria .
The colony grew rapidly in both population and economic power .
All sorts of gold records were produced including the `` richest shallow alluvial goldfield in the world '' and the largest gold nugget .
More than 462,000 students were enrolled in primary schools and more than 390,000 in secondary schools .
Retention rates for the final two years of secondary school were 77 per cent for public school students and 90 per cent for private school students .
The state also has 2.4 million beef cattle , with more than 2.2 million cattle and calves slaughtered each year .
In 2003 -- 04 , Victorian commercial fishing crews and aquaculture industry produced 11,634 tonnes of seafood valued at nearly A$ 109 million .
Blacklipped abalone is the mainstay of the catch , bringing in A$ 46 million , followed by southern rock lobster worth A$ 13.7 million .
There are also several smaller freight operators and numerous tourist railways operating over lines which were once parts of a state-owned system .
The first European settlement in the area later known as Victoria was established in October 1803 under Lieutenant-Governor David Collins at Sullivan Bay on Port Phillip .
It consisted of 402 people -LRB- 5 Government officials , 9 officers of marines , 2 drummers , and 39 privates , 5 soldiers ' wives , and a child , 307 convicts , 17 convicts ' wives , and 7 children -RRB- .
They had been sent from England in HMS Calcutta under the command of Captain Daniel Woodriff , principally out of fear that the French , who had been exploring the area , might establish their own settlement and thereby challenge British rights to the continent .
Some of the leaders of the Eureka rebellion went on to become members of the Victorian Parliament .
It is responsible for managing areas of government that are not exclusively the Commonwealth 's , by the Australian Constitution , such as education , health and law enforcement .
This represented 24 % of national agricultural production total gross value .
Victorian farms range from small horticultural outfits to large-scale livestock and grain productions .
A quarter of farmland is used to grow consumable crops .
As Huguenots gained influence and more openly displayed their faith , Catholic hostility grew , in spite of increasingly liberal political concessions and edicts of toleration from the French crown .
Various hypotheses have been promoted .
In Geneva , Hugues , though Catholic , was a leader of the `` Confederate Party '' , so called because it favoured independence from the Duke of Savoy through an alliance between the city-state of Geneva and the Swiss Confederation .
The move would have had the side effect of fostering relations with the Swiss .
Thus , Hugues plus Eidgenosse by way of Huisgenoten supposedly became Huguenot , a nickname associating the Protestant cause with politics unpopular in France .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The country had a long history of struggles with the papacy by the time the Protestant Reformation finally arrived .
The city 's political institutions and the university were all handed over to the Huguenots .
Peace terms called for the dismantling of the city 's fortifications .
A royal citadel was built and the university and consulate were taken over by the Catholic party .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The couple left for the Far East ten years later .
A number of New Amsterdam 's families were of Huguenot origin , often having emigrated as refugees to the Netherlands in the previous century .
He became pastor of the first Huguenot church in North America in that city .
They were very successful at marriage and property speculation .
Some of their descendants moved into the Deep South and Texas , where they developed new plantations .
They also found many French-speaking Calvinist churches there .
Renewed religious warfare in the 1620s caused the political and military privileges of the Huguenots to be abolished following their defeat .
Some Huguenot preachers and congregants were attacked as they attempted to meet for worship .
By 1620 the Huguenots were on the defensive , and the government increasingly applied pressure .
revolted against royal authority .
The Huguenots respond by establishing independent political and military structures , establishing diplomatic contacts with foreign powers , and openly revolting against central power .
The rebellions were implacably suppressed by the French Crown .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- A diaspora of French Australians still considers itself Huguenot , even after centuries of exile .
Amongst them were 200 clergy .
Many came from the region of the Cévennes , for instance , the village of Fraissinet-de-Lozère .
Around 1700 , it is estimated that nearly 25 % of the Amsterdam population was Huguenot .
Huguenots intermarried with Dutch from the outset .
Such explanations have been traced to the contemporary , Reguier de la Plancha -LRB- d. 1560 -RRB- , who in De l'Estat de France offered the following account as to the origin of the name , as cited by The Cape Monthly :
The house derives its name from a weaving school which was moved there in the last years of the 19th century , reviving an earlier use . -RRB-
Others refugees practised the variety of occupations necessary to sustain the community as distinct from the indigenous population .
Numerous signs of Huguenot presence can still be seen with names still in use , and with areas of the main towns and cities named after the people who settled there .
At the time , they constituted the majority of the townspeople .
The kingdom did not fully recover for years .
The pattern of warfare , followed by brief periods of peace , continued for nearly another quarter-century .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
It proved disastrous to the Huguenots and costly for France .
The English welcomed the French refugees , providing money from both government and private agencies to aid their relocation .
A couple of ships with around 500 people arrived at the Guanabara Bay , present-day Rio de Janeiro , and settled in a small island .
A fort , named Fort Coligny , was built to protect them from attack from the Portuguese troops and Brazilian Native Americans .
It was an attempt to establish a French colony in South America .
The Portuguese threatened the prisoners with death if they did not convert to Catholicism .
The Huguenots of Guanabara , as they are now known , produced a declaration of faith to express their beliefs to the Portuguese .
This was their death sentence .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Examples include : Blignaut , Cilliers , de Klerk -LRB- Le Clercq -RRB- , de Villiers , du Plessis , Du Preez -LRB- Des Pres -RRB- , du Randt -LRB- Durand -RRB- , du Toit , Duvenhage -LRB- Du Vinage -RRB- , Franck , Fouche , Fourie -LRB- Fleurit -RRB- , Gervais , Giliomee -LRB- Guilliaume -RRB- , Gous/Gouws -LRB- Gauch -RRB- , Hugo , Jordaan -LRB- Jourdan -RRB- , Joubert , Kriek , Labuschagne -LRB- la Buscagne -RRB- , le Roux , Lombard , Malan , Malherbe , Marais , Maree , Minnaar -LRB- Mesnard -RRB- , Nel -LRB- Nell -RRB- , Naude ' , Nortje -LRB- Nortier -RRB- , Pienaar -LRB- Pinard -RRB- , Retief -LRB- Retif -RRB- , Rossouw -LRB- Rousseau -RRB- , Taljaard -LRB- Taillard -RRB- , TerBlanche , Theron , Viljoen -LRB- Villion -RRB- and Visagie -LRB- Visage -RRB- .
Although 19th century sources have asserted that some of these refugees were lacemakers and contributed to the East Midlands lace industry , this is contentious .
The Berlin Huguenots preserved the French language in their church services for nearly a century .
Many of their descendents rose to positions of prominence .
The effort was the first at any permanent European settlement in the present-day continental United States , but survived only a short time .
Hundreds of French soldiers were stranded and surrendered to the numerically inferior Spanish forces led by Pedro Menendez .
Menendez proceeded to massacre the defenseless Huguenots , after which he wiped out the Fort Caroline garrison .
French Huguenots made two attempts to establish a haven in North America .
In 1564 , Ribault 's former lieutenant René Goulaine de Laudonnière launched a second voyage to build a colony ; he established Fort Caroline in what is now Jacksonville , Florida .
War at home again precluded a resupply mission , and the colony struggled .
Menéndez ' forces routed the French and executed most of the Protestant captives .
Some settlers landed in present-day Chesterfield County .
Gradually they intermarried with their English neighbors .
Through the 18th and 19th centuries , descendants of the French migrated west into the Piedmont , and across the Appalachian Mountains into the West of what became Kentucky , Tennessee , Missouri , and other states .
In the Manakintown area , the Huguenot Memorial Bridge across the James River and Huguenot Road were named in their honor , as were many local features , including several schools , including Huguenot High School .
The Dutch Republic rapidly became a destination for Huguenot exiles .
As both spoke French in daily life , their court church in the Prinsenhof in Delft held services in French .
The practice has continued to the present day .
The Prinsenhof is one of the 14 active Walloon churches of the Dutch Reformed Church .
The ties between Huguenots and the Dutch Republic 's military and political leadership , the House of Orange-Nassau , which existed since the early days of the Dutch Revolt , helped support the many early settlements of Huguenots in the Dutch Republic 's colonies .
They settled at the Cape of Good Hope in South Africa and New Netherland in North America .
In relative terms , this was one of the largest waves of immigration ever of a single ethnic community to Britain .
Following the French Crown 's revocation of the Edict of Nantes , many Huguenots settled in Ireland in the late 17th and early 18th centuries , encouraged by an act of parliament for Protestants ' settling in Ireland .
The Count supported mercantilism and welcomed technically skilled immigrants into his lands , regardless of their religion .
Other founding families created enterprises based on textiles and such traditional Huguenot occupations in France .
The community and its congregation remain active to this day , with descendants of many of the founding families still living in the region .
He was regarded by the Gallicans and Protestants as a noble man who respected people 's dignity and lives .
The Gallicans briefly achieved independence for the French church , on the principle that the religion of France could not be controlled by the Bishop of Rome , a foreign power .
Long after the sect was suppressed by Francis I , the remaining French Waldensians , then mostly in the Luberon region , sought to join William Farel , Calvin and the Reformation , and Olivetan published a French Bible for them .
The French Confession of 1559 shows a decidedly Calvinistic influence .
Sometime between 1550 and 1580 , members of the Reformed church in France came to be commonly known as Huguenots .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Similar massacres took place in other towns in the weeks following .
The main provincial towns and cities experiencing the Massacre were Aix , Bordeaux , Bourges , Lyons , Meaux , Orleans , Rouen , Toulouse , and Troyes .
The exact number of fatalities throughout the country is not known .
On 23 -- 24 August , between about 2,000 and 3,000 Protestants were killed in Paris and between 3,000 and 7,000 more in the French provinces .
Beyond Paris , the killings continued until 3 October .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In 1685 , he issued the Edict of Fontainebleau , revoking the Edict of Nantes and declaring Protestantism illegal .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
A small wooden church was first erected in the community , followed by a second church that built of stone .
Previous to the erection of it , the strong men would often walk twenty-three miles on Saturday evening , the distance by the road from New Rochelle to New York , to attend the Sunday service .
The church was eventually replaced by a third , Trinity-St .
Paul 's Episcopal Church , which contains heirlooms including the original bell from the French Huguenot Church `` Eglise du St. Esperit '' on Pine Street in New York City , which is preserved as a relic in the tower room .
The Huguenot cemetery , or `` Huguenot Burial Ground '' , has since been recognized as a historic cemetery that is the final resting place for a wide range of the Huguenot founders , early settlers and prominent citizens dating back more than three centuries .
Assimilated , the French made numerous contributions to United States economic life , especially as merchants and artisans in the late Colonial and early Federal periods .
Some Huguenot descendants in the Netherlands may be noted by French family names , although they typically use Dutch given names .
Due to the Huguenots ' early ties with the leadership of the Dutch Revolt and their own participation , some of the Dutch patriciate are of part-Huguenot descent .
They established a major weaving industry in and around Spitalfields -LRB- see Petticoat Lane and the Tenterground -RRB- in East London .
In Wandsworth , their gardening skills benefited the Battersea market gardens .
The flight of Huguenot refugees from Tours , France drew off most of the workers of its great silk mills which they had built .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Some of these immigrants moved to Norwich , which had accommodated an earlier settlement of Walloon weavers .
The French added to the existing immigrant population , then comprising about a third of the population of the city .
Another 4,000 Huguenots settled in the German territories of Baden , Franconia -LRB- Principality of Bayreuth , Principality of Ansbach -RRB- , Landgraviate of Hesse-Kassel , Duchy of Württemberg , in the Wetterau Association of Imperial Counts , in the Palatinate and Palatinate-Zweibrücken , in the Rhine-Main-Area -LRB- Frankfurt -RRB- , in modern-day Saarland ; and 1,500 found refuge in Hamburg , Bremen and Lower Saxony .
Three hundred refugees were granted asylum at the court of George William , Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg in Celle .
When expanded through pistons or turbines , mechanical work is done .
The reduced-pressure steam is then condensed and pumped back into the boiler .
Newcomen 's engine was relatively inefficient , and in most cases was used for pumping water .
It worked by creating a partial vacuum by condensing steam under a piston within a cylinder .
It was employed for draining mine workings at depths hitherto impossible , and also for providing a reusable water supply for driving waterwheels at factories sited away from a suitable `` head '' .
Water that had passed over the wheel was pumped back up into a storage reservoir above the wheel .
The design incorporated a number of important innovations that included using high-pressure steam which reduced the weight of the engine and increased its efficiency .
Trevithick visited the Newcastle area later in 1804 and the colliery railways in north-east England became the leading centre for experimentation and development of steam locomotives .
It is a logical extension of the compound engine -LRB- described above -RRB- to split the expansion into yet more stages to increase efficiency .
The result is the multiple expansion engine .
These engines use a series of cylinders of progressively increasing diameter .
These cylinders are designed to divide the work into equal shares for each expansion stage .
As with the double expansion engine , if space is at a premium , then two smaller cylinders may be used for the low-pressure stage .
Multiple expansion engines typically had the cylinders arranged inline , but various other formations were used .
Y-S-T engines divided the low-pressure expansion stages between two cylinders , one at each end of the engine .
This allowed the crankshaft to be better balanced , resulting in a smoother , faster-responding engine which ran with less vibration .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In the 1840s and 50s , there were attempts to overcome this problem by means of various patent valve gears with a separate , variable cutoff expansion valve riding on the back of the main slide valve ; the latter usually had fixed or limited cutoff .
The combined setup gave a fair approximation of the ideal events , at the expense of increased friction and wear , and the mechanism tended to be complicated .
The plugs are also too small in area to lower steam pressure significantly , depressurizing the boiler .
If they were any larger , the volume of escaping steam would itself endanger the crew .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The engines could be sited anywhere that water and coal or wood fuel could be obtained .
The atmospheric engines of Newcomen and Watt were large compared to the amount of power they produced , but high pressure steam engines were light enough to be applied to vehicles such as traction engines and the railway locomotives .
In the following centuries , the few steam-powered `` engines '' known were , like the aeolipile , essentially experimental devices used by inventors to demonstrate the properties of steam .
Denis Papin , a Huguenot refugee , did some useful work on the steam digester in 1679 , and first used a piston to raise weights in 1690 .
Compound engines exhausted steam in to successively larger cylinders to accommodate the higher volumes at reduced pressures , giving improved efficiency .
Steam turbines virtually replaced reciprocating engines in electricity generating stations early in the 20th century , where their efficiency , higher speed appropriate to generator service , and smooth rotation were advantages .
Steam turbines were extensively applied for propulsion of large ships throughout most of the 20th century .
The steam engine indicator traces on paper the pressure in the cylinder throughout the cycle , which can be used to spot various problems and calculate developed horsepower .
It was routinely used by engineers , mechanics and insurance inspectors .
The engine indicator can also be used on internal combustion engines .
See image of indicator diagram below -LRB- in Types of motor units section -RRB- .
In one case -LRB- the first type of Vauclain compound -RRB- , the pistons worked in the same phase driving a common crosshead and crank , again set at 90 ° as for a two-cylinder engine .
With the 3-cylinder compound arrangement , the LP cranks were either set at 90 ° with the HP one at 135 ° to the other two , or in some cases all three cranks were set at 120 ° .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
These events are controlled by valves often working inside a steam chest adjacent to the cylinder ; the valves distribute the steam by opening and closing steam ports communicating with the cylinder end -LRB- s -RRB- and are driven by valve gear , of which there are many types .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
By this means , the simple-expansion uniflow engine gives efficiency equivalent to that of classic compound systems with the added advantage of superior part-load performance , and comparable efficiency to turbines for smaller engines below one thousand horsepower .
However , the thermal expansion gradient uniflow engines produce along the cylinder wall gives practical difficulties .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Low boiling hydrocarbons can be used in a binary cycle .
This low turbine entry temperature -LRB- compared with a gas turbine -RRB- is why the Rankine cycle is often used as a bottoming cycle in combined-cycle gas turbine power stations .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
This was the first public steam railway in the world and then in 1829 , he built The Rocket which was entered in and won the Rainhill Trials .
The Liverpool and Manchester Railway opened in 1830 making exclusive use of steam power for both passenger and freight trains .
In the compound engine , high-pressure steam from the boiler expands in a high-pressure -LRB- HP -RRB- cylinder and then enters one or more subsequent lower-pressure -LRB- LP -RRB- cylinders .
The complete expansion of the steam now occurs across multiple cylinders and as less expansion now occurs in each cylinder less heat is lost by the steam in each .
This reduces the magnitude of cylinder heating and cooling , increasing the efficiency of the engine .
Therefore , the bore , and often the stroke , are increased in low-pressure cylinders resulting in larger cylinders .
In electricity production , the high speed of turbine rotation matches well with the speed of modern electric generators , which are typically direct connected to their driving turbines .
The cycle is an arrangement of components as is typically used for simple power production , and utilizes the phase change of water -LRB- boiling water producing steam , condensing exhaust steam , producing liquid water -RRB- -RRB- to provide a practical heat/power conversion system .
The Rankine cycle is used in virtually all steam power production applications .
This was a three-fold improvement over the average Newcomen design .
Early Watt engines equipped with high-pressure steam improved this to 65 million .
It used condensing steam to create a vacuum which was used to raise water from below , then it used steam pressure to raise it higher .
Small engines were effective though larger models were problematic .
They proved only to have a limited lift height and were prone to boiler explosions .
It received some use in mines , pumping stations and for supplying water wheels used to power textile machinery .
An attractive feature of the Savery engine was its low cost .
It continued to be manufactured until the late 18th century .
One engine was still known to be operating in 1820 .
Although the reciprocating steam engine is no longer in widespread commercial use , various companies are exploring or exploiting the potential of the engine as an alternative to internal combustion engines .
-LSB- not in citation given -RSB-
The condensers are cooled by water flow from oceans , rivers , lakes , and often by cooling towers which evaporate water to provide cooling energy removal .
The resulting condensed hot water output from the condenser is then put back into the boiler via a pump .
Such towers often have visible plumes due to the evaporated water condensing into droplets carried up by the warm air .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The governor was able to handle smaller variations such as those caused by fluctuating heat load to the boiler .
Also , there was a tendency for oscillation whenever there was a speed change .
The governor was improved over time and coupled with variable steam cut off , good speed control in response to changes in load was attainable near the end of the 19th century .
However , although never in the majority , it was popular in many other countries .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Using boiling water to produce mechanical motion goes back over 2000 years , but early devices were not practical .
Savery 's steam pump used condensing steam to create a vacuum and draw water into a chamber , and then applied pressurized steam to further pump the water .
The rotors have a propeller-like arrangement of blades at the outer edge .
Steam acts upon these blades , producing rotary motion .
The stator consists of a similar , but fixed , series of blades that serve to redirect the steam flow onto the next rotor stage .
A steam turbine often exhausts into a surface condenser that provides a vacuum .
The stages of a steam turbine are typically arranged to extract the maximum potential work from a specific velocity and pressure of steam , giving rise to a series of variably sized high - and low-pressure stages .
Turbines are only efficient if they rotate at relatively high speed , therefore they are usually connected to reduction gearing to drive lower speed applications , such as a ship 's propeller .
In the vast majority of large electric generating stations , turbines are directly connected to generators with no reduction gearing .
In nuclear power applications the turbines typically run at half these speeds , 1800 RPM and 1500 RPM .
A turbine rotor is also only capable of providing power when rotating in one direction .
Therefore , a reversing stage or gearbox is usually required where power is required in the opposite direction .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Many such engines have been designed , from the time of James Watt to the present day , but relatively few were actually built and even fewer went into quantity production ; see link at bottom of article for more details .
Lack of expansive working , or any means of control of the cutoff is also a serious problem with many such designs .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Newcomen 's and Watt 's early engines were `` atmospheric '' .
The engine cylinders had to be large because the only usable force acting on them was due to atmospheric pressure .
One end of the lever carried a weight or spring that restrained the valve against steam pressure .
This arrangement is considerably safer .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Watt was also aware of the change in the boiling point of water with pressure .
Otherwise , the improvements to the engine itself were more mechanical in nature .
The thermodynamic concepts of the Rankine cycle did give engineers the understanding needed to calculate efficiency which aided the development of modern high-pressure and - temperature boilers and the steam turbine .
The benefit of this is lost somewhat due to the lower heat addition temperature .
Nonetheless , the efficiencies of actual large steam cycles and large modern gas turbines are fairly well matched .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
See : Mechanical stoker
Prior to and during World War I , the expansion engine dominated marine applications where high vessel speed was not essential .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
A limited number of steam turbine railroad locomotives were manufactured .
Elsewhere , notably in the U.S.A. , more advanced designs with electric transmission were built experimentally , but not reproduced .
It was found that steam turbines were not ideally suited to the railroad environment and these locomotives failed to oust the classic reciprocating steam unit in the way that modern diesel and electric traction has done .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Pumping the working fluid in liquid form during the cycle requires a small fraction of the energy to transport it compared to the energy needed to compress the working fluid in gaseous form in a compressor -LRB- as in the Carnot cycle -RRB- .
The cycle of a reciprocating steam engine differs from that of turbines because of condensation and re-evaporation occurring in the cylinder or in the steam inlet passages .
It is too chemically reactive to remain a free element in air without being continuously replenished by the photosynthetic action of living organisms .
At even higher low earth orbit altitudes , sufficient atomic oxygen is present to cause erosion for spacecraft .
In one experiment he found that placing either a mouse or a lit candle in a closed container over water caused the water to rise and replace one-fourteenth of the air 's volume before extinguishing the subjects .
After breathing the gas himself , he wrote : `` The feeling of it to my lungs was not sensibly different from that of common air , but I fancied that my breast felt peculiarly light and easy for some time afterwards . ''
-LSB- k -RSB-
-LSB- a -RSB-
The fact that a substance like wood gains overall weight in burning was hidden by the buoyancy of the gaseous combustion products .
Its name derives from the Greek roots ὀξύς oxys , `` acid '' , literally `` sharp '' , referring to the sour taste of acids and - γενής - genes , `` producer '' , literally `` begetter '' , because at the time of naming , it was mistakenly thought that all acids required oxygen in their composition .
Common uses of oxygen includes the production cycle of steel , plastics and textiles , brazing , welding and cutting of steels and other metals , rocket propellant , in oxygen therapy and life support systems in aircraft , submarines , spaceflight and diving .
This combination of cancellations and σ and π overlaps results in dioxygen 's double bond character and reactivity , and a triplet electronic ground state .
In one experiment , Lavoisier observed that there was no overall increase in weight when tin and air were heated in a closed container .
ἄζωτον `` lifeless '' -RRB- , which did not support either .
Azote later became nitrogen in English , although it has kept the name in French and several other European languages .
Ozone is produced in the upper atmosphere when O 2 combines with atomic oxygen made by the splitting of O 2 by ultraviolet -LRB- UV -RRB- radiation .
Near the Earth 's surface , it is a pollutant formed as a by-product of automobile exhaust .
The metastable molecule tetraoxygen -LRB- O 4 -RRB- was discovered in 2001 , and was assumed to exist in one of the six phases of solid oxygen .
It was proven in 2006 that this phase , created by pressurizing O 2 to 20 GPa , is in fact a rhombohedral O 8 cluster .
This cluster has the potential to be a much more powerful oxidizer than either O 2 or O 3 and may therefore be used in rocket fuel .
A metallic phase was discovered in 1990 when solid oxygen is subjected to a pressure of above 96 GPa and it was shown in 1998 that at very low temperatures , this phase becomes superconducting .
Other aspects of O 2 are covered in the remainder of this article .
Both men lowered the temperature of air until it liquefied and then distilled the component gases by boiling them off one at a time and capturing them .
This method of welding and cutting metal later became common .
Water in equilibrium with air contains approximately 1 molecule of dissolved O 2 for every 2 molecules of N 2 , compared to an atmospheric ratio of approximately 1:4 .
At 5 °C the solubility increases to 9.0 mL -LRB- 50 % more than at 25 °C -RRB- per liter for water and 7.2 mL -LRB- 45 % more -RRB- per liter for sea water .
Oxygen gas is the second most common component of the Earth 's atmosphere , taking up 20.8 % of its volume and 23.1 % of its mass -LRB- some 1015 tonnes -RRB- .
-LSB- d -RSB- Earth is unusual among the planets of the Solar System in having such a high concentration of oxygen gas in its atmosphere : Mars -LRB- with 0.1 % O 2 by volume -RRB- and Venus have far lower concentrations .
He sent a telegram on December 22 , 1877 to the French Academy of Sciences in Paris announcing his discovery of liquid oxygen .
Just two days later , French physicist Louis Paul Cailletet announced his own method of liquefying molecular oxygen .
Marine organisms then incorporate more oxygen-18 into their skeletons and shells than they would in a warmer climate .
Paleoclimatologists also directly measure this ratio in the water molecules of ice core samples that are up to several hundreds of thousands of years old .
This approach exploits the fact that in those bands it is possible to discriminate the vegetation 's reflectance from its fluorescence , which is much weaker .
-LSB- c -RSB-
In the present equilibrium , production and consumption occur at the same rate of roughly 1/2000th of the entire atmospheric oxygen per year .
Simultaneously , nitrogen gas is released from the other nitrogen-saturated zeolite bed , by reducing the chamber operating pressure and diverting part of the oxygen gas from the producer bed through it , in the reverse direction of flow .
After a set cycle time the operation of the two beds is interchanged , thereby allowing for a continuous supply of gaseous oxygen to be pumped through a pipeline .
This is known as pressure swing adsorption .
Contrary to popular belief , the 2:1 ratio observed in the DC electrolysis of acidified water does not prove that the empirical formula of water is H2O unless certain assumptions are made about the molecular formulae of hydrogen and oxygen themselves .
Another air separation technology involves forcing air to dissolve through ceramic membranes based on zirconium dioxide by either high pressure or an electric current , to produce nearly pure O 2 gas .
Oxygen bars are establishments , found in Japan , California , and Las Vegas , Nevada since the late 1990s that offer higher than normal O 2 exposure for a fee .
Carbon monoxide poisoning , gas gangrene , and decompression sickness -LRB- the ` bends ' -RRB- are sometimes treated using these devices .
Increasing the pressure of O 2 as soon as possible is part of the treatment .
Many oxides of the transition metals are non-stoichiometric compounds , with slightly less metal than the chemical formula would show .
People who climb mountains or fly in non-pressurized fixed-wing aircraft sometimes have supplemental O 2 supplies .
Pulling on the masks `` to start the flow of oxygen '' as cabin safety instructions dictate , forces iron filings into the sodium chlorate inside the canister .
Liquid oxygen is passed through heat exchangers , which convert the cryogenic liquid into gas before it enters the building .
Other important organic compounds that contain oxygen are : glycerol , formaldehyde , glutaraldehyde , citric acid , acetic anhydride , and acetamide .
-LRB- although this figure also is subject to wide variation , depending on type of mask -RRB- .
The embargo caused an oil crisis , or `` shock '' , with many short - and long-term effects on global politics and the global economy .
The crisis had a major impact on international relations and created a rift within NATO .
Arab oil producers linked any future policy changes to peace between the belligerents .
To address this , the Nixon Administration began multilateral negotiations with the combatants .
Shortly thereafter , Britain followed , floating the pound sterling .
The other industrialized nations followed suit with their respective currencies .
The result was a depreciation of the dollar and other industrialized nations ' currencies .
This contributed to the `` Oil Shock '' .
OPEC ministers had not developed institutional mechanisms to update prices in sync with changing market conditions , so their real incomes lagged .
Weeks later , the Shah of Iran said in an interview : `` Of course -LSB- the price of oil -RSB- is going to rise ... Certainly !
And how !
... You 've -LSB- Western nations -RSB- increased the price of the wheat you sell us by 300 percent , and the same for sugar and cement ... You buy our crude oil and sell it back to us , refined as petrochemicals , at a hundred times the price you 've paid us ... It 's only fair that , from now on , you should pay more for oil .
George Lenczowski notes , `` Military supplies did not exhaust Nixon 's eagerness to prevent Israel 's collapse ... This -LSB- $ 2.2 billion -RSB- decision triggered a collective OPEC response . ''
Libya immediately announced it would embargo oil shipments to the United States .
Saudi Arabia and the other Arab oil-producing states joined the embargo on October 20 , 1973 .
At their Kuwait meeting , OAPEC proclaimed the embargo that curbed exports to various countries and blocked all oil deliveries to the US as a `` principal hostile country '' .
The embargo was not uniform across Europe .
Heath asked the British to heat only one room in their houses over the winter .
The Netherlands imposed prison sentences for those who used more than their ration of electricity .
Predictably , old oil was withdrawn from the market , creating greater scarcity .
The rule also discouraged development of alternative energies .
The rule had been intended to promote oil exploration .
Motorists faced long lines at gas stations beginning in summer 1972 and increasing by summer 1973 .
Simon allocated states the same amount of domestic oil for 1974 that each had consumed in 1972 , which worked for states whose populations were not increasing .
In other states , lines at gasoline stations were common .
Although no explicit plan was mentioned , a conversation between U.S. Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger and British Ambassador to the United States Lord Cromer revealed Schlesinger had told him that `` it was no longer obvious to him that the U.S. could not use force . ''
On November 7 , 1973 , the Saudi and Kuwaiti governments declared Japan a `` nonfriendly '' country to encourage it to change its noninvolvement policy .
Both states were competing for preeminence in the Persian Gulf and using increased revenues to fund expanded militaries .
By 1979 , Saudi arms purchases from the US exceeded five times Israel 's .
Saudi Arabia , on the other hand , is an Arab , largely Sunni Muslim nation headed by a near absolutist monarchy .
In November 2010 , Wikileaks leaked confidential diplomatic cables pertaining to the United States and its allies which revealed that the late Saudi King Abdullah urged the United States to attack Iran in order to destroy its potential nuclear weapons program , describing Iran as `` a snake whose head should be cut off without any procrastination . ''
The improvements stayed even though the price of a barrel of oil remained constant at $ 12 from 1974 to 1979 .
Sales of large sedans for most makes -LRB- except Chrysler products -RRB- recovered within two model years of the 1973 crisis .
Slightly smaller , mid-size models such as the Oldsmobile Cutlass , Chevrolet Monte Carlo , Ford Thunderbird and various other models sold well .
By 1977 , GM 's full-sized cars reflected the crisis .
Additionally , its own member nations were divided .
Adjusted for inflation , oil briefly fell back to pre-1973 levels .
This `` sale '' price was a windfall for oil-importing nations , both developing and developed .
Gemini missions developed some of the space travel techniques that were necessary for the success of the Apollo missions .
Apollo used Saturn family rockets as launch vehicles .
After the first landing , sufficient flight hardware remained for nine follow-on landings with a plan for extended lunar geological and astrophysical exploration .
The crew returned to Earth safely by using the Lunar Module as a `` lifeboat '' for these functions .
Apollo set several major human spaceflight milestones .
It stands alone in sending manned missions beyond low Earth orbit .
The program laid the foundation for NASA 's current human spaceflight capability , and funded construction of its Johnson Space Center and Kennedy Space Center .
Silverstein chose the name at home one evening , early in 1960 , because he felt `` Apollo riding his chariot across the Sun was appropriate to the grand scale of the proposed program . ''
Preliminary specifications were laid out for a spacecraft with a mission module cabin separate from the command module -LRB- piloting and re-entry cabin -RRB- , and a propulsion and equipment module .
Beyond military power , Kennedy used aerospace technology as a symbol of national prestige , pledging to make the US not `` first but , first and , first if , but first period . ''
Despite Kennedy 's rhetoric , he did not immediately come to a decision on the status of the Apollo program once he became president .
His memo concluded that a manned Moon landing was far enough in the future that it was likely the United States would achieve it first .
So Gilruth was given authority to grow his organization into a new NASA center , the Manned Spacecraft Center -LRB- MSC -RRB- .
It also became clear that Apollo would outgrow the Canaveral launch facilities in Florida .
The two newest launch complexes were already being built for the Saturn I and IB rockets at the northernmost end : LC-34 and LC-37 .
Construction began in November 1962 .
The LOC also included an Operations and Checkout Building -LRB- OCB -RRB- to which Gemini and Apollo spacecraft were initially received prior to being mated to their launch vehicles .
Mueller accepted , on the condition that he have a say in NASA reorganization necessary to effectively administer Apollo .
Webb then worked with Associate Administrator -LRB- later Deputy Administrator -RRB- Robert Seamans to reorganize the Office of Manned Space Flight -LRB- OMSF -RRB- .
Dissenters including John Houbolt at Langley Research Center emphasized the important weight reductions that were offered by the LOR approach .
Throughout 1960 and 1961 , Houbolt campaigned for the recognition of LOR as a viable and practical option .
This committee recognized that the chosen mode was an important part of the launch vehicle choice , and recommended in favor of a hybrid EOR-LOR mode .
Its consideration of LOR -- as well as Houbolt 's ceaseless work -- played an important role in publicizing the workability of the approach .
But even after NASA reached internal agreement , it was far from smooth sailing .
Webb jumped in and defended von Braun , until Kennedy ended the squabble by stating that the matter was `` still subject to final review '' .
Wiesner finally relented , unwilling to settle the dispute once and for all in Kennedy 's office , because of the President 's involvement with the October Cuban missile crisis , and fear of Kennedy 's support for Webb .
Some documents prove this theory was discussed before and after the method was chosen .
It was the only component of the Apollo spacecraft to survive without major configuration changes as the program evolved from the early Apollo study designs .
The module was 24.6 feet -LRB- 7.5 m -RRB- long and 12.83 feet -LRB- 3.91 m -RRB- in diameter .
Also , there was no provision for docking with the Lunar Module .
It consisted of separate descent and ascent stages , each with its own engine .
The descent stage contained storage for the descent propellant , surface stay consumables , and surface exploration equipment .
The ascent stage contained the crew cabin , ascent propellant , and a reaction control system .
The initial direct ascent plan to send the three-man Apollo Command/Service Module directly to the lunar surface , on top of a large descent rocket stage , would require a Nova-class launcher , with a lunar payload capability of over 180,000 pounds -LRB- 82,000 kg -RRB- .
The first flight with a live S-IV was launched from LC-37 .
Saturn IB launch vehicles and flights were designated with an AS-200 series number , `` AS '' indicating `` Apollo Saturn '' and the `` 2 '' indicating the second member of the Saturn rocket family .
Its capability grew to 103,600 pounds -LRB- 47,000 kg -RRB- for the later advanced lunar landings .
The S-IC first stage burned RP-1 / LOX for a rated thrust of 7,500,000 pounds-force -LRB- 33,400 kN -RRB- , which was upgraded to 7,610,000 pounds-force -LRB- 33,900 kN -RRB- .
Crews on all development flights -LRB- except the Earth orbit CSM development flights -RRB- through the first two landings on Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 , included at least two -LRB- sometimes three -RRB- Gemini veterans .
Schmitt participated in the lunar geology training of all of the Apollo landing crews .
The NASA Administrator in October , 2008 , decided to award them the Distinguished Service Medals , by this time posthumously to Schirra and Eisele .
But Eisele dislocated his shoulder twice aboard the KC135 weightlessness training aircraft , and had to undergo surgery on January 27 .
Slayton replaced him with Chaffee .
NASA announced the final crew selection for AS-204 on March 21 , 1966 , with the backup crew consisting of Gemini veterans James McDivitt and David Scott , with rookie Russell L. `` Rusty '' Schweickart .
Phillips documented his findings in a December 19 letter to NAA president Lee Atwood , with a strongly worded letter by Mueller , and also gave a presentation of the results to Mueller and Deputy Administrator Robert Seamans .
If successful , this would be followed by a more rigorous countdown simulation test closer to the February 21 launch , with both spacecraft and launch vehicle fueled .
Then , communications problems frustrated the astronauts and forced a hold in the simulated countdown .
Pressure rose high enough from the fire that the cabin burst and the fire erupted onto the pad area , frustrating attempts to rescue the crew .
At the insistence of NASA Administrator Webb , North American removed Harrison Storms as Command Module program manager .
The A missions were unmanned Saturn V validation ; B was unmanned LM validation using the Saturn IB ; C was manned CSM Earth orbit validation using the Saturn IB ; D was the first manned CSM/LM flight -LRB- this replaced AS-258 , using a single Saturn V launch -RRB- ; E would be a higher Earth orbit CSM/LM flight ; F would be the first lunar mission , testing the LM in lunar orbit but without landing -LRB- a `` dress rehearsal '' -RRB- ; and G would be the first manned landing .
The list of types covered follow-on lunar exploration to include H lunar landings , I for lunar orbital survey missions , and J for extended-stay lunar landings .
The intent of this mission was to achieve trans-lunar injection , followed closely by a simulated direct-return abort , using the Service Module engine to achieve another high-speed reentry .
The Saturn V experienced pogo oscillation , a problem caused by non-steady engine combustion , which damaged fuel lines in the second and third stages .
Two S-II engines shut down prematurely , but the remaining engines were able to compensate .
The damage to the third stage engine was more severe , preventing it from restarting for trans-lunar injection .
Mission controllers were able to use the Service Module engine to essentially repeat the flight profile of Apollo 4 .
In the summer it had become clear that the LM would not be ready in time .
This would keep the program on track .
The decision was not announced publicly until successful completion of Apollo 7 .
Armstrong and Aldrin performed the first landing at the Sea of Tranquility at 20:17:40 UTC on July 20 , 1969 .
The Command Module Pilot was Gemini veteran Richard F. Gordon , Jr. .
They made two EVAs totaling 7 hours and 45 minutes .
The contracted batch of 15 Saturn Vs were enough for lunar landing missions through Apollo 20 .
Another NASA review board was convened to determine the cause , which turned out to be a combination of damage of the tank in the factory , and a subcontractor not making a tank component according to updated design specifications .
As such , they represent samples from a very early period in the development of the Solar System , that are largely absent on Earth .
This anorthosite rock is composed almost exclusively of the calcium-rich feldspar mineral anorthite , and is believed to be representative of the highland crust .
KREEP and the anorthositic samples have been used to infer that the outer portion of the Moon was once completely molten -LRB- see lunar magma ocean -RRB- .
Many show signs of being subjected to high pressure shock waves that are generated during impact events .
All samples returned from the Moon are highly brecciated as a result of being subjected to multiple impact events .
This was based on a Congressional Budget Office report , A Budgetary Analysis of NASA 's New Vision for Space , September 2004 .
Looking beyond the manned lunar landings , NASA investigated several post-lunar applications for Apollo hardware .
Astronauts would continue to use the CSM as a ferry to the station .
The workshop was to be supplemented by Apollo Telescope Missions , which would replace the LM 's descent stage equipment and engine with a solar telescope observatory .
The S-IVB orbital workshop was the only one of these plans to make it off the drawing board .
In 2008 , Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency 's SELENE probe observed evidence of the halo surrounding the Apollo 15 Lunar Module blast crater while orbiting above the lunar surface .
This resulted in lunar footage that had to be converted for the live television broadcast and stored on magnetic telemetry tapes .
Although the European Union does not have a codified constitution , like every political body it has laws which `` constitute '' its basic governance structure .
The Treaties establish the EU 's institutions , list their powers and responsibilities , and explain the areas in which the EU can legislate with Directives or Regulations .
The Commission oversees departments and various agencies that execute or enforce EU law .
It appoints the Commissioners and the board of the European Central Bank .
The Court can review the legality of the EU institutions ' actions , in compliance with the Treaties .
It can also decide upon claims for breach of EU laws from member states and citizens .
The Treaties contain formal and substantive provisions , which frame policies of the European Union institutions and determine the division of competences between the European Union and its member states .
The TEU establishes that European Union law applies to the metropolitan territories of the member states , as well as certain islands and overseas territories , including Madeira , the Canary Islands and the French overseas departments .
The TEU allows the European Council to make specific provisions for regions , as for example done for customs matters in Gibraltar and Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon .
The TEU provides that commitments entered into by the member states between themselves before the treaty was signed no longer apply .
-LSB- vague -RSB- All EU member states are regarded as subject to the general obligation of the principle of cooperation , as stated in the TEU , whereby member states are obliged not to take measure which could jeopardise the attainment of the TEU objectives .
Minor amendments were made during the 1960s and 1970s .
Under article 17 -LRB- 2 -RRB- , `` Union legislative acts may only be adopted on the basis of a Commission proposal , except where the Treaties provide otherwise . ''
The Parliament can also formally request the Commission to submit a legislative proposal but the Commission can reject such a suggestion , giving reasons .
The Commissioners -LRB- and most importantly , the portfolios they will hold -RRB- are bargained over intensively by the member states .
The Commissioners , as a block , are then subject to a qualified majority vote of the Council to approve , and majority approval of the Parliament .
The proposal to make the Commissioners be drawn from the elected Parliament , was not adopted in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Commissioners have various privileges , such as being exempt from member state taxes -LRB- but not EU taxes -RRB- , and having immunity from prosecution for doing official acts .
Beyond the Commission , the European Central Bank has relative executive autonomy in its conduct of monetary policy for the purpose of managing the euro .
According to the Treaty on European Union articles 9 and 10 , the EU observes `` the principle of equality of its citizens '' and is meant to be founded on `` representative democracy '' .
The justification for this `` democratic deficit '' under the Treaties is usually thought to be that completion integration of the European economy and political institutions required the technical coordination of experts , while popular understanding of the EU developed and nationalist sentiments declined post-war .
Citizens ' rights are therefore limited compared to the democratic polities within all European member states : under TEU article 11 citizens and associations have the rights such as publicising their views and submit an initiative that must be considered by the Commission with one million signatures .
TFEU article 227 contains a further right for citizens to petition the Parliament on issues which affect them .
There are 750 MEPs and their numbers are `` degressively proportional '' according to member state size .
This means - although the Council is meant to be the body representing member states - in the Parliament citizens of smaller member states have more voice than citizens in larger member states .
Parties do not receive public funds from the EU , as the Court of Justice held in Parti écologiste `` Les Verts '' v Parliament that this was entirely an issue to be regulated by the member states .
The Parliament 's powers include calling inquiries into maladministration or appoint an Ombudsman pending any court proceedings .
In some cases , the Parliament has explicit consultation rights , which the Commission must genuinely follow .
The heads of government of member states also convene a `` European Council '' -LRB- a distinct body -RRB- that the TEU article 15 defines as providing the ` necessary impetus for its development and shall define the general political directions and priorities ' .
The Council does this : in effect this is the governments of the member states , but there will be a different minister at each meeting , depending on the topic discussed -LRB- e.g. for environmental issues , the member states ' environment ministers attend and vote ; for foreign affairs , the foreign ministers , etc. -RRB- .
The minister must have the authority to represent and bin the member states in decisions .
This is critical during the legislative process .
A different procedure exists for budgets .
For `` enhanced cooperation '' among a sub-set of at least member states , authorisation must be given by the Council .
Member state governments should be informed by the Commission at the outset before any proposals start the legislative procedure .
The EU as a whole can only act within its power set out in the Treaties .
Under TEU article 19 -LRB- 3 -RRB- is to be the ultimate court to interpret questions of EU law .
Arguably this has been done through both seminal and controversial judgments , including Van Gend en Loos , Mangold v Helm , and Kadi v Commission .
Since its founding , the EU has operated among an increasing plurality of national and globalising legal systems .
He claimed the Italian nationalisation law conflicted with the Treaty of Rome , and requested a reference be made to both the Italian Constitutional Court and the Court of Justice under TFEU article 267 .
However , in principle , Mr Costa was entitled to plead that the Treaty conflicted with national law , and the court would have a duty to consider his claim to make a reference if there would be no appeal against its decision .
The Court of Justice , repeating its view in Van Gend en Loos , said member states `` albeit within limited spheres , have restricted their sovereign rights and created a body of law applicable both to their nationals and to themselves '' on the `` basis of reciprocity '' .
EU law would not `` be overridden by domestic legal provisions , however framed ... without the legal basis of the community itself being called into question . ''
This meant any `` subsequent unilateral act '' of the member state inapplicable .
In `` accordance with the principle of the precedence of Community law , '' said the Court of Justice , the `` directly applicable measures of the institutions '' -LRB- such as the Regulations in the case -RRB- `` render automatically inapplicable any conflicting provision of current national law '' .
This was necessary to prevent a `` corresponding denial '' of Treaty `` obligations undertaken unconditionally and irrevocably by member states '' , that could `` imperil the very foundations of the '' EU .
But despite the views of the Court of Justice , the national courts of member states have not accepted the same analysis .
In the United Kingdom , the basic principle is that Parliament , as the sovereign expression of democratic legitimacy , can decide whether it wishes to expressly legislate against EU law .
This , however , would only happen in the case of an express wish of the people to withdraw from the EU .
It was held in R -LRB- Factortame Ltd -RRB- v Secretary of State for Transport that `` whatever limitation of its sovereignty Parliament accepted when it enacted the European Communities Act 1972 was entirely voluntary '' and so `` it has always been clear '' that UK courts have a duty `` to override any rule of national law found to be in conflict with any directly enforceable rule of Community law . ''
However , as the nicknames of the judgments go , `` so long as '' the EU works towards the democratisation of its institutions , and has a framework that protects fundamental human rights , it would not review EU legislation for compatibility with German constitutional principles .
Most other member states have expressed similar reservations .
Both member states and the Commission have a general legal right or `` standing '' -LRB- locus standi -RRB- to bring claims against EU institutions and other member states for breach of the treaties .
From the EU 's foundation , the Court of Justice also held that the Treaties allowed citizens or corporations to bring claims against EU and member state institutions for violation of the Treaties and Regulations , if they were properly interpreted as creating rights and obligations .
This meant courts of member states were not bound to apply an EU law where a national rule conflicted , even though the member state government could be sued , if it would impose an obligation on another citizen or corporation .
These rules on `` direct effect '' limit the extent to which member state courts are bound to administer EU law .
The remedy for a claimant where there has been a breach of the law is often monetary damages , but courts can also require specific performance or will grant an injunction , in order to ensure the law is effective as possible .
Although it is generally accepted that EU law has primacy , not all EU laws give citizens standing to bring claims : that is , not all EU laws have `` direct effect '' .
After a Dutch court made a reference , the Court of Justice held that even though the Treaties did not `` expressly '' confer a right on citizens or companies to bring claims , they could do so .
Historically , international treaties had only allowed states to have legal claims for their enforcement , but the Court of Justice proclaimed `` the Community constitutes a new legal order of international law '' .
Moreover , member states comes under a duty not to replicate Regulations in their own law , in order to prevent confusion .
For instance , in Commission v Italy the Court of Justice held that Italy had breached a duty under the Treaties , both by failing to operate a scheme to pay farmers a premium to slaughter cows -LRB- to reduce dairy overproduction -RRB- , and by reproducing the rules in a decree with various additions .
`` Regulations , '' held the Court of Justice , `` come into force solely by virtue of their publication '' and implementation could have the effect of `` jeopardizing their simultaneous and uniform application in the whole of the Union . ''
On the other hand , some Regulations may themselves expressly require implementing measures , in which case those specific rules should be followed .
In theory , this is because TFEU article 288 says Directives are addressed to the member states and usually `` leave to the national authorities the choice of form and methods '' to implement .
In part this reflects that directives often create minimum standards , leaving member states to apply higher standards .
However , on the current position adopted by the Court of Justice , citizens have standing to make claims based on national laws that implement Directives , but not from Directives themselves .
Directives do not have so called `` horizontal '' direct effect -LRB- i.e. between non-state parties -RRB- .
The Court of Justice refused , but there are five large exceptions .
So , in Pubblico Ministero v Ratti because the Italian government had failed to implement a Directive 73/173/EEC on packaging and labelling solvents by the deadline , it was estopped from enforcing a conflicting national law from 1963 against Mr Ratti 's solvent and varnish business .
A member state could `` not rely , as against individuals , on its own failure to perform the obligations which the Directive entails . ''
So , in CIA Security v Signalson and Securitel the Court of Justice held that a business called CIA Security could defend itself from allegations by competitors that it had not complied with a Belgian decree from 1991 about alarm systems , on the basis that it had not been notified to the Commission as a Directive required .
Third , if a Directive gives expression to a `` general principle '' of EU law , it can be invoked between private non-state parties before its deadline for implementation .
This follows from Kücükdeveci v Swedex GmbH & Co KG where the German Civil Code § 622 stated that the years people worked under the age of 25 would not count towards the increasing statutory notice before dismissal .
She claimed that the law not counting her years under age 25 was unlawful age discrimination under the Employment Equality Framework Directive .
The Court of Justice held that the Directive could be relied on by her because equality was also a general principle of EU law .
Third , if the defendant is an emanation of the state , even if not central government , it can still be bound by Directives .
This could also be true if the enterprise is privatised , as it was held with a water company that was responsible for basic water provision .
Textbooks -LRB- though not the Court itself -RRB- often called this `` indirect effect '' .
The Court of Justice quickly acknowledged that the duty of interpretation can not contradict plain words in a national statute .
But , fifth , if a member state has failed to implement a Directive , a citizen may not be able to bring claims against other non-state parties , but can sue the member state itself for failure to implement the law .
The Court of Justice held that if a Directive would confer identifiable rights on individuals , and there is a causal link between a member state 's violation of EU and a claimant 's loss , damages must be paid .
The fact that the incompatible law is an Act of Parliament is no defence .
In formulating these principles , the courts have drawn on a variety of sources , including : public international law and legal doctrines and principles present in the legal systems of European Union member states and in the jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights .
According to the general principle of proportionality the lawfulness of an action depends on whether it was appropriate and necessary to achieve the objectives legitimately pursued .
As a general principle in European Union law it means that the law must be certain , in that it is clear and precise , and its legal implications foreseeable , specially when applied to financial obligations .
Legislation in member states which implements European Union law must be worded so that it is clearly understandable by those who are subject to the law .
In European Union law the general principle of legal certainty prohibits Ex post facto laws , i.e. laws should not take effect before they are published .
The legitimate expectation doctrine holds that and that `` those who act in good faith on the basis of law as it is or seems to be should not be frustrated in their expectations '' .
Fundamental rights , as in human rights , were first recognised by the European Court of Justice in the late 60s and fundamental rights are now regarded as integral part of the general principles of European Union law .
The European Court of Justice also found that `` international treaties for the protection of human rights on which the member states have collaborated or of which they are signatories , can supply guidelines which should be followed within the framework of Community law . ''
It was not envisaged for European Union measures , that is legislative and administrative actions by European Union institutions , to be subject to human rights .
The European Court of Justice recognised fundamental rights as general principle of European Union law as the need to ensure that European Union measures are compatible with the human rights enshrined in member states ' constitution became ever more apparent .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union draws a list of fundamental rights from the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , the Declaration on Fundamental Rights produced by the European Parliament in 1989 and European Union Treaties .
A toned down version was adopted as the Social Charter at the 1989 Strasbourg European Council .
Again , the UK was exempt from legislation arising from the protocol , unless it agreed to be bound by it .
The protocol was to become known as `` Social Chapter '' , despite not actually being a chapter of the Maastricht Treaty .
To achieve aims of the Agreement on Social Policy the European Union was to `` support and complement '' the policies of member states .
The aims of the Agreement on Social Policy are :
In the 10 years following the 1997 Treaty of Amsterdam and adoption of the Social Chapter the European Union has undertaken policy initiatives in various social policy areas , including labour and industry relations , equal opportunity , health and safety , public health , protection of children , the disabled and elderly , poverty , migrant workers , education , training and youth .
The agreement aimed to prevent Germany from re-establishing dominance in the production of coal and steel as members felt that its dominance had contributed to the outbreak of the war .
This was the first time that competition law principles were included in a plurilateral regional agreement and established the trans-European model of competition law .
The Treaty of Rome established the enactment of competition law as one of the main aims of the EEC through the `` institution of a system ensuring that competition in the common market is not distorted '' .
The two central provisions on EU competition law on companies were established in article 85 , which prohibited anti-competitive agreements , subject to some exemptions , and article 86 prohibiting the abuse of dominant position .
The treaty also established principles on competition law for member states , with article 90 covering public undertakings , and article 92 making provisions on state aid .
Regulations on mergers were not included as member states could not establish consensus on the issue at the time .
According to Article 101 -LRB- 2 -RRB- any such agreements are automatically void .
Article 101 -LRB- 3 -RRB- establishes exemptions , if the collusion is for distributional or technological innovation , gives consumers a `` fair share '' of the benefit and does not include unreasonable restraints that risk eliminating competition anywhere -LRB- or compliant with the general principle of European Union law of proportionality -RRB- .
The general test is whether a concentration -LRB- i.e. merger or acquisition -RRB- with a community dimension -LRB- i.e. affects a number of EU member states -RRB- might significantly impede effective competition .
Article 107 lays down a general rule that the state may not aid or subsidise private parties in distortion of free competition and provides exemptions for charities , regional development objectives and in the event of a natural disaster .
According to the standard theory of comparative advantage , two countries can both benefit from trade even if one of them has a less productive economy in all respects .
It was originally theorised that a free trade area had a tendency to give way to a customs union , which led to a common market , then monetary union , then union of monetary and fiscal policy , political and eventually a full union characteristic of a federal state .
In Europe , however , those stages were considerably mixed , and it remains unclear whether the `` endgame '' should be the same as a state , traditionally understood .
In practice free trade , without standards to ensure fair trade , can benefit some people and groups within countries -LRB- particularly big business -RRB- much more than others , but will burden people who lack bargaining power in an expanding market , particularly workers , consumers , small business , developing industries , and communities .
The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union articles 28 to 37 establish the principle of free movement of goods in the EU , while articles 45 to 66 require free movement of persons , services and capital .
These so-called `` four freedoms '' were thought to be inhibited by physical barriers -LRB- e.g. customs -RRB- , technical barriers -LRB- e.g. differing laws on safety , consumer or environmental standards -RRB- and fiscal barriers -LRB- e.g. different Value Added Tax rates -RRB- .
The tension in the law is that the free movement and trade is not supposed to spill over into a licence for unrestricted commercial profit .
The EU manages imports from non-member states , duties between member states are prohibited , and imports circulate freely .
In addition under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union article 34 , ` Quantitative restrictions on imports and all measures having equivalent effect shall be prohibited between Member States ' .
In Procureur du Roi v Dassonville the Court of Justice held that this rule meant all `` trading rules '' that are `` enacted by Member States '' which could hinder trade `` directly or indirectly , actually or potentially '' would be caught by article 34 .
This meant that a Belgian law requiring Scotch whisky imports to have a certificate of origin was unlikely to be lawful .
This `` wide test '' , to determine what could potentially be an unlawful restriction on trade , applies equally to actions by quasi-government bodies , such as the former `` Buy Irish '' company that had government appointees .
France was liable for these hindrances to trade because the authorities ` manifestly and persistently abstained ' from preventing the sabotage .
Generally speaking , if a member state has laws or practices that directly discriminate against imports -LRB- or exports under TFEU article 35 -RRB- then it must be justified under article 36 .
The justifications include public morality , policy or security , `` protection of health and life of humans , animals or plants '' , `` national treasures '' of `` artistic , historic or archaeological value '' and `` industrial and commercial property . ''
In addition , although not clearly listed , environmental protection can justify restrictions on trade as an overriding requirement derived from TFEU article 11 .
More generally , it has been increasingly acknowledged that fundamental human rights should take priority over all trade rules .
Although many companies , including Mr Schmidberger 's German undertaking , were prevented from trading , the Court of Justice reasoned that freedom of association is one of the ` fundamental pillars of a democratic society ' , against which the free movement of goods had to be balanced , and was probably subordinate .
If a member state does appeal to the article 36 justification , the measures it takes have to be applied proportionately .
This means the rule must be pursue a legitimate aim and -LRB- 1 -RRB- be suitable to achieve the aim , -LRB- 2 -RRB- be necessary , so that a less restrictive measure could not achieve the same result , and -LRB- 3 -RRB- be reasonable in balancing the interests of free trade with interests in article 36 .
Often rules apply to all goods neutrally , but may have a greater practical effect on imports than domestic products .
For such `` indirect '' discriminatory -LRB- or `` indistinctly applicable '' -RRB- measures the Court of Justice has developed more justifications : either those in article 36 , or additional `` mandatory '' or `` overriding '' requirements such as consumer protection , improving labour standards , protecting the environment , press diversity , fairness in commerce , and more : the categories are not closed .
The Court of Justice rejected the German government 's arguments that the measure proportionately protected public health under TFEU article 36 , because stronger beverages were available and adequate labelling would be enough for consumers to understand what they bought .
This rule primarily applies to requirements about a product 's content or packaging .
In Walter Rau Lebensmittelwerke v De Smedt PVBA the Court of Justice found that a Belgian law requiring all margarine to be in cube shaped packages infringed article 34 , and was not justified by the pursuit of consumer protection .
The argument that Belgians would believe it was butter if it was not cube shaped was disproportionate : it would `` considerably exceed the requirements of the object in view '' and labelling would protect consumers `` just as effectively '' .
It had to be `` chocolate substitute '' .
They claimed the law infringed article 34 .
The Court of Justice held that a low content of vegetable fat did not justify a `` chocolate substitute '' label .
This was derogatory in the consumers ' eyes .
A ` neutral and objective statement ' was enough to protect consumers .
If member states place considerable obstacles on the use of a product , this can also infringe article 34 .
Again , the law applied neutrally to everyone , but disproportionately affected importers , because Italian companies did not make trailers .
This was not a product requirement , but the Court reasoned that the prohibition would deter people from buying it : it would have `` a considerable influence on the behaviour of consumers '' that `` affects the access of that product to the market '' .
It would require justification under article 36 , or as a mandatory requirement .
In contrast to product requirements or other laws that hinder market access , the Court of Justice developed a presumption that `` selling arrangements '' would be presumed to not fall into TFEU article 34 , if they applied equally to all sellers , and affected them in the same manner in fact .
The Court of Justice held , as `` in law and in fact '' it was an equally applicable `` selling arrangement '' -LRB- not something that alters a product 's content -RRB- it was outside the scope of article 34 , and so did not need to be justified .
Selling arrangements can be held to have an unequal effect `` in fact '' particularly where traders from another member state are seeking to break into the market , but there are restrictions on advertising and marketing .
While the bans have remained -LRB- justifiable under article 36 or as a mandatory requirement -RRB- the Court emphasised that complete marketing bans could be disproportionate if advertising were `` the only effective form of promotion enabling -LSB- a trader -RSB- to penetrate '' the market .
In Konsumentombudsmannen v Gourmet AB the Court suggested that a total ban for advertising alcohol on the radio , TV and in magazines could fall within article 34 where advertising was the only way for sellers to overcome consumers ' `` traditional social practices and to local habits and customs '' to buy their products , but again the national courts would decide whether it was justified under article 36 to protect public health .
Increasingly , states have to give mutual recognition to each other 's standards of regulation , while the EU has attempted to harmonise minimum ideals of best practice .
The attempt to raise standards is hoped to avoid a regulatory `` race to the bottom '' , while allowing consumers access to goods from around the continent .
However , from the 1970s , this focus shifted towards developing a more `` social '' Europe .
This means the basic `` worker '' rights in TFEU article 45 function as a specific expression of the general rights of citizens in TFEU articles 18 to 21 .
According to the Court of Justice , a `` worker '' is anybody who is economically active , which includes everyone in an employment relationship , `` under the direction of another person '' for `` remuneration '' .
A job , however , need not be paid in money for someone to be protected as a worker .
Having `` worker '' status means protection against all forms of discrimination by governments , and employers , in access to employment , tax , and social security rights .
By contrast a citizen , who is `` any person having the nationality of a Member State '' -LRB- TFEU article 20 -LRB- 1 -RRB- -RRB- , has rights to seek work , vote in local and European elections , but more restricted rights to claim social security .
In practice , free movement has become politically contentious as nationalist political parties have manipulated fears about immigrants taking away people 's jobs and benefits -LRB- paradoxically at the same time -RRB- .
Nevertheless , practically `` all available research finds little impact '' of `` labour mobility on wages and employment of local workers '' .
First , articles 1 to 4 generally require that workers can take up employment , conclude contracts , and not suffer discrimination compared to nationals of the member state .
The Court of Justice held `` the transfer rules constitute -LSB- d -RSB- an obstacle to free movement '' and were unlawful unless they could be justified in the public interest , but this was unlikely .
By contrast in Angonese v Cassa di Risparmio di Bolzano SpA a bank in Bolzano , Italy , was not allowed to require Mr Angonese to have a bilingual certificate that could only be obtained in Bolzano .
The Court of Justice , giving `` horizontal '' direct effect to TFEU article 45 , reasoned that people from other countries would have little chance of acquiring the certificate , and because it was `` impossible to submit proof of the required linguistic knowledge by any other means '' , the measure was disproportionate .
Second , article 7 -LRB- 2 -RRB- requires equal treatment in respect of tax .
In Finanzamt Köln Altstadt v Schumacker the Court of Justice held that it contravened TFEU art 45 to deny tax benefits -LRB- e.g. for married couples , and social insurance expense deductions -RRB- to a man who worked in Germany , but was resident in Belgium when other German residents got the benefits .
By contrast in Weigel v Finanzlandesdirektion für Vorarlberg the Court of Justice rejected Mr Weigel 's claim that a re-registration charge upon bringing his car to Austria violated his right to free movement .
Although the tax was `` likely to have a negative bearing on the decision of migrant workers to exercise their right to freedom of movement '' , because the charge applied equally to Austrians , in absence of EU legislation on the matter it had to be regarded as justified .
Third , people must receive equal treatment regarding `` social advantages '' , although the Court has approved residential qualifying periods .
The general justifications for limiting free movement in TFEU article 45 -LRB- 3 -RRB- are `` public policy , public security or public health '' , and there is also a general exception in article 45 -LRB- 4 -RRB- for `` employment in the public service '' .
In Gebhard v Consiglio dell ' Ordine degli Avvocati e Procuratori di Milano the Court of Justice held that to be `` established '' means to participate in economic life `` on a stable and continuous basis '' , while providing `` services '' meant pursuing activity more `` on a temporary basis '' .
This meant that a lawyer from Stuttgart , who had set up chambers in Milan and was censured by the Milan Bar Council for not having registered , was entitled to bring a claim under for establishment freedom , rather than service freedom .
All people or entities that engage in economic activity , particularly the self-employed , or `` undertakings '' such as companies or firms , have a right to set up an enterprise without unjustified restrictions .
The Court of Justice has held that both a member state government and a private party can hinder freedom of establishment , so article 49 has both `` vertical '' and `` horizontal '' direct effect .
The Grand Chamber of the Court of Justice held the Commission had not proven that this had any object or effect of limiting practitioners from entering the market .
Therefore , there was no prima facie infringement freedom of establishment that needed to be justified .
Environment Commissioner Stavros Dimas stated that `` Such highly toxic waste should never have left the European Union '' .
That ruling set a precedent that the Commission , on a supranational basis , may legislate in criminal law -- something never done before .
So far , the only other proposal has been the draft intellectual property rights directive .
Motions were tabled in the European Parliament against that legislation on the basis that criminal law should not be an EU competence , but was rejected at vote .
The Court of Justice held that the freedom to provide services applied , it was directly effective , and the rule was probably unjustified : having an address in the member state would be enough to pursue the legitimate aim of good administration of justice .
The Court of Justice has held that secondary education falls outside the scope of article 56 , because usually the state funds it , though higher education does not .
Health care generally counts as a service .
In Geraets-Smits v Stichting Ziekenfonds Mrs Geraets-Smits claimed she should be reimbursed by Dutch social insurance for costs of receiving treatment in Germany .
Several governments submitted that hospital services should not be regarded as economic , and should not fall within article 56 .
But the Court of Justice held health was a `` service '' even though the government -LRB- rather than the service recipient -RRB- paid for the service .
National authorities could be justified in refusing to reimburse patients for medical services abroad if the health care received at home was without undue delay , and it followed `` international medical science '' on which treatments counted as normal and necessary .
The Court requires that the individual circumstances of a patient justify waiting lists , and this is also true in the context of the UK 's National Health Service .
Aside from public services , another sensitive field of services are those classified as illegal .
Josemans v Burgemeester van Maastricht held that the Netherlands ' regulation of cannabis consumption , including the prohibitions by some municipalities on tourists -LRB- but not Dutch nationals -RRB- going to coffee shops , fell outside article 56 altogether .
If an activity does fall within article 56 , a restriction can be justified under article 52 or overriding requirements developed by the Court of Justice .
In Alpine Investments BV v Minister van Financiën a business that sold commodities futures -LRB- with Merrill Lynch and another banking firms -RRB- attempted to challenge a Dutch law that prohibiting cold calling customers .
The Court of Justice held the Dutch prohibition pursued a legitimate aim to prevent `` undesirable developments in securities trading '' including protecting the consumer from aggressive sales tactics , thus maintaining confidence in the Dutch markets .
In Omega Spielhallen GmbH v Bonn a `` laserdrome '' business was banned by the Bonn council .
It bought fake laser gun services from a UK firm called Pulsar Ltd , but residents had protested against `` playing at killing '' entertainment .
The Court of Justice held that the German constitutional value of human dignity , which underpinned the ban , did count as a justified restriction on freedom to provide services .
In Liga Portuguesa de Futebol v Santa Casa da Misericórdia de Lisboa the Court of Justice also held that the state monopoly on gambling , and a penalty for a Gibraltar firm that had sold internet gambling services , was justified to prevent fraud and gambling where people 's views were highly divergent .
The ban was proportionate as this was an appropriate and necessary way to tackle the serious problems of fraud that arise over the internet .
In the Services Directive a group of justifications were codified in article 16 that the case law has developed .
In regard to companies , the Court of Justice held in R -LRB- Daily Mail and General Trust plc -RRB- v HM Treasury that member states could restrict a company moving its seat of business , without infringing TFEU article 49 .
The UK did not need to justify its action , as rules on company seats were not yet harmonised .
By contrast , in Centros Ltd v Erhversus-og Selkabssyrelsen the Court of Justice found that a UK limited company operating in Denmark could not be required to comply with Denmark 's minimum share capital rules .
The Court of Justice held that Denmark 's minimum capital law infringed Centros Ltd 's freedom of establishment and could not be justified , because a company in the UK could admittedly provide services in Denmark without being established there , and there were less restrictive means of achieving the aim of creditor protection .
This approach was criticised as potentially opening the EU to unjustified regulatory competition , and a race to the bottom in standards , like in the US where the state Delaware attracts most companies and is often argued to have the worst standards of accountability of boards , and low corporate taxes as a result .
However , in Cartesio Oktató és Szolgáltató bt the Court of Justice affirmed again that because corporations are created by law , they are in principle subject to any rules for formation that a state of incorporation wishes to impose .
This meant that the Hungarian authorities could prevent a company from shifting its central administration to Italy while it still operated and was incorporated in Hungary .
Thus , the court draws a distinction between the right of establishment for foreign companies -LRB- where restrictions must be justified -RRB- , and the right of the state to determine conditions for companies incorporated in its territory , although it is not entirely clear why .
There is debate , however , over how extensive this reduction was .
The total number of tree species in the region is estimated at 16,000 .
The rainforest contains several species that can pose a hazard .
There are also numerous parasites and disease vectors .
Malaria , yellow fever and Dengue fever can also be contracted in the Amazon region .
The main sources of deforestation in the Amazon are human settlement and development of the land .
The soils in the Amazon are productive for just a short period of time , so farmers are constantly moving to new areas and clearing more land .
These farming practices led to deforestation and caused extensive environmental damage .
New research however , conducted by Leydimere Oliveira et al. , has shown that the more rainforest is logged in the Amazon , the less precipitation reaches the area and so the lower the yield per hectare becomes .
So despite the popular perception , there has been no economical advantage for Brazil from logging rainforest zones and converting these to pastoral fields .
Amazonian forests are estimated to have accumulated 0.62 ± 0.37 tons of carbon per hectare per year between 1975 and 1996 .
However , simulations of Amazon basin climate change across many different models are not consistent in their estimation of any rainfall response , ranging from weak increases to strong decreases .
Currently , most tribes in the Amazon do not have clearly defined boundaries , making it easier for commercial ventures to target their territories .
The findings were published in the journal Science .
Like cnidarians , their bodies consist of a mass of jelly , with one layer of cells on the outside and another lining the internal cavity .
In ctenophores , these layers are two cells deep , while those in cnidarians are only one cell deep .
Increasing awareness of the differences persuaded more recent authors to classify them as separate phyla .
Almost all ctenophores are predators , taking prey ranging from microscopic larvae and rotifers to the adults of small crustaceans ; the exceptions are juveniles of two species , which live as parasites on the salps on which adults of their species feed .
These variations enable different species to build huge populations in the same area , because they specialize in different types of prey , which they capture by as wide a range of methods as spiders use .
Ctenophores may be abundant during the summer months in some coastal locations , but in other places they are uncommon and difficult to find .
The position of the ctenophores in the evolutionary family tree of animals has long been debated , and the majority view at present , based on molecular phylogenetics , is that cnidarians and bilaterians are more closely related to each other than either is to ctenophores .
Both ctenophores and cnidarians have a type of muscle that , in more complex animals , arises from the middle cell layer , and as a result some recent text books classify ctenophores as triploblastic , while others still regard them as diploblastic .
For a phylum with relatively few species , ctenophores have a wide range of body plans .
In addition oceanic species do not preserve well , and are known mainly from photographs and from observers ' notes .
The mouth and pharynx have both cilia and well-developed muscles .
In other parts of the canal system , the gastrodermis is different on the sides nearest to and furthest from the organ that it supplies .
The side furthest from the organ is covered with ciliated cells that circulate water through the canals , punctuated by ciliary rosettes , pores that are surrounded by double whorls of cilia and connect to the mesoglea .
The rows are oriented to run from near the mouth -LRB- the `` oral pole '' -RRB- to the opposite end -LRB- the `` aboral pole '' -RRB- , and are spaced more or less evenly around the body , although spacing patterns vary by species and in most species the comb rows extend only part of the distance from the aboral pole towards the mouth .
These normally beat so that the propulsion stroke is away from the mouth , although they can also reverse direction .
When trying to escape predators , one species can accelerate to six times its normal speed ; some other species reverse direction as part of their escape behavior , by reversing the power stroke of the comb plate cilia .
Their body fluids are normally as concentrated as seawater .
A ctenophore does not automatically try to keep the statolith resting equally on all the balancers .
Instead its response is determined by the animal 's `` mood '' , in other words the overall state of the nervous system .
For example , if a ctenophore with trailing tentacles captures prey , it will often put some comb rows into reverse , spinning the mouth towards the prey .
Some species of cydippids have bodies that are flattened to various extents , so that they are wider in the plane of the tentacles .
The tentacles and tentilla are densely covered with microscopic colloblasts that capture prey by sticking to it .
The function of the spiral thread is uncertain , but it may absorb stress when prey tries to escape , and thus prevent the collobast from being torn apart .
In addition to colloblasts , members of the genus Haeckelia , which feed mainly on jellyfish , incorporate their victims ' stinging nematocytes into their own tentacles -- some cnidaria-eating nudibranchs similarly incorporate nematocytes into their bodies for defense .
The unique flicking is an uncoiling movement powered by contraction of the striated muscle .
The wriggling motion is produced by smooth muscles , but of a highly specialized type .
Coiling around prey is accomplished largely by the return of the tentilla to their inactive state , but the coils may be tightened by smooth muscle .
The `` combs '' beat in a metachronal rhythm rather like that of a Mexican wave .
This forms a mechanical system for transmitting the beat rhythm from the combs to the balancers , via water disturbances created by the cilia .
Their inconspicuous tentacles originate from the corners of the mouth , running in convoluted grooves and spreading out over the inner surface of the lobes -LRB- rather than trailing far behind , as in the Cydippida -RRB- .
Lobates have eight comb-rows , originating at the aboral pole and usually not extending beyond the body to the lobes ; in species with -LRB- four -RRB- auricles , the cilia edging the auricles are extensions of cilia in four of the comb rows .
Most lobates are quite passive when moving through the water , using the cilia on their comb rows for propulsion , although Leucothea has long and active auricles whose movements also contribute to propulsion .
This may have enabled lobates to grow larger than cydippids and to have shapes that are less egg-like .
These fused bundles of several thousand large cilia are able to `` bite '' off pieces of prey that are too large to swallow whole -- almost always other ctenophores .
This tight closure streamlines the front of the animal when it is pursuing prey .
There is a pair of comb-rows along each aboral edge , and tentilla emerging from a groove all along the oral edge , which stream back across most of the wing-like body surface .
Almost all species are hermaphrodites , in other words they function as both males and females at the same time -- except that in two species of the genus Ocryopsis individuals remain of the same single sex all their lives .
Development of the fertilized eggs is direct , in other words there is no distinctive larval form , and juveniles of all groups generally resemble miniature cydippid adults .
In most species the juveniles gradually develop the body forms of their parents .
Detailed statistical investigation has not suggested the function of ctenophores ' bioluminescence nor produced any correlation between its exact color and any aspect of the animals ' environments , such as depth or whether they live in coastal or mid-ocean waters .
If food is plentiful , they can eat 10 times their own weight per day .
While Beroe preys mainly on other ctenophores , other surface-water species prey on zooplankton -LRB- planktonic animals -RRB- ranging in size from the microscopic , including mollusc and fish larvae , to small adult crustaceans such as copepods , amphipods , and even krill .
Ctenophores have been compared to spiders in their wide range of techniques from capturing prey -- some hang motionless in the water using their tentacles as `` webs '' , some are ambush predators like Salticid jumping spiders , and some dangle a sticky droplet at the end of a fine thread , as bolas spiders do .
This variety explains the wide range of body forms in a phylum with rather few species .
It is also often difficult to identify the remains of ctenophores in the guts of possible predators , although the combs sometimes remain intact long enough to provide a clue .
Since ctenophores and jellyfish often have large seasonal variations in population , most fish that prey on them are generalists , and may have a greater effect on populations than the specialist jelly-eaters .
The larvae of some sea anemones are parasites on ctenophores , as are the larvae of some flatworms that parasitize fish when they reach adulthood .
Mnemiopsis is well equipped to invade new territories -LRB- although this was not predicted until after it so successfully colonized the Black Sea -RRB- , as it can breed very rapidly and tolerate a wide range of water temperatures and salinities .
The impact was increased by chronic overfishing , and by eutrophication that gave the entire ecosystem a short-term boost , causing the Mnemiopsis population to increase even faster than normal -- and above all by the absence of efficient predators on these introduced ctenophores .
However the abundance of plankton in the area seems unlikely to be restored to pre-Mnemiopsis levels .
Until the mid-1990s only two specimens good enough for analysis were known , both members of the crown group , from the early Devonian -LRB- Emsian -RRB- period .
They also appear to have had internal organ-like structures unlike anything found in living ctenophores .
One of the fossil species first reported in 1996 had a large mouth , apparently surrounded by a folded edge that may have been muscular .
Evidence from China a year later suggests that such ctenophores were widespread in the Cambrian , but perhaps very different from modern species -- for example one fossil 's comb-rows were mounted on prominent vanes .
De-Gan Shu , Simon Conway Morris et al. found on its branches what they considered rows of cilia , used for filter feeding .
The relationship of ctenophores to the rest of Metazoa is very important to our understanding of the early evolution of animals and the origin of multicellularity .
It has been the focus of debate for many years .
Ctenophores have been purported to be the sister lineage to the Bilateria , sister to the Cnidaria , sister to Cnidaria , Placozoa and Bilateria , and sister to all other animal phyla .
A series of studies that looked at the presence and absence of members of gene families and signalling pathways -LRB- e.g. , homeoboxes , nuclear receptors , the Wnt signaling pathway , and sodium channels -RRB- showed evidence congruent with the latter two scenarios , that ctenophores are either sister to Cnidaria , Placozoa and Bilateria or sister to all other animal phyla .
This position would suggest that neural and muscle cell types were either lost in major animal lineages -LRB- e.g. , Porifera -RRB- or that they evolved independently in the ctenophore lineage .
Ctenophores and sponges are also the only known animal phyla that lack any true hox genes .
Instead he found that various cydippid families were more similar to members of other ctenophore orders than to other cydippids .
He also suggested that the last common ancestor of modern ctenophores was either cydippid-like or beroid-like .
It also found that the genetic differences between these species were very small -- so small that the relationships between the Lobata , Cestida and Thalassocalycida remained uncertain .
When the analysis was broadened to include representatives of other phyla , it concluded that cnidarians are probably more closely related to bilaterians than either group is to ctenophores but that this diagnosis is uncertain .
As of 2015 , the city 's population was 520,159 , making it the fifth-largest city in California , the largest inland city in California and the 34th-largest in the nation .
Fresno is in the center of the San Joaquin Valley and is the largest city in the Central Valley , which contains the San Joaquin Valley .
Before World War II , Fresno had many ethnic neighborhoods , including Little Armenia , German Town , Little Italy , and Chinatown .
Current plans call for the reopening of the Fulton Mall to automobile traffic .
Although parts of Sunnyside are within the City of Fresno , much of the neighborhood is a `` county island '' within Fresno County .
The Tower District neighborhood is just north of downtown Fresno proper , and one-half mile south of Fresno City College .
Although the neighborhood was known as a residential area prior , the early commercial establishments of the Tower District began with small shops and services that flocked to the area shortly after World War II .
The character of small local businesses largely remains today .
This vibrant and culturally diverse area of retail businesses and residences experienced a renewal after a significant decline in the late 1960s and 1970s .
McDonald subsequently became a leading performer on Broadway in New York City and a Tony award winning actress .
Also in the Tower District is Good Company Players ' 2nd Space Theatre .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Homes from the early 20th century line this boulevard in the heart of the historic Alta Vista Tract .
The original development of this area began circa 1910 , on 190 acres of what had been an alfalfa field .
The tract 's boundaries were Balch Avenue on the south , Cedar Avenue on the east , the rear property line of Platt Avenue -LRB- east of Sixth Street -RRB- and Platt Avenue -LRB- west of Sixth Street -RRB- on the north , and First Street on the west .
The subdivision was annexed to the City in January 1912 , in an election that was the first in which women voted in the community .
At the time of its admission to the City , the Alta Vista Tract was uninhabited but landscaped , although the trees had to be watered by tank wagon .
The US Department of Housing and Urban Development has also built small subdivisions of single-family homes in the area for purchase by low-income working families .
Due to its position on the edge of the city and years of neglect by developers , is not a true `` inner-city '' neighborhood , and there are many vacant lots , strawberry fields and vineyards throughout the neighborhood .
He bequeathed a major portion of his estate in 1968 to provide a regional park and bird sanctuary in Northeast Fresno .
The park lies on the South bank of the San Joaquin River between Highway 41 and Friant Road .
Now packed with amenities , Woodward Park is the only Regional Park of its size in the Central Valley .
The Southeast corner of the park harbors numerous bird species offering bird enthusiasts an excellent opportunity for viewing .
The park 's numerous picnic tables make for a great picnic destination and a convenient escape from city life .
The park 's amphetheatre was renovated in 2010 , and has hosted performances by acts such as Deftones , Tech N9ne , and Sevendust as well as numerous others .
Woodward Park is home to the annual CIF -LRB- California Interscholastic Federation -RRB- State Championship cross country meet , which takes place in late November .
It is also the home of the Woodward Shakespeare Festival which began performances in the park in 2005 .
Still in operation today , the public use airport provides a unique neighborhood that spawned interest and similar communities nationwide .
December and January are the coldest months , and average around 46.5 °F -LRB- 8.1 °C -RRB- , and there are 14 nights with freezing lows annually , with the coldest night of the year typically bottoming out below 30 °F -LRB- − 1.1 °C -RRB- .
Summers provide considerable sunshine , with July peaking at 97 percent of the total possible sunlight hours ; conversely , January is the lowest with only 46 percent of the daylight time in sunlight because of thick tule fog .
However , the year averages 81 % of possible sunshine , for a total of 3550 hours .
Fresno meteorology was selected in a national U.S. Environmental Protection Agency study for analysis of equilibrium temperature for use of ten-year meteorological data to represent a warm , dry western United States locale .
The average windows for 100 °F -LRB- 37.8 °C -RRB- + , 90 °F -LRB- 32.2 °C -RRB- + , and freezing temperatures are June 1 thru September 13 , April 26 thru October 9 , and December 10 thru January 28 , respectively , and no freeze occurred between in the 1983/1984 season .
Annual rainfall has ranged from 23.57 inches -LRB- 598.7 mm -RRB- in the `` rain year '' from July 1982 to June 1983 down to 4.43 inches -LRB- 112.5 mm -RRB- from July 1933 to June 1934 .
Measurable precipitation falls on an average of 48 days annually .
Hispanic or Latino of any race were 232,055 persons -LRB- 46.9 % -RRB- .
Among the Hispanic population , 42.7 % of the total population are Mexican , 0.4 % Salvadoran , and 0.4 % Puerto Rican .
35,064 households -LRB- 22.1 % -RRB- were made up of individuals and 12,344 -LRB- 7.8 % -RRB- had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older .
Hispanic or Latino of any race were 39.9 % of the population .
Major improvements to signage , lane width , median separation , vertical clearance , and other concerns are currently underway .
The new concept found little resonance among network implementers until the independent work of Donald Davies at the National Physical Laboratory -LRB- United Kingdom -RRB- -LRB- NPL -RRB- in the late 1960s .
He gave a talk on the proposal in 1966 , after which a person from the Ministry of Defence -LRB- MoD -RRB- told him about Baran 's work .
Each packet is labeled with a destination address , source address , and port numbers .
It may also be labeled with the sequence number of the packet .
This precludes the need for a dedicated path to help the packet find its way to its destination , but means that much more information is needed in the packet header , which is therefore larger , and this information needs to be looked up in power-hungry content-addressable memory .
Each packet is dispatched and may go via different routes ; potentially , the system has to do as much work for every packet as the connection-oriented system has to do in connection set-up , but with less information as to the application 's requirements .
Thus a virtual connection , also known as a virtual circuit or byte stream is provided to the end-user by a transport layer protocol , although intermediate network nodes only provides a connectionless network layer service .
Address information is only transferred to each node during the connection set-up phase , when the route to the destination is discovered and an entry is added to the switching table in each network node through which the connection passes .
The signaling protocols used allow the application to specify its requirements and discover link parameters .
Acceptable values for service parameters may be negotiated .
Both X. 25 and Frame Relay provide connection-oriented operations .
But X. 25 does it at the network layer of the OSI Model .
Frame Relay does it at level two , the data link layer .
Another major difference between X. 25 and Frame Relay is that X. 25 requires a handshake between the communicating parties before any user packets are transmitted .
Frame Relay does not define any such handshakes .
X. 25 does not define any operations inside the packet network .
It only operates at the user-network-interface -LRB- UNI -RRB- .
Thus , the network provider is free to use any procedure it wishes inside the network .
X. 25 does specify some limited re-transmission procedures at the UNI , and its link layer protocol -LRB- LAPB -RRB- provides conventional HDLC-type link management procedures .
Frame Relay is a modified version of ISDN 's layer two protocol , LAPD and LAPB .
As such , its integrity operations pertain only between nodes on a link , not end-to-end .
Any retransmissions must be carried out by higher layer protocols .
The X. 25 UNI protocol is part of the X. 25 protocol suite , which consists of the lower three layers of the OSI Model .
It was widely used at the UNI for packet switching networks during the 1980s and early 1990s , to provide a standardized interface into and out of packet networks .
Some implementations used X. 25 within the network as well , but its connection-oriented features made this setup cumbersome and inefficient .
Frame relay operates principally at layer two of the OSI Model .
However , its address field -LRB- the Data Link Connection ID , or DLCI -RRB- can be used at the OSI network layer , with a minimum set of procedures .
Thus , it rids itself of many X. 25 layer 3 encumbrances , but still has the DLCI as an ID beyond a node-to-node layer two link protocol .
The simplicity of Frame Relay makes it faster and more efficient than X. 25 .
Because Frame relay is a data link layer protocol , like X. 25 it does not define internal network routing operations .
For X. 25 its packet IDs -- the virtual circuit and virtual channel numbers have to be correlated to network addresses .
The same is true for Frame Relays DLCI .
How this is done is up to the network provider .
Frame Relay , by virtue of having no network layer procedures is connection-oriented at layer two , by using the HDLC/LAPD/LAPB Set Asynchronous Balanced Mode -LRB- SABM -RRB- .
X. 25 connections are typically established for each communication session , but it does have a feature allowing a limited amount of traffic to be passed across the UNI without the connection-oriented handshake .
For a while , Frame Relay was used to interconnect LANs across wide area networks .
< Uyless Black , X. 25 and Related Protocols , IEEE Computer Society , 1991 > < Uyless Black , Frame Relay Networks , McGraw-Hill , 1998 > < Uyless Black , MPLS and Label Switching Networks , Prentice Hall , 2001 > < Uyless Black , ATM , Volume I , Prentice Hall , 1995 >
Before the introduction of X. 25 in 1973 , about twenty different network technologies had been developed .
In the datagram system , the hosts have the responsibility to ensure orderly delivery of packets .
This results in a simpler host interface with less functionality than in the datagram model .
The X. 25 protocol suite uses this network type .
It was the primary protocol used by Apple devices through the 1980s and 90s .
First demonstrated in 1973 , it was developed to explore alternatives to the early ARPANET design and to support network research generally .
It evolved into one of the first peer-to-peer network architectures , thus transforming DEC into a networking powerhouse in the 1980s .
The DECnet protocols were designed entirely by Digital Equipment Corporation .
-LRB- In addition to selling GE computers , the centers were computer service bureaus , offering batch processing services .
Warner was right . -RRB-
In October 1972 connections to the CDC mainframe at Michigan State University in East Lansing completed the triad .
All of this set the stage for Merit 's role in the NSFNET project starting in the mid-1980s .
He had tried to interest AT&T in buying the technology , but the monopoly 's reaction was that this was incompatible with their future .
Bolt , Beranack and Newman -LRB- BBN -RRB- provided the financing .
Telenet designed these protocols and helped standardize them in the CCITT .
Telenet was incorporated in 1973 and started operations in 1975 .
It went public in 1979 and was then sold to GTE .
Tymnet was also connected to dozens of other public networks in the U.S. and internationally via X. 25/X .75 gateways .
-LRB- Interesting note : Tymnet was not named after Mr. Tyme .
Another employee suggested the name . -RRB-
There were two kinds of X. 25 networks .
Some such as DATAPAC and TRANSPAC were initially implemented with an X. 25 external interface .
Some older networks such as TELENET and TYMNET were modified to provide a X. 25 host interface in addition to older host connection schemes .
Northern Telecom sold several DATAPAC clones to foreign PTTs including the Deutsche Bundespost .
X. 75 and X. 121 allowed the interconnection of national X. 25 networks .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
And because the main Videotex service used the network and modified PAD devices as infrastructure the name Datanet 1 was used for these services as well .
NSFNET was also the name given to several nationwide backbone networks operating at speeds of 56 kbit/s , 1.5 Mbit/s -LRB- T1 -RRB- , and 45 Mbit/s -LRB- T3 -RRB- that were constructed to support NSF 's networking initiatives from 1985-1995 .
In total , the plague reduced the world population from an estimated 450 million down to 350 -- 375 million in the 14th century .
In China , the 13th century Mongol conquest caused a decline in farming and trading .
However , economic recovery had been observed at the beginning of the 14th century .
As it spread to western Europe , the disease entered the region from southern Russia also .
During 1347 , the disease travelled eastward to Gaza , and north along the eastern coast to cities in Lebanon , Syria and Palestine , including Ashkelon , Acre , Jerusalem , Sidon , Damascus , Homs , and Aleppo .
In 1348 -- 49 , the disease reached Antioch .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LRB- `` Commonly and from its effects , they called it the black death '' -RRB- .
Medical knowledge had stagnated during the Middle Ages .
This report became the first and most widely circulated of a series of plague tracts that sought to give advice to sufferers .
The word ` plague ' had no special significance at this time , and only the recurrence of outbreaks during the Middle Ages gave it the name that has become the medical term .
This blockage results in starvation and aggressive feeding behaviour by the fleas , which repeatedly attempt to clear their blockage by regurgitation , resulting in thousands of plague bacteria being flushed into the feeding site , infecting the host .
When the second population dies , the fleas move on to other hosts , including people , thus creating a human epidemic .
Other forms of plague have been implicated by modern scientists .
Symptoms include fever , cough , and blood-tinged sputum .
As the disease progresses , sputum becomes free flowing and bright red .
Septicemic plague is the least common of the three forms , with a mortality rate near 100 % .
In cases of pneumonic and particularly septicemic plague , the progress of the disease is so rapid that there would often be no time for the development of the enlarged lymph nodes that were noted as buboes .
Surveys of plague pit remains from the Dutch town of Bergen op Zoom showed the Y. pestis genotype responsible for the pandemic that spread through the Low Countries from 1350 differed from that found in Britain and France , implying Bergen op Zoom -LRB- and possibly other parts of the southern Netherlands -RRB- was not directly infected from England or France in 1349 and suggesting a second wave of plague , different from those in Britain and France , may have been carried to the Low Countries from Norway , the Hanseatic cities or another site .
A variety of alternatives to the Y. pestis have been put forward .
Scott and Duncan have argued that the pandemic was a form of infectious disease that characterise as hemorrhagic plague similar to Ebola .
Archaeologist Barney Sloane has argued that there is insufficient evidence of the extinction of a large number of rats in the archaeological record of the medieval waterfront in London and that the plague spread too quickly to support the thesis that the Y. pestis was spread from fleas on rats ; he argues that transmission must have been person to person .
However , no single alternative solution has achieved widespread acceptance .
The Black Death killed about 40 % of Egypt 's population .
In Italy , the population of Florence was reduced from 110 -- 120 thousand inhabitants in 1338 down to 50 thousand in 1351 .
At least 60 % of the population of Hamburg and Bremen perished , and a similar percentage of Londoners may have died from the disease as well .
Before 1350 , there were about 170,000 settlements in Germany , and this was reduced by nearly 40,000 by 1450 .
In 1348 , the plague spread so rapidly that before any physicians or government authorities had time to reflect upon its origins , about a third of the European population had already perished .
Monks and priests were especially hard hit since they cared for victims of the Black Death .
The Second Pandemic was particularly widespread in the following years : 1360 -- 63 ; 1374 ; 1400 ; 1438 -- 39 ; 1456 -- 57 ; 1464 -- 66 ; 1481 -- 85 ; 1500 -- 03 ; 1518 -- 31 ; 1544 -- 48 ; 1563 -- 66 ; 1573 -- 88 ; 1596 -- 99 ; 1602 -- 11 ; 1623 -- 40 ; 1644 -- 54 ; and 1664 -- 67 .
Subsequent outbreaks , though severe , marked the retreat from most of Europe -LRB- 18th century -RRB- and northern Africa -LRB- 19th century -RRB- .
Over the next few hundred years , further outbreaks occurred in 1361 -- 62 , 1369 , 1379 -- 83 , 1389 -- 93 , and throughout the first half of the 15th century .
During the 16th and 17th centuries , the plague was present in Paris around 30 per cent of the time .
Plague epidemics ravaged London in 1563 , 1593 , 1603 , 1625 , 1636 , and 1665 , reducing its population by 10 to 30 % during those years .
Over 10 % of Amsterdam 's population died in 1623 -- 25 , and again in 1635 -- 36 , 1655 , and 1664 .
The plague of 1576 -- 77 killed 50,000 in Venice , almost a third of the population .
Over 60 % of Norway 's population died in 1348 -- 50 .
More than 1.25 million deaths resulted from the extreme incidence of plague in 17th-century Spain .
The plague killed two-thirds of the inhabitants of Helsinki , and claimed a third of Stockholm 's population .
The Black Death ravaged much of the Islamic world .
Plague repeatedly struck the cities of North Africa .
Between 1701 and 1750 , thirty-seven larger and smaller epidemics were recorded in Constantinople , and an additional thirty-one between 1751 and 1800 .
The rock cycle is an important concept in geology which illustrates the relationships between these three types of rock , and magma .
Sedimentary rock may also be re-eroded and redeposited , and metamorphic rock may also undergo additional metamorphism .
There is an intimate coupling between the movement of the plates on the surface and the convection of the mantle : oceanic plate motions and mantle convection currents always move in the same direction , because the oceanic lithosphere is the rigid upper thermal boundary layer of the convecting mantle .
The development of plate tectonics provided a physical basis for many observations of the solid Earth .
Long linear regions of geologic features could be explained as plate boundaries .
They also provided a driving force for crustal deformation , and a new setting for the observations of structural geology .
Early advances in this field showed the existence of a liquid outer core -LRB- where shear waves were not able to propagate -RRB- and a dense solid inner core .
These images have led to a much more detailed view of the interior of the Earth , and have replaced the simplified layered model with a much more dynamic model .
The following four timelines show the geologic time scale .
The first shows the entire time from the formation of the Earth to the present , but this compresses the most recent eon .
The second scale compresses the most recent era , so the most recent era is expanded in the third scale .
The second , third , and fourth timelines are therefore each subsections of their preceding timeline as indicated by asterisks .
The Pleistocene -LRB- P -RRB- epoch .
A similar situation with igneous rocks occurs when xenoliths are found .
This changed the understanding of geologic time .
These are used in geochronologic and thermochronologic studies .
Common methods include uranium-lead dating , potassium-argon dating , argon-argon dating and uranium-thorium dating .
These methods are used for a variety of applications .
These methods can also be used to determine ages of pluton emplacement .
Because rock units , other than muds , do not significantly change in volume , this is accomplished in two primary ways : through faulting and folding .
Because deeper rock is often older , as noted by the principle of superposition , this can result in older rocks moving on top of younger ones .
Movement along faults can result in folding , either because the faults are not planar or because rock layers are dragged along , forming drag folds as slip occurs along the fault .
Deeper in the Earth , rocks behave plastically , and fold instead of faulting .
If some of the units in the fold are facing downward , the structure is called an overturned anticline or syncline , and if all of the rock units are overturned or the correct up-direction is unknown , they are simply called by the most general terms , antiforms and synforms .
Normal faults drop rock units that are higher below those that are lower .
This typically results in younger units being placed below older units .
The addition of new rock units , both depositionally and intrusively , often occurs during deformation .
These sediments are deposited on the rock unit that is going down .
Volcanic ashes and lavas accumulate on the surface , and igneous intrusions enter from below .
This can result in the emplacement of dike swarms , such as those that are observable across the Canadian shield , or rings of dikes around the lava tube of a volcano .
All of these processes do not necessarily occur in a single environment , and do not necessarily occur in a single order .
Other areas are much more geologically complex .
In the southwestern United States , sedimentary , volcanic , and intrusive rocks have been metamorphosed , faulted , foliated , and folded .
In addition , these processes can occur in stages .
In many places , the Grand Canyon in the southwestern United States being a very visible example , the lower rock units were metamorphosed and deformed , and then deformation ended and the upper , undeformed units were deposited .
Although any amount of rock emplacement and rock deformation can occur , and they can occur any number of times , these concepts provide a guide to understanding the geological history of an area .
Geologists use a number of field , laboratory , and numerical modeling methods to decipher Earth history and understand the processes that occur on and inside the Earth .
Two of the primary methods for identifying rocks in the laboratory are through optical microscopy and by using an electron microprobe .
In the electron microprobe , individual locations are analyzed for their exact chemical compositions and variation in composition within individual crystals .
This work can also help to explain processes that occur within the Earth , such as subduction and magma chamber evolution .
This helps to show the relationship between erosion and the shape of the mountain range .
These studies can also give useful information about pathways for metamorphism through pressure , temperature , space , and time .
These fossils help scientists to date the core and to understand the depositional environment in which the rock units formed .
Other scientists perform stable isotope studies on the rocks to gain information about past climate .
1 , Vol .
2 -RRB- .
Almost every state in the Union was traversed and mapped by him , the Allegheny Mountains being crossed and recrossed some 50 times .
This antedates William Smith 's geological map of England by six years , although it was constructed using a different classification of rocks .
This theory states that slow geological processes have occurred throughout the Earth 's history and are still occurring today .
Though Hutton believed in uniformitarianism , the idea was not widely accepted at the time .
Newcastle is the most populous city in the North East and Tyneside the eighth most populous conurbation in the United Kingdom .
Newcastle 's economy includes corporate headquarters , learning , digital technology , retail , tourism and cultural centres , from which the city contributes # 13 billion towards the United Kingdom 's GVA .
Among its icons are Newcastle Brown Ale ; Newcastle United football club ; and the Tyne Bridge .
It was given the family name of the Roman Emperor Hadrian , who founded it in the 2nd century AD .
This rare honour suggests that Hadrian may have visited the site and instituted the bridge on his tour of Britain .
The course of the `` Roman Wall '' can be traced eastwards to the Segedunum Roman fort in Wallsend -- the `` wall 's end '' -- and to the supply fort Arbeia in South Shields .
This monopoly , which lasted for a considerable time , helped Newcastle prosper and develop into a major town .
The phrase taking coals to Newcastle was first recorded contextually in 1538 .
In 1644 the Scots then captured the reinforced fortification on the Lawe in South Shields following a siege .
The Victorian industrial revolution brought industrial structures that included the 2 1⁄2 - mile -LRB- 4.0 km -RRB- Victoria Tunnelling , built in 1842 , which provided underground wagon ways to the staithes .
On 3 February 1879 , Mosley Street in the city , was the first public road in the world to be lit up by the incandescent lightbulb .
In 1882 , Newcastle became the seat of an Anglican diocese , with St. Nicholas ' Church becoming its cathedral .
The street curves down from Grey 's Monument towards the valley of the River Tyne and was voted England 's finest street in 2005 in a survey of BBC Radio 4 listeners .
In the Google Street View awards of 2010 , Grey Street came 3rd in the British picturesque category .
Osborne Road came 4th in the foodie street category .
The right incidentally extends to the pitch of St. James ' Park , Newcastle United Football Club 's ground , though this is not exercised , although the Freemen do collect rent for the loss of privilege .
The Newcastle and Gateshead Quaysides are now a thriving , cosmopolitan area with bars , restaurants and public spaces .
Richard Grainger was said to ` have found Newcastle of bricks and timber and left it in stone ' .
At the time of its opening in 1835 it was said to be one of the largest and most beautiful markets in Europe .
With the exception of the timber roof which was destroyed by a fire in 1901 and replaced by latticed-steel arches the Market is largely in its original condition .
There are several major shopping areas in Newcastle City Centre .
It incorporates a flagship Debenhams store as well as one of the largest John Lewis stores in the UK .
John Lewis is still known to many in Newcastle as Bainbridges .
Emerson Bainbridge -LRB- 1817 -- 1892 -RRB- , a pioneer and the founder of Bainbridges , sold goods via department , a new for merchant custom for that time .
Eldon Square is currently undergoing a full redevelopment .
The wing of the centre , including the undercover Green Market , near Grainger Street was demolished in 2007 so that the area could be redeveloped .
This was completed in February 2010 with the opening of a flagship Debenhams department store as well as other major stores including Apple , Hollister and Guess .
They can still be found in areas such as South Heaton in Newcastle but once dominated the streetscape on both sides of the Tyne .
Newcastle has a population of 282,442 according to the Office for National Statistics .
The metropolitan boroughs of North Tyneside -LRB- population circa 201,000 -RRB- , South Tyneside -LRB- population circa 148,000 -RRB- and Gateshead -LRB- population circa 201,000 -RRB- are , along with Newcastle , all part of the Tyneside conurbation -LRB- population circa 880,000 -RRB- .
The metropolitan county of Tyne and Wear , which consists of the four aforementioned boroughs as well as the City of Sunderland -LRB- population circa 275,000 -RRB- , had a population of around 1,076,000 and the Tyne and Wear City Region which also includes North Durham , South East Northumberland and the Tyne Valley has a population of 1,650,000 .
There are also small but significant Chinese , Jewish and Eastern European -LRB- Polish , Czech Roma -RRB- populations .
There are concentrations of pubs , bars and nightclubs around the Bigg Market and the Quayside area of the city centre .
He brought members of his famous acting family such as Sarah Siddons and John Kemble out of London to Newcastle .
Northern Stage , formally known as the Newcastle Playhouse and Gulbenkian Studio , hosts various local , national and international productions in addition to those produced by the Northern Stage company .
Other theatres in the city include the Live Theatre , the People 's Theatre and the Jubilee Theatre .
The North East Art Expo , a festival of art and design from the regions professional artists , is held in late May .
Newcastle Community Green Festival , which claims to be the UK 's biggest free community environmental festival , also takes place every June , in Leazes Park .
The Ouseburn Festival , a family oriented weekend festival near the city centre , incorporating a `` Family Fun Day '' and `` Carnival Day '' , is held in late July .
Brian Johnson was a member of local rock band Geordie before becoming the lead vocalist of AC/DC .
In May 2008 the Tyneside Cinema reopened in the restored and refurbished original building .
Later came The Clouded Yellow -LRB- 1951 -RRB- and Payroll -LRB- 1961 -RRB- , both of which feature more extensive scenes filmed in the city .
The Eagles are the most successful team in the history of the British Basketball League -LRB- BBL -RRB- .
Newcastle also hosts the start of the annual Great North Run , the world 's largest half-marathon in which participants race over the Tyne Bridge into Gateshead and then towards the finish line 13.1 miles -LRB- 21.1 km -RRB- away on the coast at South Shields .
In 2014 , work was completed on the stations historic entrance .
The station sightlines towards the Castle Keep , whilst showcasing the curvature of the station 's arched roof .
The first services were operated by the North Eastern Railway company .
First TransPennine Express operates services to Manchester and Liverpool .
In 2004 , the company Marconi designed and constructed the mobile radio system to the underground Metro system .
The Metro system was the first in the UK to have mobile phone antennae installed in the tunnels .
All Metro trains are being completely refurbished and most stations are undergoing improvement works -LRB- or in some cases complete reconstruction , for example North Shields -RRB- .
Proposed routes include to Newcastle 's west end , to the Cobalt business park in North Tyneside , to the Metrocentre in Gateshead and to additional locations in Gateshead , South Tyneside and Sunderland .
Arriva mainly operates from Haymarket Bus Station providing the majority of services to the north of Newcastle , Northumberland and North Tyneside .
There are a number of successful state schools , including Walker Technology College , Gosforth High School , Heaton Manor School , St Cuthbert 's High School , St. Mary 's Catholic Comprehensive School , Kenton School , George Stephenson High School , Sacred Heart and Benfield School .
The largest girls ' independent school is Newcastle High School for Girls .
Both schools are located on the same street in Jesmond .
Newcastle School for Boys is the only independent boys ' only school in the city and is situated in Gosforth .
Newcastle University is now one of the UK 's leading international universities .
St Mary 's became a cathedral in 1850 and St Nicholas ' in 1882 .
It is quite possible that there was an earlier church here dating from Saxon times .
This older church would have been one of several churches along the River Tyne dedicated to St Andrew , including the Priory church at Hexham .
The building contains more old stonework than any other church in Newcastle .
Many key names associated with Newcastle 's history worshipped and were buried here .
Three of the cannonballs remain on site as testament to the siege .
Vice Admiral Cuthbert Collingwood , 1st Baron Collingwood , was born in the city .
Ironmaster , metallurgist , and member of parliament Isaac Lowthian Bell was born in the city in 1816 .
Portuguese writer Eça de Queiroz was a diplomat in Newcastle from late 1874 until April 1879 -- his most productive literary period .
These include the Natural History Museum , the Science Museum and the Royal Albert Hall .
The holdings of ceramics , glass , textiles , costumes , silver , ironwork , jewellery , furniture , medieval objects , sculpture , prints and printmaking , drawings and photographs are among the largest and most comprehensive in the world .
The departments of Asia include art from South Asia , China , Japan , Korea and the Islamic world .
The East Asian collections are among the best in Europe , with particular strengths in ceramics and metalwork , while the Islamic collection is amongst the largest in the Western world .
Overall , it is one of the largest museums in the world .
At this stage the collections covered both applied art and science .
Several of the exhibits from the Exhibition were purchased to form the nucleus of the collection .
By February 1854 discussions were underway to transfer the museum to the current site and it was renamed South Kensington Museum .
The site was occupied by Brompton Park House ; this was extended including the first refreshment rooms opened in 1857 , the museum being the first in the world to provide such a facility .
This was to enable in the words of Cole `` to ascertain practically what hours are most convenient to the working classes '' -- this was linked to the use of the collections of both applied art and science as educational resources to help boost productive industry .
In these early years the practical use of the collection was very much emphasised as opposed to that of `` High Art '' at the National Gallery and scholarship at the British Museum .
From the 1860s to the 1880s the scientific collections had been moved from the main museum site to various improvised galleries to the west of Exhibition Road .
In 1893 the `` Science Museum '' had effectively come into existence when a separate director was appointed .
This was organised by the Council of Industrial Design established by the British government in 1944 `` to promote by all practicable means the improvement of design in the products of British industry '' .
Dundee City Council is expected to pay a major part of the running costs .
The V&A is not contributing financially , but will be providing expertise , loans and exhibitions .
The Victorian parts of the building have a complex history , with piecemeal additions by different architects .
Founded in May 1852 , it was not until 1857 that the museum moved to the present site .
This area of London was known as Brompton but had been renamed South Kensington .
The next major expansions were designed by the same architect , the Turner and Vernon galleries built 1858-9 to house the eponymous collections -LRB- later transferred to the Tate Gallery -RRB- and now used as the picture galleries and tapestry gallery respectively .
The North and South Courts , were then built , both of which opened by June 1862 .
They now form the galleries for temporary exhibitions and are directly behind the Sheepshanks Gallery .
An ambitious scheme of decoration was developed for these new areas : a series of mosaic figures depicting famous European artists of the Medieval and Renaissance period .
These have now been removed to other areas of the museum .
Also started were a series of frescoes by Lord Leighton : Industrial Arts as Applied to War 1878 -- 1880 and Industrial Arts Applied to Peace , which was started but never finished .
The last work by Fowke was the design for the range of buildings on the north and west sides of the garden , this includes the refreshment rooms , reinstated as the Museum Café in 2006 , with the silver gallery above , -LRB- at the time the ceramics gallery -RRB- , the top floor has a splendid lecture theatre although this is seldom open to the general public .
The ceramic staircase in the northwest corner of this range of buildings was designed by F. W. Moody and has architectural details of moulded and coloured pottery .
All the work on the north range was designed and built in 1864 -- 69 .
This building replaced Brompton Park House , which could then be demolished to make way for the south range .
The interiors of the three refreshment rooms were assigned to different designers .
This completed the northern half of the site , creating a quadrangle with the garden at its centre , but left the museum without a proper façade .
In 1890 the government launched a competition to design new buildings for the museum , with architect Alfred Waterhouse as one of the judges ; this would give the museum a new imposing front entrance .
Construction took place between 1899 and 1909 .
Stylistically it is a strange hybrid , although much of the detail belongs to the Renaissance there are medieval influences at work .
The main entrance consisting of a series of shallow arches supported by slender columns and niches with twin doors separated by pier is Romanesque in form but Classical in detail .
Other areas designed by Webb include the Entrance Hall and Rotunda , the East and West Halls , the areas occupied by the shop and Asian Galleries as well as the Costume Gallery .
In the immediate post-war years there was little money available for other than essential repairs .
This involved flooring over Aston Webb 's main hall to form the book stacks , with a new medieval gallery on the ground floor -LRB- now the shop , opened in 2006 -RRB- .
Then the lower ground-floor galleries in the south-west part of the museum were redesigned , opening in 1978 to form the new galleries covering Continental art 1600 -- 1800 -LRB- late Renaissance , Baroque through Rococo and neo-Classical -RRB- .
In order to adapt the building as galleries , all the Victorian interiors except for the staircase were recast during the remodelling .
These are set in the columned screen wall designed by Aston Webb that forms the façade .
This included two of the ten columns having their ceramic decoration replaced and the elaborate painted designs restored on the ceiling .
The plan is expected to take about ten years and was started in 2002 .
Several designers and architects have been involved in this work .
Eva Jiřičná designed the enhancements to the main entrance and rotunda , the new shop , the tunnel and the sculpture galleries .
Not only are all the major British architects of the last four hundred years represented , but many European -LRB- especially Italian -RRB- and American architects ' drawings are held in the collection .
There are several examples from Italian Renaissance buildings including , portals , fireplaces , balconies and a stone buffet that used to have a built in fountain .
Examples covering Asia are in those galleries concerned with those countries , as well as models and photographs in the main architecture gallery .
A masterpiece of Islamic art is a 10th-century Rock crystal ewer .
Many examples of Qur ' āns with exquisite calligraphy dating from various periods are on display .
A 15th-century minbar from a Cairo mosque with ivory forming complex geometrical patterns inlaid in wood is one of the larger objects on display .
Extensive examples of ceramics especially Iznik pottery , glasswork including 14th-century lamps from mosques and metalwork are on display .
Examples of tile work from various buildings including a fireplace dated 1731 from Istanbul made of intricately decorated blue and white tiles and turquoise tiles from the exterior of buildings from Samarkand are also displayed .
There is an extensive collection of sculpture , mainly of a religious nature , Hindu , Buddhist and Jain .
The gallery is richly endowed with art of the Mughal Empire and the Marathas , including fine portraits of the emperors and other paintings and drawings , jade wine cups and gold spoons inset with emeralds , diamonds and rubies , also from this period are parts of buildings such as a jaali and pillars .
India was a large producer of textiles , from dyed cotton chintz , muslin to rich embroidery work using gold and silver thread , coloured sequins and beads is displayed , as are carpets from Agra and Lahore .
Examples of clothing are also displayed .
Notably , a metre-high bronze head of the Buddha dated to c. 750 AD and one of the oldest items a 2,000-year-old jade horse head from a burial , other sculptures include life-size tomb guardians .
Classic examples of Chinese manufacturing are displayed that include lacquer , silk , porcelain , jade and cloisonné enamel .
Two large ancestor portraits of a husband and wife painted in watercolour on silk date from the 18th century .
There is a unique Chinese lacquerware table , made in the imperial workshops during the reign of the Xuande Emperor in the Ming dynasty .
Examples of clothing are also displayed .
One of the largest objects is a bed from the mid-17th century .
The work of contemporary Chinese designers is also displayed .
Examples of classic Japanese armour from the mid-19th century , steel sword blades -LRB- Katana -RRB- , Inrō , lacquerware including the Mazarin Chest dated c1640 is one of the finest surviving pieces from Kyoto , porcelain including Imari , Netsuke , woodblock prints including the work of Ando Hiroshige , graphic works include printed books , as well as a few paintings , scrolls and screens , textiles and dress including kimonos are some of the objects on display .
The museum also holds some cloisonné pieces from the Japanese art production company , Ando Cloisonné .
The smaller galleries cover Korea , the Himalayan kingdoms and South East Asia .
Himalayan items include important early Nepalese bronze sculptures , repoussé work and embroidery .
Their contents include a large collection of sketches and references to the equestrian sculpture commissioned by the Duke of Milan Ludovico Sforza to commemorate his father Francesco Sforza .
Amongst the books he collected are early editions in Greek and Latin of the poets and playwrights Aeschylus , Aristotle , Homer , Livy , Ovid , Pindar , Sophocles and Virgil .
More recent authors include Giovanni Boccaccio , Dante , Racine , Rabelais and Molière .
also the Victorian period is represented by William Morris .
The Victoria and Albert Museum 's Word and Image Department was under the same pressure being felt in archives around the world , to digitize their collection .
The first step of the Factory Project was to take photographs utilizing digital cameras .
The Word and Image Department had a collection of old photos but they were in black and white and in variant conditions , so new photos were shot .
Those new photographs will be accessible to researchers to the Victoria and Albert Museum web-site .
The third step of the Factory Project is to audit the collection .
All of those items which were photographed and cataloged , must be audited to make sure everything listed as being in the collection was physically found during the creation of the Factory Project .
The fourth goal of the Factory Project is conservation , which means performing some basic preventable procedures to those items in the department .
There is a `` Search the Collections '' feature on the Victoria and Albert web-site .
The main impetus behind the large-scale digitization project called the Factory Project was to list more items in the collections in those computer databases .
The galleries also link design to wider trends in British culture .
For instance , design in the Tudor period was influenced by the spread of printed books and the work of European artists and craftsmen employed in Britain .
In the Stuart period , increasing trade , especially with Asia , enabled wider access to luxuries like carpets , lacquered furniture , silks and porcelain .
European styles seen on the Grand Tour also influenced taste .
In the Victorian era new technology and machinery had a significant effect on manufacturing , and for the first time since the reformation , the Anglican and Roman Catholic Churches had a major effect on art and design such as the Gothic Revival .
There is a large display on the Great Exhibition which , among other things , led to the founding of the V&A .
Well represented in the collection is Meissen porcelain , from the first factory in Europe to discover the Chinese method of making porcelain .
Ceramics from the Manufacture nationale de Sèvres are extensive , especially from the 18th and 19th centuries .
The collection of 18th-century British porcelain is the largest and finest in the world .
Examples from every factory are represented , the collections of Chelsea porcelain and Worcester Porcelain being especially fine .
All the major 19th-century British factories are also represented .
This bequest forms part of the finest collection of East Asian pottery and porcelain in the world , including Kakiemon ware .
Bernard Palissy has several examples of his work in the collection including dishes , jugs and candlesticks .
There is an unrivalled collection of Italian maiolica and lustreware from Spain .
The collection of Iznik pottery from Turkey is the largest in the world .
There are many examples of crystal chandeliers both English , displayed in the British galleries and foreign for example Venetian -LRB- attributed to Giuseppe Briati -RRB- dated c1750 are in the collection .
The stained glass collection is possibly the finest in the world , covering the medieval to modern periods , and covering Europe as well as Britain .
Several examples of English 16th-century heraldic glass is displayed in the British Galleries .
Many well-known designers of stained glass are represented in the collection including , from the 19th century : Dante Gabriel Rossetti , Edward Burne-Jones and William Morris .
There is also an example of Frank Lloyd Wright 's work in the collection .
20th-century designers include Harry Clarke , John Piper , Patrick Reyntiens , Veronica Whall and Brian Clarke .
In this latter gallery stained glass is displayed alongside silverware starting in the 12th century and continuing to the present .
Some of the most outstanding stained glass , dated 1243 -- 48 comes from the Sainte-Chapelle , is displayed along with other examples in the new Medieval & Renaissance galleries .
Examples of British stained glass are displayed in the British Galleries .
Modern British artists represented in the collection include : Paul Nash , Percy Wyndham Lewis , Eric Gill , Stanley Spencer , John Piper , Graham Sutherland , Lucian Freud and David Hockney .
Other famous designers with work in the collection include Coco Chanel , Hubert de Givenchy , Christian Dior , Cristóbal Balenciaga , Yves Saint Laurent , Guy Laroche , Irene Galitzine , Mila Schön , Valentino Garavani , Norman Norell , Norman Hartnell , Zandra Rhodes , Hardy Amies , Mary Quant , Christian Lacroix , Jean Muir and Pierre Cardin .
One of the most important pieces in this collection is a marquetry commode by the ébéniste Jean Henri Riesener dated c1780 .
Other signed pieces of furniture in the collection include a bureau by Jean-François Oeben , a pair of pedestals with inlaid brass work by André Charles Boulle , a commode by Bernard Vanrisamburgh and a work-table by Martin Carlin .
Other 18th-century ébénistes represented in the Museum collection include Adam Weisweiler , David Roentgen , Gilles Joubert & Pierre Langlois .
In 1901 , Sir George Donaldson donated several pieces of art Nouveau furniture to the museum , which he had acquired the previous year at the Paris Exposition Universelle .
This was criticized at the time , with the result that the museum ceased to collect contemporary items and did not do so again until the 1960s .
In 1986 the Lady Abingdon collection of French Empire furniture was bequeathed by Mrs T. R. P. Hole .
One of the grandest pieces of 19th-century furniture is the highly elaborate French Cabinet dated 1861 -- 1867 made by M. Fourdinois , made from ebony inlaid with box , lime , holly , pear , walnut and mahogany woods as well as marble with gilded carvings .
Furniture designed by Ernest Gimson , Edward William Godwin , Charles Voysey , Adolf Loos and Otto Wagner are among the late 19th-century and early 20th-century examples in the collection .
The museum owns pieces by renowned jewelers Cartier , Jean Schlumberger , Peter Carl Fabergé , Hemmerle and Lalique .
Other items in the collection include diamond dress ornaments made for Catherine the Great , bracelet clasps once belonging to Marie Antoinette , and the Beauharnais emerald necklace presented by Napoleon to his adopted daughter Hortense de Beauharnais in 1806 .
The museum also collects international modern jewellery by designers such as Gijs Bakker , Onno Boekhoudt , Peter Chang , Gerda Flockinger , Lucy Sarneel , Dorothea Prühl and Wendy Ramshaw , and African and Asian traditional jewellery .
The main silver gallery is divided into these areas : British silver pre-1800 ; British silver 1800 to 1900 ; modernist to contemporary silver ; European silver .
Silversmiths ' whose work is represented in the collection include Paul de Lamerie and Paul Storr whose Castlereagh Inkstand dated 1817 -- 19 is one of his finest works .
The main iron work gallery covers European wrought and cast iron from the mediaeval period to the early 20th century .
The master of wrought ironwork Jean Tijou is represented by both examples of his work and designs on paper .
It was made by Skidmore & Company .
Its structure of timber and cast iron is embellished with wrought iron , burnished brass and copper .
Much of the copper and ironwork is painted in a wide range of colours .
The arches and columns are decorated with polished quartz and panels of mosaic .
Another highlight is the 1351 Reichenau Crozier .
The Burghley Nef , a salt-cellar , French , dated 1527 -- 28 , uses a nautilus shell to form the hull of a vessel , which rests on the tail of a parcelgilt mermaid , who rests on a hexagonal gilt plinth on six claw-and-ball feet .
Both masts have main and top-sails , and battlemented fighting-tops are made from gold .
These items are displayed in the new Medieval & Renaissance galleries .
There is also on display a fresco by Pietro Perugino dated 1522 from the church of Castello at Fontignano -LRB- Perugia -RRB- and is amongst the painter 's last works .
Other artists with works in the collection include : Bernardino Fungai , Marcus Gheeraerts the Younger , Domenico di Pace Beccafumi , Fioravante Ferramola , Jan Brueghel the Elder , Anthony van Dyck , Ludovico Carracci , Antonio Verrio , Giovanni Battista Tiepolo , Domenico Tiepolo , Canaletto , Francis Hayman , Pompeo Batoni , Benjamin West , Paul Sandby , Richard Wilson , William Etty , Henry Fuseli , Sir Thomas Lawrence , James Barry , Francis Danby , Richard Parkes Bonington and Alphonse Legros .
There are several of John Thomson 's 1876-7 images of Street Life in London in the collection .
This covers among other periods Byzantine and Anglo Saxon ivory sculptures , British , French and Spanish medieval statues and carvings , the Renaissance , Baroque , Neo-Classical , Victorian and Art Nouveau periods .
Materials used include , marble , alabaster , stone , terracotta , wood -LRB- history of wood carving -RRB- , ivory , gesso , plaster , bronze , lead and ceramics .
The collection of Italian , Medieval , Renaissance , Baroque and Neoclassical sculpture -LRB- both original and in cast form -RRB- is unequalled outside of Italy .
An unusual sculpture is the ancient Roman statue of Narcissus restored by Valerio Cioli c1564 with plaster .
There are several small scale bronzes by Donatello , Alessandro Vittoria , Tiziano Aspetti and Francesco Fanelli in the collection .
Other French sculptors with work in the collection are Hubert Le Sueur , François Girardon , Michel Clodion , Jean-Antoine Houdon , Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux and Jules Dalou .
A sample of some of these sculptors ' work is on display in the British Galleries .
These galleries concentrate on works dated 1600 to 1950 by British sculptors , works by continental sculptors who worked in Britain , and works bought by British patrons from the continental sculptors , such as Canova 's Theseus and the Minotaur .
Then there is a section that covers late 19th-century and early 20th-century sculpture , this includes work by Rodin and other French sculptors such as Dalou who spent several years in Britain where he taught sculpture .
Techniques represented include weaving , printing , quilting embroidery , lace , tapestry and carpets .
The collections are well represented in these areas : early silks from the Near East , lace , European tapestries and English medieval church embroidery .
Both of the major English centres of tapestry weaving of the 16th and 17th centuries respectively , Sheldon & Mortlake are represented in the collection by several examples .
Some of the finest tapestries are examples from the Gobelins workshop , including a set of ` Jason and the Argonauts ' dating from the 1750s .
Other continental centres of tapestry weaving with work in the collection include Brussels , Tournai , Beauvais , Strasbourg and Florence .
Types of items displayed include costumes , set models , wigs , prompt books , and posters .
The conservators specialise in particular areas of conservation .
Interventive treatment makes an object more stable , but also more attractive and comprehensible to the viewer .
It is usually undertaken on items that are to go on public display .
The network is part of the Big Three television networks .
In the mid-1950s , ABC merged with United Paramount Theatres , a chain of movie theaters that formerly operated as a subsidiary of Paramount Pictures .
Leonard Goldenson , who had been the head of UPT , made the new television network profitable by helping develop and greenlight many successful series .
In 1996 , most of Capital Cities/ABC 's assets were purchased by The Walt Disney Company .
In the 1930s , radio in the United States was dominated by three companies : the Columbia Broadcasting System -LRB- CBS -RRB- , the Mutual Broadcasting System and the National Broadcasting Company -LRB- NBC -RRB- .
The report recommended that RCA give up control of either NBC Red or NBC Blue .
Having no power over the networks themselves , the FCC established a regulation forbidding licenses to be issued for radio stations if they were affiliated with a network which already owned multiple networks that provided content of public interest .
The newly separated NBC Red and NBC Blue divided their respective corporate assets .
Between 1942 and 1943 , Woods offered to sell the entire NBC Blue Network , a package that included leases on landlines , three pending television licenses -LRB- WJZ-TV in New York City , KGO-TV in San Francisco and WENR-TV in Chicago -RRB- , 60 affiliates , four operations facilities -LRB- in New York City , Chicago , Los Angeles and Washington D.C. -RRB- , contracts with actors , and the brand associated with the Blue Network .
Due to FCC ownership rules , the transaction , which was to include the purchase of three RCA stations by Noble , would require him to resell his station with the FCC 's approval .
Soon afterward , the Blue Network was purchased by the new company Noble founded , the American Broadcasting System .
The network also became known for such suspenseful dramas as Sherlock Holmes , Gang Busters and Counterspy , as well as several mid-afternoon youth-oriented programs .
The idea was to create a network of wholly and partially owned channels , and affiliates to rebroadcast the network 's programs .
The first attempts to internationalize the ABC television network date back to the 1950s , after Leonard Goldenson , following the United Paramount Theatres model , tried to use on ABC the same strategies he had made in expanding UPT 's theater operation to the international market .
NBC 's plane landed in Latin America -LSB- where ? -RSB-
, leading ABC to learn of subsidiaries in that region .
Goldenson tried international investing , having ABC invest in the Latin American market , acquiring a 51 % interest in a network covering Central America .
Under its current contract with the Miss America Organization , ABC will continue to broadcast the pageant through 2016 .
In addition to the long-running All My Children -LRB- 1970 -- 2011 -RRB- and One Life to Live -LRB- 1968 -- 2012 -RRB- , notable past soap operas seen on the daytime lineup include Ryan 's Hope , Dark Shadows , Loving , The City and Port Charles .
ABC Daytime has also aired a number of game shows , including The Dating Game , The Newlywed Game , Let 's Make a Deal , Password , Split Second , The $ 10,000 / $ 20,000 Pyramid , Family Feud , The Better Sex , Trivia Trap , All-Star Blitz and Hot Streak .
While its radio network was undergoing reconstruction , ABC found it difficult to avoid falling behind on the new medium of television .
The result was a strange period where television flourished in certain areas and network radio remained the main source of broadcast entertainment and news in others .
Its revenues , which were related to advertising and were indexed compared to the number of listeners/viewers , failed to compensate for its heavy investments in purchasing and building stations .
Goldenson and Noble reached a tentative agreement in the late spring of 1951 in which UPT would acquire ABC and turn it into a subsidiary of the company that would retain autonomy in its management .
However , the transaction had to be approved by the FCC because of the presence of television networks and the recent separation between Paramount and UPT .
Insofar as Paramount Pictures was already a shareholder in the DuMont Television Network , the FCC conducted a series of hearings to ensure whether Paramount was truly separated from United Paramount Theatres , and whether it was violating antitrust laws .
One FCC Commissioner saw the possibility of ABC , funded by UPT , becoming a viable and competitive third television network .
To comply with FCC ownership restrictions in effect at the time that barred common ownership of two television stations in the same market , UPT sold its Chicago television station , WBKB-TV , to CBS -LRB- which subsequently changed the station 's call letters to WBBM-TV -RRB- for $ 6 million , while it kept ABC 's existing Chicago station , WENR-TV .
The merged company acquired the WBKB call letters for channel 7 , which would eventually become WLS-TV .
Goldenson began to sell some of the older theaters to help finance the new television network .
ABC 's other owned-and-operated stations launched over the course of the next 13 months : WENR-TV in Chicago signed on the air on September 17 , while WXYZ-TV in Detroit went on the air on October 9 , 1948 .
However , KGO-TV in San Francisco , which had received its license prior to the freeze , made its debut on May 5 , 1949 .
The Flintstones allowed ABC to present a novelty , that of prime-time animated programming , but it also allowed the network to begin filling the hole opened by the conclusion of the Disney partnership by carrying family-oriented programming from other producers .
Goldenson said ABC could not counter the offer , because the network did not have the technical and financial resources to carry the program in the format .
The four-note signature has been updated with every television season thereafter -LRB- though variants of it used since the 1998 -- 99 season remain in use during the production company vanity cards shown following the closing credits of most programs -RRB- .
Ten years later , in 1993 , the `` ABC Circle '' logo reverted to its classic white-on-black color scheme , but with gloss effects on both the circle and the letters , and a bronze border surrounding the circle .
The 1970s and 1980s saw the emergence of many graphical imaging packages for the network in which based the logo 's setting mainly on special lighting effects then under development including white , blue , pink , rainbow neon and glittering dotted lines .
The logo 's simplicity made it easier to redesign and duplicate , which conferred a benefit for ABC -LRB- mostly before the advent of computer graphics -RRB- .
The network had earlier reached an eleventh-hour deal to renew its carriage agreement with the provider on December 31 , 1999 .
In addition to Who Wants to Be a Millionaire , the network entered the 2000s with hits held over from the previous decade such as The Practice , NYPD Blue and The Wonderful World of Disney and new series such as My Wife and Kids and According to Jim , all of which managed to help ABC stay ahead of the competition in the ratings in spite of the later departure of Millionaire .
Outside of Friday stalwart 20/20 , Friday nights remained a weak spot for ABC for the next 11 years .
At its peak , the program aired as much as six nights a week .
Buoyed by Millionaire , during the 1999 -- 2000 season , ABC became the first network to move from third to first place in the ratings during a single television season .
In addition to the ABC network , the Disney acquisition integrated ABC 's ten owned-and-operated television and 21 radio stations ; its 80 % interest in ESPN , ownership interests in The History Channel , A&E Television Networks , and Lifetime Entertainment ; and Capital Cities/ABC 's magazine and newspaper properties into the company .
As FCC ownership rules forbade the company from keeping both it and KABC-TV , Disney sold Los Angeles independent station KCAL-TV to Young Broadcasting for $ 387 million .
Around the time of the merger , Disney 's television production units had already produced series for the network such as Home Improvement and Boy Meets World , while the deal also allowed ABC access to Disney 's children 's programming library for its Saturday morning block .
Many companies sought to take over ABC , including Norton Simon , General Electric , International Telephone and Telegraph and Litton Industries .
The WABC call letters were previously used by the flagship station of CBS Radio -LRB- now WCBS -LRB- AM -RRB- -RRB- until 1946 .
However , a problem emerged regarding the directions taken by ABC and UPT .
Despite the promise of non-interference between ABC and UPT , Goldenson had to intervene in ABC 's decisions because of financial problems and the FCC 's long period of indecision .
In addition , to comply with FCC ownership restrictions , it would have been required to sell either WABC-TV or DuMont owned-and-operated station WABD in the New York City market , as well as two other stations .
The merged ABC-DuMont would have had the resources to compete with CBS and NBC .
ABC 's merger with UPT led to the creation of relationships with Hollywood 's film production studios , breaking a quarantine that had existed at that time between film and television , the latter of which had previously been more connected to radio .
Warner tried with mixed success to adapt some of its most successful films as ABC television series , and showcase these adaptations as part of the wheel series Warner Bros. .
Presents .
In August 1970 , Shaw announced that ABC FM 's music choice policy should be reviewed to allow listeners access to many styles of music .
Hits for the television network during the late 1960s and early 1970s included The Courtship of Eddie 's Father , The Brady Bunch and The Partridge Family .
ABC 's gains in audience share were greatly helped by the fact that several smaller markets had grown large enough to allow full-time affiliations from all three networks .
1970 also saw the premieres of several soap operas including the long-running All My Children , which ran on the network for 41 years .
Worldvision was sold to a consortium of ABC executives for nearly $ 10 million .
He was responsible for reacquiring the rights to the Looney Tunes-Merrie Melodies library , bringing the shorts back to ABC after spending several years on CBS , as well as developing The Jackson 5ive animated series and a series about the Osmonds , and greenlighting Super Friends , based on DC Comics ' Justice League of America series .
That same year , the network made the decision to compete with NBC 's morning news-talk program Today .
Its first attempt at such competition was AM America ; however , that show 's success was not straightforward .
One of its affiliates , WCVB-TV premiered morning show Good Day !
.
First premiering in 1973 as Good Morning !
, it was groundbreaking for being entirely produced on the road and broadcasting from locations outside of the Boston area .
Also , in the summer of 1975 , ABC discovered that its Cleveland affiliate WEWS-TV was producing its own morning program The Morning Exchange , which debuted in 1972 and was now locally pre-empting AM America ; it was the first morning show to utilize a set modeled after a living room , and established a concept now commonplace among network morning shows in which news and weather updates were featured at the top and bottom of each hour .
The 1970s were highlighted by several successful comedy , fantasy , action and superhero-themed series for the network including Kung Fu , The Six Million Dollar Man , Wonder Woman , Starsky & Hutch , Charlie 's Angels , The Bionic Woman , Fantasy Island and Battlestar Galactica .
Roots went on to become one of the highest-rated programs in American television history , with unprecedented ratings for its finale .
Meanwhile , ABC News , which formed as a newly separate division , sought to become a global leader in television news .
That same year , ABC launched a major expansion of its office facilities in New York City .
Meanwhile , a former parking lot , located at 30 West 67th Street , was transformed into an impressive 15-story building .
WABC-TV moved its operations from offices at 77 West 66th Street to 149 Columbus Avenue , freeing up space for the ABC network to house some of its operations .
Both stations were acquired as a contingency plan in the event that CBS reached an affiliation deal with WXYZ-TV -LRB- to replace WJBK , which switched to Fox as a result of that network 's group affiliation agreement with New World Communications -RRB- in order to allow the network to retain some over-the-air presence in the Detroit market -LRB- the E.W. Scripps Company and ABC would reach a group affiliation deal that renewed affiliation agreements with WXYZ and WEWS , and switch four other stations , including two whose Fox affiliations were displaced by the New World deal , with the network -RRB- .
, did not live to see a third season ; other series such as Boston Legal and the U.S. version of Life on Mars suffered from low viewership , despite the former , a spin off of The Practice , being a once-highlighted breakout series when it debuted in 2005 .
The program would become a minor success for the network during its initial six-episode run , which led ABC to renew Duel as a regular series starting in April 2008 .
However , Duel suffered from low viewership during its run as a regular series , and ABC canceled the program after sixteen episodes .
During this reorganization , the group announced that it would lay off 5 % of its workforce .
With the network 's two former hit shows now out of the picture , the network 's remaining top veteran shows Desperate Housewives and Grey 's Anatomy , and another hit drama Brothers & Sisters , all ended the 2009 -- 10 season recorded their lowest ratings ever .
However , between the publication and implementation of these regulations , the separation of the network 's catalog was made in 1973 .
The broadcast rights to pre-1973 productions were transferred to Worldvision , which became independent in the same year .
The company has been sold several times since Paramount Television acquired it in 1999 , and has most recently been absorbed into CBS Television Distribution , a unit of CBS Corporation .
With Disney 's 1996 purchase of ABC , ABC Circle Films was absorbed into Touchstone Television , a Disney subsidiary which in turn was renamed ABC Studios in 2007 .
The ABC logo has evolved many times since the network 's creation in 1943 .
ABC itself would finish the season in third place as Fox crashed to fourth in both demographics .
During the 1960s , ABC continued on the same path that it began to take in the mid-1950s , by consolidating the network as part of its effort to gain loyalty from the public .
The network 's finances improved and allowed it to invest in other properties and programming .
This acquisition allowed ABC to consolidate its presence in the market .
Always in search of new programs that would help it compete with NBC and CBS , ABC 's management believed that sports could be a major catalyst in improving the network 's market share .
Wide World of Sports , in particular , was not merely devoted to a single sport , but rather to generally all sporting events .
This operation allowed for the conversion of the premises at 66th Street into production facilities for television and radio programs .
In June 1984 , ABC 's executive committee approved the company 's interest acquisition in ESPN , and ABC arranged with Getty Oil to obtain an 80 % stake in the channel , while selling the remaining 20 % to Nabisco .
Meanwhile , ABC withdrew from the theme park business for good when it sold the Silver Springs Nature Theme Park .
Lasting nine seasons , its success led ABC to greenlight additional sitcom projects helmed by comedians during the 1990s including The Drew Carey Show ; Brett Butler vehicle Grace Under Fire ; and Ellen , which became notable for a 1997 episode which served as the coming out of series star Ellen DeGeneres -LRB- as well as her character in the series -RRB- as a lesbian .
.
In some markets , including the former two mentioned , these stations also maintain digital simulcasts on a subchannel of a co-owned/co-managed full-power television station .
All of ABC 's owned-and-operated stations and affiliates have had their own facilities and studios , but transverse entities have been created to produce national programming .
ABC News has premises a little further on West 66th Street , in a six-story building occupying a 196 feet -LRB- 60 m -RRB- × 379 feet -LRB- 116 m -RRB- plot at 121 -- 135 West End Avenue .
The updated logo carries a simpler gloss design than the previous version , and contains lettering more closely resembling Paul Rand 's original version of the circle logo .
By 1954 , all U.S. networks had regained control of their programming , with higher advertising revenues : ABC 's revenue increased by 67 % -LRB- earning $ 26 million -RRB- , NBC 's went up by 30 % -LRB- $ 100 million -RRB- and CBS 's rose by 44 % -LRB- $ 117 million -RRB- .
Most markets outside the largest ones were not large enough to support three full-time network affiliates .
In some markets that were large enough for a third full-time affiliate , the only available commercial allocation was on the less-desirable UHF band .
Additionally , during the analog television era , UHF stations were not adequately receivable in rugged terrain .
These factors made many prospective station owners skittish about investing in a UHF station , especially one that would have had to take on an affiliation with a weaker network .
However , the network 's intake of money at the time would allow it to accelerate its content production .
The movement in westerns , which ABC is credited for having started , represented a fifth of all primetime series on American television in January 1959 , at which point detective shows were beginning to rise in popularity as well .
ABC requested additional productions from Disney .
The series went on to quickly become `` immensely popular '' .
That year also saw the premiere of The Fugitive -LRB- on September 17 -RRB- , a drama series centering on a man on the run after being accused of committing a murder he did not commit .
ITT management promised that the company would allow ABC to retain autonomy in the publishing business .
To finance the purchase , Capital Cities borrowed $ 2.1 billion from a consortium of banks , which sold certain assets that Capital Cites could not acquire or retain due to FCC ownership rules for a combined $ 900 million and sold off several cable television systems , which were sold to The Washington Post Company -LRB- forming the present-day Cable One -RRB- .
In February 1986 , Thomas S. Murphy , who had been serving as CEO of Capital Cities since 1964 , was appointed chairman and CEO emeritus of ABC .
Jim Duffy stepped down as ABC Television president for a management position at ABC Communications , a subsidiary that specialized in community service programming , including shows related to literary education .
, Just the Ten of Us , The Wonder Years , Full House and Perfect Strangers .
The studio also operated two subsidiaries , Palomar Pictures International and Selmur Pictures .
To captivate the network 's audiences , short 66-minute series were scheduled a half-hour before their hour-long competition .
The ABC logo was also significantly redesigned as part of the transition , with a glossy `` ball '' effect that was specifically designed for HD .
On-air , the logo was accompanied by animated water and ribbon effects .
His descendants extended the Mongol Empire across most of Eurasia by conquering or creating vassal states out of all of modern-day China , Korea , the Caucasus , Central Asia , and substantial portions of modern Eastern Europe , Russia , and Southwest Asia .
Many of these invasions repeated the earlier large-scale slaughters of local populations .
As a result , Genghis Khan and his empire have a fearsome reputation in local histories .
The Secret History of the Mongols reports that Temüjin was born with a blood clot grasped in his fist , a traditional sign that he was destined to become a great leader .
Like many of the nomads of Mongolia , Temüjin 's early life was difficult .
For the next several years , Hoelun and her children lived in poverty , surviving primarily on wild fruits and ox carcasses , marmots , and other small game killed by Temüjin and his brothers .
Temüjin 's reputation also became widespread after his escape from the Tayichi'ud .
Despite speculation over Jochi , Börte would be Temüjin 's only empress , though he did follow tradition by taking several morganatic wives .
Genghis Khan also had many other children with his other wives , but they were excluded from the succession .
While the names of sons were documented , daughters were not .
This relationship was first reinforced when Börte was captured by the Merkits .
As Jamukha and Temüjin drifted apart in their friendship , each began consolidating power , and soon became rivals .
However , Jamukha , threatened by Temüjin 's rapid ascent , quickly moved to stop Temüjin 's ambitions .
In 1187 , he launched an attack against his former friend with an army of thirty thousand troops .
Jamukha horrified people greatly and harmed his image by boiling seventy young male captives alive in cauldrons , alienating many of his potential followers and eliciting sympathy for Temüjin .
The life of Temüjin for the next ten years is very unclear , as historical records are mostly silent on that period .
As he defeated rival tribes , he did not drive away enemy soldiers and abandon the rest .
These political innovations inspired great loyalty among the conquered people , making Temüjin stronger with each victory .
This act led to the split between both factions and was a prelude to war .
The Naimans did not surrender , although enough sectors again voluntarily sided with Temüjin .
Jamukha 's assumption of this title was the final breach with Temüjin , and Jamukha formed a coalition of tribes to oppose him .
Jamukha requested this form of death , despite the fact that in the past Jamukha had been known to have boiled his opponents ' generals alive .
Accounts of Genghis Khan 's life are marked by claims of a series of betrayals and conspiracies .
It was a monumental feat for the `` Mongols '' -LRB- as they became known collectively -RRB- .
This unification of all confederations by Genghis Khan established peace between previously warring tribes and a single political and military force under Genghis Khan .
The commander of the Jin dynasty army made a tactical mistake in not attacking the Mongols at the first opportunity .
At this engagement fought at Badger Pass the Mongols massacred hundreds of thousands of Jin troops .
The Jin dynasty collapsed in 1234 , after the siege of Caizhou .
Genghis Khan decided to conquer the Qara Khitai and defeat Kuchlug , possibly to take him out of power .
By this time the Mongol army was exhausted from ten years of continuous campaigning in China against the Western Xia and Jin dynasty .
Kuchlug fled again , but was soon hunted down by Jebe 's army and executed .
The situation became further complicated because the governor later refused to make repayments for the looting of the caravans and handing over the perpetrators .
Genghis Khan then sent again a second group of three ambassadors -LRB- two Mongols and a Muslim -RRB- to meet the Shah himself instead of the governor Inalchuq .
This was seen as an affront and insult to Genghis Khan .
He left a commander and number of troops in China , designated his successors to be his family members and likely appointed Ögedei to be his immediate successor and then went out to Khwarezmia .
His son Jochi led the first division into the northeast of Khwarezmia .
The Shah 's army was split by diverse internecine feuds and by the Shah 's decision to divide his army into small groups concentrated in various cities .
The Shah died under mysterious circumstances on a small island within his empire .
The Mongols ' conquest , even by their own standards , was brutal .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
After several days only a few remaining soldiers , loyal supporters of the Shah , held out in the citadel .
Ata-Malik Juvayni , a high official in the service of the Mongol empire , wrote that in Termez , on the Oxus , `` all the people , both men and women , were driven out onto the plain , and divided in accordance with their usual custom , then they were all slain '' .
The city of Bukhara was not heavily fortified , with a moat and a single wall , and the citadel typical of Khwarezmi cities .
As the Mongol soldiers looted the city , a fire broke out , razing most of the city to the ground .
Genghis Khan led the main army on a raid through Afghanistan and northern India towards Mongolia , while another 20,000 -LRB- two tumen -RRB- contingent marched through the Caucasus and into Russia under generals Jebe and Subutai .
They pushed deep into Armenia and Azerbaijan .
Subutai sent emissaries to the Slavic princes calling for a separate peace , but the emissaries were executed .
They also may have fought against the neighboring Volga Bulgars .
There is no historical record except a short account by the Arab historian Ibn al-Athir , writing in Mosul some 1100 miles away from the event .
Various historical secondary sources - Morgan , Chambers , Grousset - state that the Mongols actually defeated the Bulgars , Chambers even going so far as to say that the Bulgars had made up stories to tell the -LRB- recently crushed -RRB- Russians that they had beaten the Mongols and driven them from their territory .
The Russian princes then sued for peace .
Subutai agreed but was in no mood to pardon the princes .
As was customary in Mongol society for nobility , the Russian princes were given a bloodless death .
Subutai had a large wooden platform constructed on which he ate his meals along with his other generals .
Six Russian princes , including Mstislav III of Kiev , were put under this platform and crushed to death .
The Mongols learned from captives of the abundant green pastures beyond the Bulgar territory , allowing for the planning for conquest of Hungary and Europe .
These two campaigns are generally regarded as reconnaissance campaigns that tried to get the feel of the political and cultural elements of the regions .
These invasions added Transoxiana and Persia to an already formidable empire while destroying any resistance along the way .
The new Tangut emperor quickly surrendered to the Mongols , and the rest of the Tanguts officially surrendered soon after .
The succession of Genghis Khan was already a significant topic during the later years of his reign , as he reached old age .
According to traditional historical accounts , the issue over Jochi 's paternity was voiced most strongly by Chagatai .
He therefore decided to divide his empire among his sons and make all of them Khan in their own right , while appointing one of his sons as his successor .
If Jochi were to become successor , it was likely that Chagatai would engage in warfare with him and collapse the empire .
Therefore , Genghis Khan decided to give the throne to Ögedei .
Some scholars , notably Ratchnevsky , have commented on the possibility that Jochi was secretly poisoned by an order from Genghis Khan .
Jochi had attempted to protect Urgench from destruction , as it belonged to territory allocated to him as a fief .
He concludes his story with the clearly apocryphal statement by Jochi : `` Genghis Khan is mad to have massacred so many people and laid waste so many lands .
The exact cause of his death remains a mystery , and is variously attributed to being killed in action against the Western Xia , illness , falling from his horse , or wounds sustained in hunting or battle .
He was already old and tired from his journeys .
According to legend , the funeral escort killed anyone and anything across their path to conceal where he was finally buried .
By 1956 a new temple was erected there to house them .
The `` relics '' were remade in the 1970s and a great marble statue of Genghis was completed in 1989 .
The Mongol Empire was one of the most ethnically and culturally diverse empires in history , as befitted its size .
Religious tolerance was thus a well established concept on the Asian steppe .
Genghis Khan realised that he needed people who could govern cities and states conquered by him .
Chu'Tsai responded that his father served the Jin dynasty honestly and so did he ; also he did not consider his own father his enemy , so the question of revenge did not apply .
This reply impressed Genghis Khan .
Chu'Tsai administered parts of the Mongol Empire and became a confidant of the successive Mongol Khans .
Contrary to popular belief , Genghis Khan did not conquer all the areas ultimately part of the Mongol Empire .
The empire 's expansion continued for a generation or more after Genghis 's death in 1227 .
They also pushed further into Russia and eastern Europe .
Genghis Khan became one of the central figures of the national identity .
Genghis Khan is regarded as one of the prominent leaders in Mongolia 's history .
He is responsible for the emergence of the Mongols as a political and ethnic identity because there was no unified identity between the tribes that had cultural similarity .
He reinforced many Mongol traditions and provided stability and unity during a time of almost endemic warfare between tribes .
President Elbegdorj sees Genghis Khan as a leader from whom to learn for anti-corruption efforts as Genghis Khan sought equal protection under the law for all citizens regardless of status or wealth .
`` Chinggis -LRB- Genghis Khan -RRB- ... was a man who deeply realized that the justice begins and consolidates with the equality of law , and not with the distinctions between people .
He was a man who knew that the good laws and rules lived longer than fancy palaces , '' Elbegdorj said in his speech on the 850th anniversary of Chinggis Khaan 's birth .
In summary , Mongolians see him as the fundamental figure in the founding of the Mongol Empire and therefore the basis for Mongolia as a country .
There has been much artwork and literature praising Genghis as a great military leader and political genius .
The years of the Mongol-established Yuan dynasty left an indelible imprint on Chinese political and social structures for subsequent generations with literature during the Jin dynasty relatively fewer .
In general the legacy of Genghis Khan and his successors , who completed the conquest of China after 65 years of struggle , remains a mixed topic .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Some historians have estimated that Iran 's population did not again reach its pre-Mongol levels until the mid-20th century . ''
The invasions of Baghdad , Samarkand , Urgench , Kiev , Vladimir among others caused mass murders , such as when portions of southern Khuzestan were completely destroyed .
According to the works of the Persian historian Rashid-al-Din Hamadani , the Mongols killed more than 70,000 people in Merv and more than 190,000 in Nishapur .
However , it seems that if they had meant to call Genghis tenggis they could have said , and written , `` Tenggis Khan '' , which they did not . -RRB-
In addition to pharma responsibilities , the pharma offered general medical advice and a range of services that are now performed solely by other specialist practitioners , such as surgery and midwifery .
The Greek word Pharmakeia -LRB- Greek : φαρμακεία -RRB- derives from pharmakon -LRB- φάρμακον -RRB- , meaning `` drug '' , `` medicine '' -LRB- or `` poison '' -RRB- .
-LSB- n 1 -RSB-
He wrote several treatises on the topic .
His Liber servitoris is of particular interest , as it provides the reader with recipes and explains how to prepare the ` simples ' from which were compounded the complex drugs then generally used .
Sabur Ibn Sahl -LRB- d 869 -RRB- , was , however , the first physician to initiate pharmacopoedia , describing a large variety of drugs and remedies for ailments .
Al-Biruni -LRB- 973 -- 1050 -RRB- wrote one of the most valuable Islamic works on pharmacology , entitled Kitab al-Saydalah -LRB- The Book of Drugs -RRB- , in which he detailed the properties of drugs and outlined the role of pharmacy and the functions and duties of the pharmacist .
Avicenna , too , described no less than 700 preparations , their properties , modes of action , and their indications .
He devoted in fact a whole volume to simple drugs in The Canon of Medicine .
Of great impact were also the works by al-Maridini of Baghdad and Cairo , and Ibn al-Wafid -LRB- 1008 -- 1074 -RRB- , both of which were printed in Latin more than fifty times , appearing as De Medicinis universalibus et particularibus by ` Mesue ' the younger , and the Medicamentis simplicibus by ` Abenguefit ' .
Peter of Abano -LRB- 1250 -- 1316 -RRB- translated and added a supplement to the work of al-Maridini under the title De Veneris .
Living in the 10th century , he wrote The foundations of the true properties of Remedies , amongst others describing arsenious oxide , and being acquainted with silicic acid .
He also describes the distillation of sea-water for drinking .
-LSB- verification needed -RSB-
For example , there are pharmacists who specialize in hematology/oncology , HIV/AIDS , infectious disease , critical care , emergency medicine , toxicology , nuclear pharmacy , pain management , psychiatry , anti-coagulation clinics , herbal medicine , neurology/epilepsy management , pediatrics , neonatal pharmacists and more .
Hospital pharmacists and trained pharmacy technicians compound sterile products for patients including total parenteral nutrition -LRB- TPN -RRB- , and other medications given intravenously .
This is a complex process that requires adequate training of personnel , quality assurance of products , and adequate facilities .
Clinical pharmacists are now an integral part of the interdisciplinary approach to patient care .
There are many instances where a practitioner issues a prescription , brokered by an Internet server , for a controlled substance to a `` patient '' s/he has never met .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In the United Kingdom , pharmacists who undertake additional training are obtaining prescribing rights and this is because of pharmacy education .
In Scotland the pharmacist can write prescriptions for Scottish registered patients of their regular medications , for the majority of drugs , except for controlled drugs , when the patient is unable to see their doctor , as could happen if they are away from home or the doctor is unavailable .
Moreover , the Doctor of Pharmacy -LRB- Pharm .
D. -RRB- degree is now required before entering practice and some pharmacists now complete one or two years of residency or fellowship training following graduation .
In addition , consultant pharmacists , who traditionally operated primarily in nursing homes are now expanding into direct consultation with patients , under the banner of `` senior care pharmacy . ''
Jawed vertebrates , including humans , have even more sophisticated defense mechanisms , including the ability to adapt over time to recognize specific pathogens more efficiently .
Immunology is a science that examines the structure and function of the immune system .
It originates from medicine and early studies on the causes of immunity to disease .
Thucydides noted that people who had recovered from a previous bout of the disease could nurse the sick without contracting the illness a second time .
Pasteur 's theory was in direct opposition to contemporary theories of disease , such as the miasma theory .
The immune system protects organisms from infection with layered defenses of increasing specificity .
Here , the immune system adapts its response during an infection to improve its recognition of the pathogen .
Microorganisms or toxins that successfully enter an organism encounter the cells and mechanisms of the innate immune system .
This system does not confer long-lasting immunity against a pathogen .
Several barriers protect organisms from infection , including mechanical , chemical , and biological barriers .
However , as organisms can not be completely sealed from their environments , other systems act to protect body openings such as the lungs , intestines , and the genitourinary tract .
Chemical barriers also protect against infection .
This reduces the probability that pathogens will reach sufficient numbers to cause illness .
Growth factors and cytotoxic factors may also be released .
These cytokines and other chemicals recruit immune cells to the site of infection and promote healing of any damaged tissue following the removal of pathogens .
Phagocytosis probably represents the oldest form of host defense , as phagocytes have been identified in both vertebrate and invertebrate animals .
Macrophages also act as scavengers , ridding the body of worn-out cells and other debris , and as antigen-presenting cells that activate the adaptive immune system .
These cells identify and eliminate pathogens , either by attacking larger pathogens through contact or by engulfing and then killing microorganisms .
They were named `` natural killer '' because of the initial notion that they do not require activation in order to kill cells that are `` missing self . ''
For many years it was unclear how NK cells recognize tumor cells and infected cells .
It is now known that the MHC makeup on the surface of those cells is altered and the NK cells become activated through recognition of `` missing self '' .
Normal body cells are not recognized and attacked by NK cells because they express intact self MHC antigens .
The ability to mount these tailored responses is maintained in the body by `` memory cells '' .
Should a pathogen infect the body more than once , these specific memory cells are used to quickly eliminate it .
Both B cells and T cells carry receptor molecules that recognize specific targets .
T cells recognize a `` non-self '' target , such as a pathogen , only after antigens -LRB- small fragments of the pathogen -RRB- have been processed and presented in combination with a `` self '' receptor called a major histocompatibility complex -LRB- MHC -RRB- molecule .
These two mechanisms of antigen presentation reflect the different roles of the two types of T cell .
As with B cells , each type of T cell recognizes a different antigen .
The T cell then travels throughout the body in search of cells where the MHC I receptors bear this antigen .
T cell killing of host cells is particularly important in preventing the replication of viruses .
T cell activation is tightly controlled and generally requires a very strong MHC/antigen activation signal , or additional activation signals provided by `` helper '' T cells -LRB- see below -RRB- .
Helper T cells express T cell receptors -LRB- TCR -RRB- that recognize antigen bound to Class II MHC molecules .
Helper T cell activation also requires longer duration of engagement with an antigen-presenting cell .
Cytokine signals produced by helper T cells enhance the microbicidal function of macrophages and the activity of killer T cells .
The conditions that produce responses from γδ T cells are not fully understood .
On the other hand , the various subsets are also part of the innate immune system , as restricted TCR or NK receptors may be used as pattern recognition receptors .
The B cell then displays these antigenic peptides on its surface MHC class II molecules .
As the activated B cell then begins to divide , its offspring -LRB- plasma cells -RRB- secrete millions of copies of the antibody that recognizes this antigen .
These antibodies circulate in blood plasma and lymph , bind to pathogens expressing the antigen and mark them for destruction by complement activation or for uptake and destruction by phagocytes .
Antibodies can also neutralize challenges directly , by binding to bacterial toxins or by interfering with the receptors that viruses and bacteria use to infect cells .
Several layers of passive protection are provided by the mother .
This is passive immunity because the fetus does not actually make any memory cells or antibodies -- it only borrows them .
In medicine , protective passive immunity can also be transferred artificially from one individual to another via antibody-rich serum .
Other hormones appear to regulate the immune system as well , most notably prolactin , growth hormone and vitamin D.
The age-related decline in immune function is also related to decreasing vitamin D levels in the elderly .
As people age , two things happen that negatively affect their vitamin D levels .
First , they stay indoors more due to decreased activity levels .
This allows killer T cells to recognize the tumor cell as abnormal .
Diets lacking sufficient protein are associated with impaired cell-mediated immunity , complement activity , phagocyte function , IgA antibody concentrations , and cytokine production .
Additionally , the loss of the thymus at an early age through genetic mutation or surgical removal results in severe immunodeficiency and a high susceptibility to infection .
Long-term active memory is acquired following infection by activation of B and T cells .
With infectious disease remaining one of the leading causes of death in the human population , vaccination represents the most effective manipulation of the immune system mankind has developed .
Therefore , pathogens evolved several methods that allow them to successfully infect a host , while evading detection or destruction by the immune system .
The self/nonself theory of immunity and the self/nonself vocabulary have been criticized , but remain very influential .
Anti-inflammatory drugs are often used to control the effects of inflammation .
Cytotoxic drugs inhibit the immune response by killing dividing cells such as activated T cells .
However , the killing is indiscriminate and other constantly dividing cells and their organs are affected , which causes toxic side effects .
There are two theories as to why the pro-inflammatory state is reserved for sleep time .
First , inflammation would cause serious cognitive and physical impairments if it were to occur during wake times .
Only after binding to calcitriol can T-cells perform their intended function .
These molecules are believed to bind pathogenic antigens in a similar way to antibodies , and with the same degree of specificity .
Many species , however , utilize mechanisms that appear to be precursors of these aspects of vertebrate immunity .
Offensive elements of the immune systems are also present in unicellular eukaryotes , but studies of their roles in defense are few .
Immunology is strongly experimental in everyday practice but is also characterized by an ongoing theoretical attitude .
Many theories have been suggested in immunology from the end of the nineteenth century up to the present time .
In addition , immunological tolerance may develop against tumor antigens , so the immune system no longer attacks the tumor cells .
Symptoms can range from mild discomfort to death .
This is also called antibody-dependent -LRB- or cytotoxic -RRB- hypersensitivity , and is mediated by IgG and IgM antibodies .
Immune complexes -LRB- aggregations of antigens , complement proteins , and IgG and IgM antibodies -RRB- deposited in various tissues trigger Type III hypersensitivity reactions .
Type IV hypersensitivity -LRB- also known as cell-mediated or delayed type hypersensitivity -RRB- usually takes between two and three days to develop .
Type IV reactions are involved in many autoimmune and infectious diseases , but may also involve contact dermatitis -LRB- poison ivy -RRB- .
These reactions are mediated by T cells , monocytes , and macrophages .
Here , a pathogen spends most of its life-cycle inside host cells , where it is shielded from direct contact with immune cells , antibodies and complement .
.
Many pathogens secrete compounds that diminish or misdirect the host 's immune response .
Some bacteria form biofilms to protect themselves from the cells and proteins of the immune system .
Such biofilms are present in many successful infections , e.g. , the chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Burkholderia cenocepacia infections characteristic of cystic fibrosis .
The mechanisms used to evade the adaptive immune system are more complicated .
The simplest approach is to rapidly change non-essential epitopes -LRB- amino acids and/or sugars -RRB- on the surface of the pathogen , while keeping essential epitopes concealed .
These frequent changes in antigens may explain the failures of vaccines directed at this virus .
In HIV , the envelope that covers the virion is formed from the outermost membrane of the host cell ; such `` self-cloaked '' viruses make it difficult for the immune system to identify them as `` non-self '' structures .
Another important role of the immune system is to identify and eliminate tumors .
The transformed cells of tumors express antigens that are not found on normal cells .
To the immune system , these antigens appear foreign , and their presence causes immune cells to attack the transformed tumor cells .
A third possible source of tumor antigens are proteins normally important for regulating cell growth and survival , that commonly mutate into cancer inducing molecules called oncogenes .
This limits the effectiveness of drugs based on larger peptides and proteins -LRB- which are typically larger than 6000 Da -RRB- .
In some cases , the drug itself is not immunogenic , but may be co-administered with an immunogenic compound , as is sometimes the case for Taxol .
Computational methods have been developed to predict the immunogenicity of peptides and proteins , which are particularly useful in designing therapeutic antibodies , assessing likely virulence of mutations in viral coat particles , and validation of proposed peptide-based drug treatments .
In addition to the negative consequences of sleep deprivation , sleep and the intertwined circadian system have been shown to have strong regulatory effects on immunological functions affecting both the innate and the adaptive immunity .
These signals induce a pro-inflammatory state through the production of the pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin-1 , interleukin-12 , TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma .
These cytokines then stimulate immune functions such as immune cells activation , proliferation , and differentiation .
It is during this time that undifferentiated , or less differentiated , like naïve and central memory T cells , peak -LRB- i.e. during a time of a slowly evolving adaptive immune response -RRB- .
This recognition signal triggers a rapid killing response .
After complement proteins initially bind to the microbe , they activate their protease activity , which in turn activates other complement proteases , and so on .
The cascade results in the production of peptides that attract immune cells , increase vascular permeability , and opsonize -LRB- coat -RRB- the surface of a pathogen , marking it for destruction .
She is not at all afraid of the death he threatens her with -LRB- and eventually carries out -RRB- , but she is afraid of how her conscience will smite her if she does not do this .
When the government knocks on the door , it is an individual in the form of a postman or tax collector whose hand hits the wood .
If a man chose to be an agent of injustice , then Thoreau insisted on confronting him with the fact that he was making a choice .
But if government is `` the voice of the people , '' as it is often called , should n't that voice be heeded ?
Even a good form of government is `` liable to be abused and perverted before the people can act through it . ''
Moreover , even if a government did express the voice of the people , this fact would not compel the obedience of individuals who disagree with what is being said .
What , then , is the proper relationship between the individual and the government ?
This assumes that common morality does not have a prohibition on deceit in such situations .
Christian Bay 's encyclopedia article states that civil disobedience requires `` carefully chosen and legitimate means , '' but holds that they do not have to be non-violent .
.
revolution does n't have to be political , i.e. `` cultural revolution '' , it simply implies sweeping and widespread change to a section of the social fabric -RRB- .
Thoreau also wrote of civil disobedience accomplishing `` peaceable revolution . ''
Howard Zinn , Harvey Wheeler , and others have identified the right espoused in The Declaration of Independence to `` alter or abolish '' an unjust government to be a principle of civil disobedience .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- -LSB- original research ? -RSB-
-LSB- page needed -RSB- There have also been many instances of solitary civil disobedience , such as that committed by Thoreau , but these sometimes go unnoticed .
Thoreau wrote , `` My civil neighbor , the tax-gatherer , is the very man I have to deal with -- for it is , after all , with men and not with parchment that I quarrel -- and he has voluntarily chosen to be an agent of the government .
How shall he ever know well that he is and does as an officer of the government , or as a man , until he is obliged to consider whether he will treat me , his neighbor , for whom he has respect , as a neighbor and well-disposed man , or as a maniac and disturber of the peace , and see if he can get over this obstruction to his neighborliness without a ruder and more impetuous thought or speech corresponding with his action . ''
It has also been argued that either choice is compatible with the spirit of civil disobedience .
ACT-UP 's Civil Disobedience Training handbook states that a civil disobedient who pleads guilty is essentially stating , `` Yes , I committed the act of which you accuse me .
I do n't deny it ; in fact , I am proud of it .
I feel I have done no wrong .
I may have violated some specific laws , but I am guilty of doing no wrong .
I therefore plead not guilty . ''
A plea of no contest is sometimes regarded as a compromise between the two .
They were put on a bus and taken to the Nye County seat of Tonopah , Nevada , and arraigned for trial before the local Justice of the Peace , that afternoon .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
But that is different than the notion that they must go to jail as part of a rule connected with civil disobedience .
In U.S. v. Burgos-Andujar , a defendant who was involved in a movement to stop military exercises by trespassing on U.S. Navy property argued to the court in allocution that `` the ones who are violating the greater law are the members of the Navy '' .
As a result , the judge increased her sentence from 40 to 60 days .
A technical defense may enhance the chances for acquittal but make for more boring proceedings and reduced press coverage .
In countries such as the United States whose laws guarantee the right to a jury trial but do not excuse lawbreaking for political purposes , some civil disobedients seek jury nullification .
Therefore , conscientious lawbreakers must be punished .
Michael Bayles argues that if a person violates a law in order to create a test case as to the constitutionality of a law , and then wins his case , then that act did not constitute civil disobedience .
The necessity defense has sometimes been used as a shadow defense by civil disobedients to deny guilt without denouncing their politically motivated acts , and to present their political beliefs in the courtroom .
However , court cases such as U.S. v. Schoon have greatly curtailed the availability of the political necessity defense .
This means that the objector has no right not to be punished .
Large-scale construction requires collaboration across multiple disciplines .
It includes large public works , dams , bridges , highways , water/wastewater and utility distribution .
There are other ways to break the industry into sectors or markets .
They publish a list of the largest companies in the United States -LRB- Top-40 -RRB- and also a list the largest global firms -LRB- Top-250 , by amount of work they are doing outside their home country -RRB- .
It was divided as transportation , petroleum , buildings , power , industrial , water , manufacturing , sewer/waste , telecom , hazardous waste plus a tenth category for other projects .
Dutch architect Janjaap Ruijssenaars 's performative architecture 3D-printed building is scheduled to be built in 2014 .
The design usually consists of drawings and specifications , usually prepared by a design team including Architect , civil engineers , mechanical engineers , electrical engineers , structural engineers , fire protection engineers , planning consultants , architectural consultants , and archaeological consultants .
Presently , a firm that is nominally an `` architecture '' or `` construction management '' firm may have experts from all related fields as employees , or to have an associated company that provides each necessary skill .
Financial planning for the project is intended to ensure that a solid plan with adequate safeguards and contingency plans are in place before the project is started and is required to ensure that the plan is properly executed over the life of the project .
This is the most common method of construction procurement and is well established and recognized .
His or her role is to design the works , prepare the specifications and produce construction drawings , administer the contract , tender the works , and manage the works from inception to completion .
Any subcontractor has a direct contractual relationship with the main contractor .
Once these have been hired , they begin building the first phase of the project .
This is in contrast to a design-bid-build contract , where the project is completely designed by the owner , then bid on , then completed .
As a whole , the industry employed an estimated 5.8 million as of April 2013 , with a 13.2 % unemployment rate .
In 2010 a salary survey revealed the differences in remuneration between different roles , sectors and locations in the construction and built environment industry .
The results showed that areas of particularly strong growth in the construction industry , such as the Middle East , yield higher average salaries than in the UK for example .
This trend is not necessarily due to the fact that more affluent roles are available , however , as architects with 14 or more years experience working in the Middle East earn on average # 43,389 per annum , compared to # 40,000 in the UK .
In 2009 , the fatal occupational injury rate among construction workers in the United States was nearly three times that for all workers .
Some private schools are boarding schools and many military academies are privately owned or operated as well .
Religiously affiliated and denominational schools form a subcategory of private schools .
Others use the denomination as more of a general label to describe on what the founders based their belief , while still maintaining a fine distinction between academics and religion .
Private schools in Australia may be favoured for many reasons : prestige and the social status of the ` old school tie ' ; better quality physical infrastructure and more facilities -LRB- e.g. playing fields , swimming pools , etc. -RRB- , higher-paid teachers ; and/or the belief that private schools offer a higher quality of education .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
These schools are typically viewed as ` elite schools ' .
Many of the ` grammar schools ' also fall in this category .
It is also not possible to abolish these rights .
Still , they are less common than in many other countries .
These schools offer the same types of diplomas as public schools .
Ersatzschulen lack the freedom to operate completely outside of government regulation .
However , it is not possible to finance these schools with such low tuition fees , which is why all German Ersatzschulen are additionally financed with public funds .
The percentages of public money could reach 100 % of the personnel expenditures .
Nevertheless , Private Schools became insolvent in the past in Germany .
However , these vocational schools are not part of the German dual education system .
So , in a strict sense , a private school is an unaided independent school .
For the purpose of this definition , only receipt of financial aid is considered , not land purchased from the government at a subsidized rate .
It is within the power of both the union government and the state governments to govern schools since Education appears in the Concurrent list of legislative subjects in the constitution .
They will have to satisfy a number of infrastructure and human resource related criteria to get Recognition -LRB- a form of license -RRB- from the government .
Critics of this system point out that this leads to corruption by school inspectors who check compliance and to fewer schools in a country that has the largest adult illiterate population in the world .
While official data does not capture the real extent of private schooling in the country , various studies have reported unpopularity of government schools and an increasing number of private schools .
If the school wishes to employ extra teachers they are paid for with school fees , which tend to be relatively low in Ireland compared to the rest of the world .
There is , however , a limited element of state assessment of private schools , because of the requirement that the state ensure that children receive a certain minimum education ; Irish private schools must still work towards the Junior Certificate and the Leaving Certificate , for example .
Many private schools in Ireland also double as boarding schools .
This caused an uproar among the Chinese and a compromise was achieved in that the schools would instead become `` National Type '' schools .
Under such a system , the government is only in charge of the school curriculum and teaching personnel while the lands still belonged to the schools .
The other category of schools are those run and partly or fully funded by private individuals , private organizations and religious groups .
The standard and the quality of education is quite high .
Most of the middle-class families send their children to such schools , which might be in their own city or far off , like boarding schools .
Preschool education is mostly limited to organized neighbourhood nursery schools .
Private school numbers have been in decline since the mid-1970s as a result of many private schools opting to become state-integrated schools , mostly due of financial difficulties stemming from changes in student numbers and/or the economy .
State-integrated schools keep their private school special character and receives state funds in return for having to operate like a state school , e.g. they must teach the state curriculum , they must employ registered teachers , and they ca n't charge tuition fees -LRB- they can charge `` attendance dues '' for the upkeep on the still-private school land and buildings -RRB- .
Academic Colleges Group is a recent group of private schools run as a business , with schools throughout Auckland , including ACG Senior College in Auckland 's CBD , ACG Parnell College in Parnell , and international school ACG New Zealand International College .
Private schools have proven to be efficient in resource utilization .
Per unit costs in private schools are generally lower when compared to public schools .
This situation is more evident at the tertiary level .
The private sector has grown ever since .
After the abolition of apartheid , the laws governing private education in South Africa changed significantly .
In the final years of the apartheid era , parents at white government schools were given the option to convert to a `` semi-private '' form called Model C , and many of these schools changed their admissions policies to accept children of other races .
.
Former `` Model C '' schools are not private schools , as they are state-controlled .
In Sweden , pupils are free to choose a private school and the private school gets paid the same amount as municipal schools .
The Swedish system has been recommended to Barack Obama .
Private schools generally prefer to be called independent schools , because of their freedom to operate outside of government and local government control .
Some of these are also known as public schools .
The name `` public school '' is based on the fact that the schools were open to pupils from anywhere , and not merely to those from a certain locality , and of any religion or occupation .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Many independent schools are single-sex -LRB- though this is becoming less common -RRB- .
For details in Scotland , see `` Meeting the Cost '' .
The academic content of the academies was usually College Preparatory .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The Supreme Court precedent appears to favor educational choice , so long as states may set standards for educational accomplishment .
However , tuition did not cover operating expenses , particularly at boarding schools .
Boarding schools with a reputation for quality in the United States have a student body drawn from throughout the country , indeed the globe , and a list of applicants which far exceeds their capacity .
Although never formally affiliated with any denomination , the early College primarily trained Congregationalist and Unitarian clergy .
Its curriculum and student body were gradually secularized during the 18th century , and by the 19th century Harvard had emerged as the central cultural establishment among Boston elites .
Harvard is a large , highly residential research university .
The nominal cost of attendance is high , but the University 's large endowment allows it to offer generous financial aid packages .
It was initially called `` New College '' or `` the college at New Towne '' .
He had left the school # 779 and his library of some 400 books .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- -LRB- A 1643 publication said the school 's purpose was `` to advance learning and perpetuate it to posterity , dreading to leave an illiterate ministry to the churches when our present ministers shall lie in the dust '' . -RRB-
:4 -- 5:24
Agassiz 's approach was distinctly idealist and posited Americans ' `` participation in the Divine Nature '' and the possibility of understanding `` intellectual existences '' .
When it came to explaining life-forms , Agassiz resorted to matters of shape based on a presumed archetype for his evidence .
The popularity of Agassiz 's efforts to `` soar with Plato '' probably also derived from other writings to which Harvard students were exposed , including Platonic treatises by Ralph Cudworth , John Norrisand , in a Romantic vein , Samuel Coleridge .
The library records at Harvard reveal that the writings of Plato and his early modern and Romantic followers were almost as regularly read during the 19th century as those of the `` official philosophy '' of the more empirical and more deistic Scottish school .
In 1943 , he asked the faculty make a definitive statement about what general education ought to be , at the secondary as well as the college level .
Women remained segregated at Radcliffe , though more and more took Harvard classes .
Harvard 's graduate schools , which had accepted females and other groups in greater numbers even before the college , also became more diverse in the post-World War II period .
Harvard Yard itself contains the central administrative offices and main libraries of the university , academic buildings including Sever Hall and University Hall , Memorial Church , and the majority of the freshman dormitories .
Each residential house contains rooms for undergraduates , House masters , and resident tutors , as well as a dining hall and library .
The facilities were made possible by a gift from Yale University alumnus Edward Harkness .
Harvard has purchased tracts of land in Allston , a walk across the Charles River from Cambridge , with the intent of major expansion southward .
Plans also call for sinking part of Storrow Drive -LRB- at Harvard 's expense -RRB- for replacement with park land and pedestrian access to the Charles River , as well as the construction of bike paths , and buildings throughout the Allston campus .
The school color is crimson , which is also the name of the Harvard sports teams and the daily newspaper , The Harvard Crimson .
Harvard has the largest university endowment in the world .
As of September 2011 -LSB- update -RSB- , it had nearly regained the loss suffered during the 2008 recession .
In December 2008 , Harvard announced that its endowment had lost 22 % -LRB- approximately $ 8 billion -RRB- from July to October 2008 , necessitating budget cuts .
Later reports suggest the loss was actually more than double that figure , a reduction of nearly 50 % of its endowment in the first four months alone .
Forbes in March 2009 estimated the loss to be in the range of $ 12 billion .
The Harvard Management Company repeatedly refused to divest , stating that `` operating expenses must not be subject to financially unrealistic strictures or carping by the unsophisticated or by special interest groups . ''
Undergraduate admission to Harvard is characterized by the Carnegie Foundation as `` more selective , lower transfer-in '' .
The four-year , full-time undergraduate program comprises a minority of enrollments at the university and emphasizes instruction with an `` arts and sciences focus '' .
Harvard offers a comprehensive doctoral graduate program and there is a high level of coexistence between graduate and undergraduate degrees .
In many concentrations , students can elect to pursue a basic program or an honors-eligible program requiring a senior thesis and/or advanced course work .
Harvard has chapters of academic honor societies such as Phi Beta Kappa and various committees and departments also award several hundred named prizes annually .
Harvard , along with other universities , has been accused of grade inflation , although there is evidence that the quality of the student body and its motivation have also increased .
Moreover , the honors of `` John Harvard Scholar '' and `` Harvard College Scholar '' will now be given only to the top 5 percent and the next 5 percent of each class .
Families with incomes between $ 60,000 to $ 80,000 pay only a few thousand dollars per year , and families earning between $ 120,000 and $ 180,000 pay no more than 10 % of their annual incomes .
According to the American Library Association , this makes it the largest academic library in the United States , and one of the largest in the world .
There are rare books , manuscripts and other special collections throughout Harvard 's libraries ; Houghton Library , the Arthur and Elizabeth Schlesinger Library on the History of Women in America , and the Harvard University Archives consist principally of rare and unique materials .
The largest collection of East-Asian language material outside of East Asia is held in the Harvard-Yenching Library .
Harvard operates several arts , cultural , and scientific museums .
The Harvard Museum of Natural History includes the Harvard Mineralogical Museum , Harvard University Herbaria featuring the Blaschka Glass Flowers exhibit , and the Museum of Comparative Zoology .
Harvard has been highly ranked by many university rankings .
When the QS and Times were published in partnership as the THE-QS World University Rankings during 2004-2009 , Harvard had also been regarded the first in every year .
The University 's undergraduate program has been continuously among the top two in the U.S. News & World Report .
In 2014 , Harvard topped the University Ranking by Academic Performance -LRB- URAP -RRB- .
It was ranked 8th on the 2013-2014 PayScale College Salary Report and 14th on the 2013 PayScale College Education Value Rankings .
In 2011 , the Mines ParisTech : Professional Ranking World Universities ranked Harvard 1st university in the world in terms of number of alumni holding CEO position in Fortune Global 500 companies .
While Harvard 's football team is no longer one of the country 's best as it often was a century ago during football 's early days -LRB- it won the Rose Bowl in 1920 -RRB- , both it and Yale have influenced the way the game is played .
The stadium 's structure actually played a role in the evolution of the college game .
But the stadium was too narrow to accommodate a wider playing surface .
So , other steps had to be taken .
These included legalizing the forward pass , perhaps the most significant rule change in the sport 's history .
The MAC offers personal trainers and specialty classes .
It is home to Harvard volleyball , fencing and wrestling .
The offices of several of the school 's varsity coaches are also in the MAC .
The Harvard crew is typically considered to be one of the top teams in the country in rowing .
The Jacksonville Beaches communities are along the adjacent Atlantic coast .
Under British rule , settlement grew at the narrow point in the river where cattle crossed , known as Wacca Pilatka to the Seminole and the Cow Ford to the British .
Harbor improvements since the late 19th century have made Jacksonville a major military and civilian deep-water port .
Its riverine location facilitates two United States Navy bases and the Port of Jacksonville , Florida 's third largest seaport .
Significant factors in the local economy include services such as banking , insurance , healthcare and logistics .
At the time of contact with Europeans , all Mocama villages in present-day Jacksonville were part of the powerful chiefdom known as the Saturiwa , centered around the mouth of the St. Johns River .
In 1564 , René Goulaine de Laudonnière established the first European settlement , Fort Caroline , on the St. Johns near the main village of the Saturiwa .
On September 20 , 1565 , a Spanish force from the nearby Spanish settlement of St. Augustine attacked Fort Caroline , and killed nearly all the French soldiers defending it .
The British introduced the cultivation of sugar cane , indigo and fruits as well the export of lumber .
As a result , the northeastern Florida area prospered economically more than it had under the Spanish .
Britain ceded control of the territory back to Spain in 1783 , after its defeat in the American Revolutionary War , and the settlement at the Cow Ford continued to grow .
They soon named the town Jacksonville , after Andrew Jackson .
The city was blockaded by Union forces , who gained control of the nearby Fort Clinch .
Though no battles were fought in Jacksonville proper , the city changed hands several times between Union and Confederate forces .
Union forces then retreated to Jacksonville and held the city for the remainder of the war .
This highlighted the visibility of the state as a worthy place for tourism .
From 1893 to 1938 Jacksonville was the site of the Florida Old Confederate Soldiers and Sailors Home with a nearby cemetery .
On May 3 , 1901 , downtown Jacksonville was ravaged by a fire that started as a kitchen fire .
The Confederate Monument in Hemming Park was one of the only landmarks to survive the fire .
On May 17 municipal authority resumed in Jacksonville .
It is said the glow from the flames could be seen in Savannah , Georgia , and the smoke plumes seen in Raleigh , North Carolina .
Architect Henry John Klutho was a primary figure in the reconstruction of the city .
The first multi-story structure built by Klutho was the Dyal-Upchurch Building in 1902 .
The St. James Building , built on the previous site of the St. James Hotel that burned down , was built in 1912 as Klutho 's crowning achievement .
One converted movie studio site , Norman Studios , remains in Arlington ; It has been converted to the Jacksonville Silent Film Museum at Norman Studios .
After World War II , the government of the city of Jacksonville began to increase spending to fund new public building projects in the boom that occurred after the war .
This added momentum to proposals for government reform .
Lower taxes , increased economic development , unification of the community , better public spending and effective administration by a more central authority were all cited as reasons for a new consolidated government .
On October 1 , 1968 , the governments merged to create the Consolidated City of Jacksonville .
Fire , police , health & welfare , recreation , public works , and housing & urban development were all combined under the new government .
This would generate most of the revenue required for the $ 2.25 billion package of major projects that included road & infrastructure improvements , environmental preservation , targeted economic development and new or improved public facilities .
Nassau County lies to the north , Baker County lies to the west , and Clay and St. Johns County lie to the south ; the Atlantic Ocean lies to the east , along with the Jacksonville Beaches .
Summers can be hot and wet , and summer thunderstorms with torrential but brief downpours are common .
High temperatures average 64 to 92 °F -LRB- 18 to 33 °C -RRB- throughout the year .
High heat indices are common for the summer months in the area , with indices above 110 °F -LRB- 43.3 °C -RRB- possible .
Jacksonville has suffered less damage from hurricanes than most other east coast cities , although the threat does exist for a direct hit by a major hurricane .
The city has only received one direct hit from a hurricane since 1871 ; however , Jacksonville has experienced hurricane or near-hurricane conditions more than a dozen times due to storms crossing the state from the Gulf of Mexico to the Atlantic Ocean , or passing to the north or south in the Atlantic and brushing past the area .
Similarly , four years prior to this , Jacksonville was inundated by Hurricane Frances and Hurricane Jeanne , which made landfall south of the area .
These tropical cyclones were the costliest indirect hits to Jacksonville .
Hurricane Floyd in 1999 caused damage mainly to Jacksonville Beach .
During Floyd , the Jacksonville Beach pier was severely damaged , and later demolished .
The rebuilt pier was later damaged by Fay , but not destroyed .
Tropical Storm Bonnie would cause minor damage in 2004 , spawning a minor tornado in the process .
Jacksonville is the most populous city in Florida , and the twelfth most populous city in the United States .
As of 2010 -LSB- update -RSB- , there were 366,273 households out of which 11.8 % were vacant .
23.9 % of households had children under the age of 18 living with them , 43.8 % were married couples , 15.2 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 36.4 % were non-families .
The average household size was 2.55 and the average family size was 3.21 .
The median age was 35.5 years .
According to a Los Angeles Times analysis of the report , the wealthiest 1 % owns 46 % of the world 's wealth ; the 85 richest people , a small part of the wealthiest 1 % , own about 0.7 % of the human population 's wealth , which is the same as the bottom half of the population .
An October 2014 study by Credit Suisse also claims that the top 1 % now own nearly half of the world 's wealth and that the accelerating disparity could trigger a recession .
A 2016 report by Oxfam claims that the 62 wealthiest individuals own as much wealth as the poorer half of the global population combined .
-LSB- unreliable source ? -RSB-
-LSB- unreliable source ? -RSB-
This process exerts a downward pressure on wages .
And therefore , inequality is driven by this price .
For a businessman who has the profit motive as the prime interest , it is a losing proposition to offer below or above market wages to workers .
An example of this would be jobs such as dish-washing or customer service .
This is because competition between employers for employees will drive up the wage .
Examples of this would include jobs that require highly developed skills , rare abilities , or a high level of risk .
In fact , it differs from the present high school education , which is regarded as a stepping-stone to acquire college and advanced degrees .
It is suggested that a large gap in male and female education may indicate backwardness and so may be associated with lower economic growth , which can explain why there is economic inequality between countries .
He attributes this trend to increased trade with poor countries and the fragmentation of the means of production , resulting in low skilled jobs becoming more tradeable .
Empirical economists Max Roser and Jesus Crespo-Cuaresma find support in the data that international trade is increasing income inequality .
They empirically confirm the predictions of the Stolper -- Samuelson theorem regarding the effects of international trade on the distribution of incomes .
Lawrence Katz estimates that trade has only accounted for 5-15 % of rising income inequality .
Several factors other than discrimination may contribute to this gap .
Kuznets demonstrated this relationship using cross-sectional data .
This does not necessarily disprove Kuznets ' theory .
A similar relationship exists among US states -LRB- r = -.620 -RRB- .
Increasing inequality harms economic growth .
Other studies have confirmed this relationship .
Research has been conducted comparing developed countries with undeveloped countries , as well as studying areas within countries .
Fajnzylber et al. -LRB- 2002 -RRB- found a similar relationship worldwide .
Among comments in academic literature on the relationship between homicides and inequality are :
Some studies have found evidence for this theory , noting that in societies where inequality is lower , population-wide satisfaction and happiness tend to be higher .
Other studies have not found consumption inequality less dramatic than household income inequality , and the CBO 's study found consumption data not `` adequately '' capturing `` consumption by high-income households '' as it does their income , though it did agree that household consumption numbers show more equal distribution than household income .
This has given the American economy a tendency to go `` from bubble to bubble '' fueled by unsustainable monetary stimulation .
When physical capital mattered most , savings and investments were key .
Then it was important to have a large contingent of rich people who could save a greater proportion of their income than the poor and invest it in physical capital .
He showed that , in accordance with the credit market imperfection approach , inequality is associated with lower level of human capital formation -LRB- education , experience , and apprenticeship -RRB- and higher level of fertility , and thereby lower levels of growth .
Perotti concluded that , `` more equal societies have lower fertility rates and higher rates of investment in education .
Both are reflected in higher rates of growth .
Studies of larger data sets have found no correlations for any fixed lead time , and a negative impact on the duration of growth .
Moreover , Piketty argues that the `` magical '' Kuznets curve hypothesis , with its emphasis on the balancing of economic growth in the long run , can not account for the significant increase in economic inequality throughout the developed world since the 1970s .
Some theories popular from the 1950s to 2011 incorrectly stated that inequality had a positive effect on economic development .
IMF economists found a strong association between lower levels of inequality in developing countries and sustained periods of economic growth .
Other causes of extra-legal property are failures to notarize transaction documents or having documents notarized but failing to have them recorded with the official agency .
This can be explained by the fact that as the poor people in the society become more wealthy , it increases their yearly carbon emissions .
This relation is expressed by the Environmental Kuznets Curve -LRB- EKC -RRB- .
-LSB- not in citation given -RSB- It should be noted here however that in certain cases , with great economic inequality , there is nonetheless not more waste and pollution created as the waste/pollution is cleaned up better afterwards -LRB- water treatment , filtering , ... -RRB- ... .
If there were fewer people however , this multiplier would be lower , and thus the amount of environmental degradation would be lower as well .
As such , the current high level of population has a large impact on this as well .
Rawls does not discuss the full implications of his theory of justice .
Some see Rawls 's argument as a justification for capitalism since even the poorest members of society theoretically benefit from increased innovations under capitalism ; others believe only a strong welfare state can satisfy Rawls 's theory of justice .
As a result , income and economic inequality increases , and it becomes more difficult to reduce the gap without additional aid .
The programme depicts the adventures of the Doctor , a Time Lord -- a space and time-travelling humanoid alien .
Accompanied by companions , the Doctor combats a variety of foes , while working to save civilisations and help people in need .
The show is a significant part of British popular culture , and elsewhere it has become a cult television favourite .
The show has influenced generations of British television professionals , many of whom grew up watching the series .
There was an unsuccessful attempt to revive regular production in 1996 with a backdoor pilot , in the form of a television film .
There also have been many spoofs and cultural references to the character in other media .
The transition from one actor to another is written into the plot of the show , as well as the differing approach to the role that each brings , under the concept of regeneration into a new incarnation .
Each actor 's portrayal differs , but they are all intended to be aspects of the same character and form part of the same storyline .
The time-travelling nature of the plot means that , on occasion , different Doctors have met each other .
He often finds events that pique his curiosity as he tries to prevent evil forces from harming innocent people or changing history , using only his ingenuity and minimal resources , such as his versatile sonic screwdriver .
Discussions and plans for the programme had been in progress for a year .
The head of drama , Canadian Sydney Newman , was mainly responsible for developing the programme , with the first format document for the series being written by Newman along with the head of the script department -LRB- later head of serials -RRB- Donald Wilson and staff writer C. E. Webber .
Writer Anthony Coburn , story editor David Whitaker and initial producer Verity Lambert also heavily contributed to the development of the series .
-LSB- note 1 -RSB- The programme was originally intended to appeal to a family audience , as an educational programme using time travel as a means to explore scientific ideas and famous moments in history .
As originally written , the Daleks and Thals were the victims of an alien neutron bomb attack but Nation later dropped the aliens and made the Daleks the aggressors .
The first serial had been completed and the BBC believed it was crucial that the next one be a success , but The Mutants was the only script ready to go , so the show had little choice but to use it .
According to producer Verity Lambert ; `` We did n't have a lot of choice -- we only had the Dalek serial to go ... We had a bit of a crisis of confidence because Donald -LSB- Wilson -RSB- was so adamant that we should n't make it .
Had we had anything else ready we would have made that . ''
Nation 's script became the second Doctor Who serial -- The Daleks -LRB- a.k.a. .
The Mutants -RRB- .
The serial introduced the eponymous aliens that would become the series ' most popular monsters , and was responsible for the BBC 's first merchandising boom .
In 2010 , Steven Moffat replaced Davies as head writer and executive producer .
In addition , Series 10 will debut in Spring 2017 , with a Christmas special broadcast in 2016 .
The electronic theme music too was perceived as eerie , novel , and frightening , at the time .
During the original run , each weekly episode formed part of a story -LRB- or `` serial '' -RRB- -- usually of four to six parts in earlier years and three to four in later years .
Each series includes several standalone and multi-part stories , linked with a loose story arc that resolves in the series finale .
As in the early `` classic '' era , each episode , whether standalone or part of a larger story , has its own title .
Four mini-episodes , running about eight minutes each , were also produced for the 1993 , 2005 and 2007 Children in Need charity appeals , while another mini-episode was produced in 2008 for a Doctor Who-themed edition of The Proms .
The 1993 2-part story , entitled Dimensions in Time , was made in collaboration with the cast of the BBC soap-opera EastEnders and was filmed partly on the EastEnders set .
A two-part mini-episode was also produced for the 2011 edition of Comic Relief .
Subsequent animations made in 2013 include The Tenth Planet , The Ice Warriors and The Moonbase .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The device has allowed for the recasting of the actor various times in the show 's history , as well as the depiction of alternative Doctors either from the Doctor 's relative past or future .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
This line became stuck in the public consciousness despite not often being repeated , and was recognised by producers of the show as a plot obstacle for when the show finally had to regenerate the Doctor a thirteenth time .
In addition to those actors who have headlined the series , others have portrayed versions of the Doctor in guest roles .
There have been instances of actors returning at later dates to reprise the role of their specific Doctor .
For 1983 's The Five Doctors , Troughton and Pertwee returned to star with Peter Davison , and Tom Baker appeared in previously unseen footage from the uncompleted Shada episode .
For this episode , Richard Hurndall replaced William Hartnell .
Patrick Troughton again returned in 1985 's The Two Doctors with Colin Baker .
In addition , the Doctor has occasionally encountered himself in the form of his own incarnation , from the near future or past .
In `` The Almost People '' the Doctor comes face-to-face with himself although it is found out that this incarnation is in fact just a flesh replica .
Additionally , multiple Doctors have returned in new adventures together in audio dramas based on the series .
Throughout the programme 's long history , there have been revelations about the Doctor that have raised additional questions .
In subsequent stories the First Doctor was depicted as the earliest incarnation of the Doctor .
So there are five of me now . ''
The name Eleventh is still used for this incarnation ; the same episode depicts the prophesied `` Fall of the Eleventh '' which had been trailed throughout the series .
In the 1967 serial , Tomb of the Cybermen , when Victoria Waterfield doubts the Doctor can remember his family because of , `` being so ancient '' , the Doctor says that he can when he really wants to -- `` The rest of the time they sleep in my mind '' .
Now I am neither . ''
The Doctor remarks in response , `` Yeah , I know the feeling . ''
In both `` Fear Her '' -LRB- 2006 -RRB- and `` The Doctor 's Daughter '' -LRB- 2008 -RRB- , he states that he had , in the past , been a father .
One of the roles of the companion is to remind the Doctor of his `` moral duty '' .
These characters were intended to act as audience surrogates , through which the audience would discover information about the Doctor who was to act as a mysterious father figure .
Dramatically , these characters provide a figure with whom the audience can identify , and serve to further the story by requesting exposition from the Doctor and manufacturing peril for the Doctor to resolve .
The Doctor regularly gains new companions and loses old ones ; sometimes they return home or find new causes -- or loves -- on worlds they have visited .
Some have died during the course of the series .
Companions are usually human , or humanoid aliens .
Steven Moffat described the companion as the main character of the show , as the story begins anew with each companion and she undergoes more change than the Doctor .
Since its 2005 return , the series has also introduced new recurring aliens : Slitheen -LRB- Raxacoricofallapatorian -RRB- , Ood , Judoon , Weeping Angels and the Silence .
The actual creatures resemble octopi with large , pronounced brains .
Their armour shells have a single eye-stalk , a sink-plunger-like device that serves the purpose of a hand , and a directed-energy weapon .
They even attack the Time Lords in the Time War , as shown during the 50th Anniversary of the show .
They continue to be a recurring ` monster ' within the Doctor Who franchise , their most recent appearances being in the 2015 episodes `` The Witch 's Familiar '' and `` Hell Bent '' .
Davros has also been a recurring figure since his debut in Genesis of the Daleks , although played by several different actors .
The Master was briefly played by Peter Pratt and Geoffrey Beevers until Anthony Ainley took over and continued to play the character until Doctor Who 's hiatus in 1989 .
During that story the role was then assumed by John Simm who returned to the role multiple times through the Tenth Doctor 's tenure .
It is regarded as a significant and innovative piece of electronic music , recorded well before the availability of commercial synthesisers or multitrack mixers .
Each note was individually created by cutting , splicing , speeding up and slowing down segments of analogue tape containing recordings of a single plucked string , white noise , and the simple harmonic waveforms of test-tone oscillators , intended for calibrating equipment and rooms , not creating music .
New techniques were invented to allow mixing of the music , as this was before the era of multitrack tape machines .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
American composer John Debney created a new arrangement of Ron Grainer 's original theme for Doctor Who in 1996 .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
He was responsible for a new version of the theme which was reported to have had a hostile reception from some viewers .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Versions of the `` Doctor Who Theme '' have also been released as pop music over the years .
Others who have covered or reinterpreted the theme include Orbital , Pink Floyd , the Australian string ensemble Fourplay , New Zealand punk band Blam Blam Blam , The Pogues , Thin Lizzy , Dub Syndicate , and the comedians Bill Bailey and Mitch Benn .
Both the theme and obsessive fans were satirised on The Chaser 's War on Everything .
The theme tune has also appeared on many compilation CDs , and has made its way into mobile-phone ringtones .
Fans have also produced and distributed their own remixes of the theme .
In January 2011 the Mankind version was released as a digital download on the album Gallifrey And Beyond .
A concert featuring the orchestra performing music from the first two series took place on 19 November 2006 to raise money for Children in Need .
David Tennant hosted the event , introducing the different sections of the concert .
Murray Gold and Russell T Davies answered questions during the interval and Daleks and Cybermen appeared whilst music from their stories was played .
The concert aired on BBCi on Christmas Day 2006 .
The BBC Philharmonic and the London Philharmonic Choir performed Murray Gold 's compositions for the series , conducted by Ben Foster , as well as a selection of classics based on the theme of space and time .
The event was presented by Freema Agyeman and guest-presented by various other stars of the show with numerous monsters participating in the proceedings .
The logo used in the television movie featuring the Eighth Doctor was an updated version of the logo used for the Third Doctor .
The following logo , while most associated with the Fifth Doctor , was also used for the Fourth Doctor 's final season .
The logo used for the Ninth Doctor was slightly edited for the Tenth Doctor , but it retained the same general appearance .
The logo used for the Eleventh Doctor had the `` DW '' TARDIS insignia placed to the right in 2012 , but the same font remained , albeit with a slight edit to the texture every episode , with the texture relating to some aspect of the story .
The programme 's popularity has waxed and waned over the decades , with three notable periods of high ratings .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Figures remained respectable into the 1980s , but fell noticeably after the programme 's 23rd series was postponed in 1985 and the show was off the air for 18 months .
Only four episodes have ever had their premiere showings on channels other than BBC One .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
CBC began showing the series again in 2005 .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Every fully extant serial has been released on VHS , and BBC Worldwide continues to regularly release serials on DVD .
The 2005 series is also available in its entirety on UMD for the PlayStation Portable .
Many early releases have been re-released as special editions , with more bonus features .
Doctor Who has appeared on stage numerous times .
John Barrowman reprised his role of Jack Harkness from the 2005 series of Doctor Who .
Two other actresses who appeared in Doctor Who also star in the series ; Eve Myles as Gwen Cooper , who also played the similarly named servant girl Gwyneth in the 2005 Doctor Who episode `` The Unquiet Dead '' , and Naoko Mori who reprised her role as Toshiko Sato first seen in `` Aliens of London '' .
The series was predominantly set in the United States , though Wales remained part of the show 's setting .
A second series followed in 2008 , notable for -LRB- as noted above -RRB- featuring the return of Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart .
It has also be referenced in Destroy All Humans !
2 , by civilians in the game 's variation of England , and in Apollo Justice : Ace Attorney .
Along with the main range , adventures of the First , Second and Third Doctors have been produced in both limited cast and full cast formats , as well as audiobooks .
The revived series has received recognition from critics and the public , across various awards ceremonies .
It was also nominated for 7 Saturn Awards , winning the only Best International Series in the ceremony 's history .
, Futurama , South Park , Community as Inspector Spacetime , The Simpsons and The Big Bang Theory .
Beyond the arts and sciences , Chicago is also well known for its professional schools , which include the Pritzker School of Medicine , the University of Chicago Booth School of Business , the Law School , the School of Social Service Administration , the Harris School of Public Policy Studies , the Graham School of Continuing Liberal and Professional Studies and the Divinity School .
Chicago 's research pursuits have been aided by unique affiliations with world-renowned institutions like the nearby Fermilab and Argonne National Laboratory , as well as the Marine Biological Laboratory .
Both Harper and future president Robert Maynard Hutchins advocated for Chicago 's curriculum to be based upon theoretical and perennial issues rather than on applied sciences and commercial utility .
With Harper 's vision in mind , the University of Chicago also became one of the 14 founding members of the Association of American Universities , an international organization of leading research universities , in 1900 .
While the Rockefeller donation provided money for academic operations and long-term endowment , it was stipulated that such money could not be used for buildings .
Under the terms of the affiliation , the schools were required to have courses of study comparable to those at the university , to notify the university early of any contemplated faculty appointments or dismissals , to make no faculty appointment without the university 's approval , and to send copies of examinations for suggestions .
A student or faculty member of an affiliated school was entitled to free tuition at the University of Chicago , and Chicago students were eligible to attend an affiliated school on the same terms and receive credit for their work .
The University of Chicago also agreed to provide affiliated schools with books and scientific apparatus and supplies at cost ; special instructors and lecturers without cost except travel expenses ; and a copy of every book and journal published by the University of Chicago Press at no cost .
The agreement provided that either party could terminate the affiliation on proper notice .
Several University of Chicago professors disliked the program , as it involved uncompensated additional labor on their part , and they believed it cheapened the academic reputation of the university .
four divisions .
In 1933 , Hutchins proposed an unsuccessful plan to merge the University of Chicago and Northwestern University into a single university .
During his term , the University of Chicago Hospitals -LRB- now called the University of Chicago Medical Center -RRB- finished construction and enrolled its first medical students .
Also , the Committee on Social Thought , an institution distinctive of the university , was created .
The report has since been used to justify decisions such as the university 's refusal to divest from South Africa in the 1980s and Darfur in the late 2000s .
In 2009 , planning or construction on several new buildings , half of which cost $ 100 million or more , was underway .
Since 2011 , major construction projects have included the Jules and Gwen Knapp Center for Biomedical Discovery , a ten-story medical research center , and further additions to the medical campus of the University of Chicago Medical Center .
In 2014 the University launched the public phase of a $ 4.5 billion fundraising campaign .
In September 2015 , the University received $ 100 million from The Pearson Family Foundation to establish The Pearson Institute for the Study and Resolution of Global Conflicts and The Pearson Global Forum at the Harris School of Public Policy Studies .
In 2011 , the university completed the glass dome-shaped Joe and Rika Mansueto Library , which provides a grand reading room for the university library and prevents the need for an off-campus book depository .
The University of Chicago also maintains facilities apart from its main campus .
In December 2013 it was announced that the Director of Argonne National Laboratory , Eric Isaacs , would become Provost .
Isaacs was replaced as Provost in March 2016 by Daniel Diermeier .
The university also contains a library system , the University of Chicago Press , the University of Chicago Laboratory Schools , and the University of Chicago Medical Center , and holds ties with a number of independent academic institutions , including Fermilab , Argonne National Laboratory , and the Marine Biological Laboratory .
As of the 2013 -- 2014 school year , 15 courses and demonstrated proficiency in a foreign language are required under the Core .
The university runs a number of academic institutions and programs apart from its undergraduate and postgraduate schools .
Since 1983 , the University of Chicago has maintained the University of Chicago School Mathematics Project , a mathematics program used in urban primary and secondary schools .
The university runs a program called the Council on Advanced Studies in the Social Sciences and Humanities , which administers interdisciplinary workshops to provide a forum for graduate students , faculty , and visiting scholars to present scholarly work in progress .
The university also operates the University of Chicago Press , the largest university press in the United States .
The university also operates a number of special libraries , including the D'Angelo Law Library , the Social Service Administration Library , and the Eckhart Library for mathematics and computer science , which closed temporarily for renovation on July 8 , 2013 .
Harper Memorial Library no longer contains any volumes ; however it is , in addition to the Regenstein Library , a 24-hour study space on campus .
Chicago also operates or is affiliated with a number of research institutions apart from the university proper .
Faculty and students at the adjacent Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago collaborate with the university , In 2013 , the university announced that it was affiliating the formerly independent Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole , Mass. .
Although formally unrelated , the National Opinion Research Center is located on Chicago 's campus .
The University of Chicago has been the site of some important experiments and academic movements .
The university 's sociology department was the first independent sociology department in the United States and gave birth to the Chicago school of sociology .
The UChicago Arts program joins academic departments and programs in the Division of the Humanities and the College , as well as professional organizations including the Court Theatre , the Oriental Institute , the Smart Museum of Art , the Renaissance Society , University of Chicago Presents , and student arts organizations .
The university has an artist-in-residence program and scholars in performance studies , contemporary art criticism , and film history .
The College 's general education core includes a `` dramatic , music , and visual arts '' requirement , requiring students to study the history of the arts , stage desire , or begin working with sculpture .
UChicago is often considered the birthplace of improvisational comedy as the Compass Players student comedy troupe evolved into The Second City improv theater troupe in 1959 .
The Reva and David Logan Center for the Arts opened in October 2012 , five years after a $ 35 million gift from alumnus David Logan and his wife Reva .
The center includes spaces for exhibitions , performances , classes , and media production .
The Logan Center was designed by Tod Williams and Billie Tsien .
This building is actually entirely glass .
The brick is a facade designed to keep the glass safe from the wind .
The architects later removed sections of the bricks when pressure arose in the form of complaints that the views of the city were blocked .
Admissions to the University of Chicago is highly selective .
The middle 50 % band of SAT scores for the undergraduate class of 2015 , excluding the writing section , was 1420 -- 1530 , the average MCAT score for entering students in the Pritzker School of Medicine in 2011 was 36 , and the median LSAT score for entering students in the Law School in 2011 was 171 .
In 2015 , the College of the University of Chicago had an acceptance rate of 7.8 % for the Class of 2019 , the lowest in the college 's history .
In 1935 , the University of Chicago reached the Sweet Sixteen .
-LRB- In 1969 , Chicago reinstated football as a Division III team , resuming playing its home games at the new Stagg Field . -RRB-
These include cultural and religious groups , academic clubs and teams , and common-interest organizations .
The university 's competitive Model United Nations team was the top ranked team in North America in 2013-14 and 2014-2015 .
All Recognized Student Organizations , from the University of Chicago Scavenger Hunt to Model UN , in addition to academic teams , sports club , arts groups , and more are funded by The University of Chicago Student Government .
In 2002 , the Associate Director of Student Activities estimated that 8 -- 10 percent of undergraduates were members of fraternities or sororities .
The student activities office has used similar figures , stating that one in ten undergraduates participate in Greek life .
Since 1946 , the university has organized the Latke-Hamantash Debate , which involves humorous discussions about the relative merits and meanings of latkes and hamantashen .
Nuclear physicist and researcher Stanton Friedman , who worked on some early projects involving nuclear-powered spacecraft propulsion systems , is also a graduate -LRB- M.Sc -RRB- .
American economist , social theorist , political philosopher , and author Thomas Sowell is also an alumnus .
His realm was , by this point , isolated from the other khanates and controlled most of present-day China and its surrounding areas , including modern Mongolia and Korea .
It was the first foreign dynasty to rule all of China and lasted until 1368 , after which its Genghisid rulers returned to their Mongolian homeland and continued to rule the Northern Yuan dynasty .
Some of the Mongolian Emperors of the Yuan mastered the Chinese language , while others only used their native language -LRB- i.e. Mongolian -RRB- and the ` Phags-pa script .
It was the khanate ruled by the successors of Möngke Khan after the division of the Mongol Empire .
-LSB- b -RSB- In the Proclamation of the Dynastic Name -LRB- 建國號詔 -RRB- , Kublai announced the name of the new dynasty as Great Yuan and claimed the succession of former Chinese dynasties from the Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors to the Tang dynasty .
In Mongolian , Dai Ön -LRB- Great Yuan -RRB- is often used in conjunction with the `` Yeke Mongghul Ulus '' -LRB- lit .
The Yuan dynasty is also known as the `` Mongol dynasty '' or `` Mongol Dynasty of China '' , similar to the names `` Manchu dynasty '' or `` Manchu Dynasty of China '' for the Qing dynasty .
Nevertheless , both terms can also refer to the khanate within the Mongol Empire directly ruled by Great Khans before the actual establishment of the Yuan dynasty by Kublai Khan in 1271 .
He and his successors expanded the Mongol empire across Asia .
Kublai was unable to read Chinese but had several Han Chinese teachers attached to him since his early years by his mother Sorghaghtani .
He sought the counsel of Chinese Buddhist and Confucian advisers .
He granted his brother Kublai control over Mongol held territories in China .
Kublai built schools for Confucian scholars , issued paper money , revived Chinese rituals , and endorsed policies that stimulated agricultural and commercial growth .
He adopted as his capital city Kaiping in Inner Mongolia , later renamed Shangdu .
Liu Heima and Shi Tianze served Ogödei Khan .
Liu Heima and Shi Tianxiang led armies against Western Xia for the Mongols .
The three Khitan Generals Shimobeidier -LRB- 石抹孛迭兒 -RRB- , Tabuyir -LRB- 塔不已兒 -RRB- and Xiaozhacizhizizhongxi -LRB- 蕭札刺之子重喜 -RRB- commanded the three Khitan Tumens and the four Han Generals Zhang Rou , Yan Shi , Shi Tianze , and Liu Heima commanded the four Han tumens under Ogödei Khan .
Shi Bingzhi was married to a Jurchen woman -LRB- surname Na-ho -RRB- and a Han Chinese woman -LRB- surname Chang -RRB- ; it is unknown which of them was Shi Tianze 's mother .
Shi Tianze was married to two Jurchen women , a Han Chinese woman , and a Korean woman , and his son Shi Gang was born to one of his Jurchen wives .
The surnames of his Jurchen wives were Mo-nien and Na-ho ; the surname of his Korean wife was Li ; and the surname of his Han Chinese wife was Shi .
Shi Tianze defected to Mongol forces upon their invasion of the Jin dynasty .
His son Shi Gang married a Kerait woman ; the Kerait were Mongolified Turkic people and were considered part of the `` Mongol nation '' .
Shi Tianze -LRB- Shih T'ien - tse -RRB- , Zhang Rou -LRB- Chang Jou , 張柔 -RRB- , and Yan Shi -LRB- Yen Shih , 嚴實 -RRB- and other high ranking Chinese who served in the Jin dynasty and defected to the Mongols helped build the structure for the administration of the new state .
The Mongol force that invaded southern China was far greater than the force they sent to invade the Middle East in 1256 .
Kublai convened a kurultai in Kaiping that elected him Great Khan .
A rival kurultai in Mongolia proclaimed Ariq Böke Great Khan , beginning a civil war .
Kublai depended on the cooperation of his Chinese subjects to ensure that his army received ample resources .
Ariq Böke was hampered by inadequate supplies and surrendered in 1264 .
All of the three western khanates -LRB- Golden Horde , Chagatai Khanate and Ilkhanate -RRB- became functionally autonomous , although only the Ilkhans truly recognized Kublai as Great Khan .
Civil strife had permanently divided the Mongol Empire .
Instability troubled the early years of Kublai Khan 's reign .
Kublai was also threatened by domestic unrest .
After successfully suppressing the revolt , Kublai curbed the influence of the Han Chinese advisers in his court .
He feared that his dependence on Chinese officials left him vulnerable to future revolts and defections to the Song .
Kublai 's Chinese advisers still wielded significant power in the government , but their official rank was nebulous .
In 1271 , Kublai formally claimed the Mandate of Heaven and declared that 1272 was the first year of the Great Yuan -LRB- Chinese : 大元 -RRB- in the style of a traditional Chinese dynasty .
The name of the dynasty originated from the I Ching and describes the `` origin of the universe '' or a `` primal force '' .
Kublai proclaimed Khanbaliq the `` Great Capital '' or Daidu -LRB- Dadu , Chinese : 大都 in Chinese -RRB- of the dynasty .
The era name was changed to Zhiyuan to herald a new era of Chinese history .
The adoption of a dynastic name legitimized Mongol rule by integrating the government into the narrative of traditional Chinese political succession .
He supported the merchants of the Silk Road trade network by protecting the Mongol postal system , constructing infrastructure , providing loans that financed trade caravans , and encouraging the circulation of paper banknotes -LRB- 鈔 , Chao -RRB- .
Mongol rule was cosmopolitan under Kublai Khan .
Marco Polo 's travels would later inspire many others like Christopher Columbus to chart a passage to the Far East in search of its legendary wealth .
From that time up until the Yuan dynasty , there were two Duke Yanshengs , once in the north in Qufu and the other in the south at Quzhou .
During the Yuan dynasty , the Emperor Kublai Khan invited the southern Duke Yansheng Kong Zhu to return to Qufu .
Kong Zhu refused , and gave up the title , so the northern branch of the family kept the title of Duke Yansheng .
The southern branch still remained in Quzhou where they lived to this day .
During the Yuan dynasty , one of Confucius ' descendants moved from China to Goryeo era Korea and established a branch of the family there after marrying a Korean woman .
He renewed a massive drive against the Song dynasty to the south .
An unsuccessful naval expedition was undertaken against Japan in 1274 .
Song loyalists escaped from the capital and enthroned a young child as Emperor Bing of Song .
The Mongols defeated the loyalists at the battle of Yamen in 1279 .
The conquest of the Song reunited northern and southern China for the first time in three hundred years .
Wars and construction projects had drained the Mongol treasury .
Efforts to raise and collect tax revenues were plagued by corruption and political scandals .
Mishandled military expeditions followed the financial problems .
Kublai botched his campaigns against Annam , Champa , and Java , but won a Pyrrhic victory against Burma .
The expeditions were hampered by disease , an inhospitable climate , and a tropical terrain unsuitable for the mounted warfare of the Mongols .
The Chinese region of Fujian was the original home of the Chinese Tran -LRB- Chen -RRB- clan before they migrated under Trần Kinh -LRB- 陳京 , Chén Jīng -RRB- to Dai Viet and whose descendants established the Trần dynasty which ruled Vietnam Đại Việt , and certain members of the clan could still speak Chinese such as when a Yuan dynasty envoy had a meeting with the Chinese-speaking Trần prince Trần Quốc Tuấn -LRB- later King Trần Hưng Đạo -RRB- in 1282 .
Professor Liam Kelley noted that people from Song dynasty China like Zhao Zhong and Xu Zongdao fled to Tran dynasty ruled Vietnam after the Mongol invasion of the Song and they helped the Tran fight against the Mongol invasion .
The Tran dynasty originated from the Fujian region of China as did the Daoist cleric Xu Zongdao who recorded the Mongol invasion and referred to them as `` Northern bandits '' .
Annam , Burma , and Champa recognized Mongol hegemony and established tributary relations with the Yuan dynasty .
Succession for the Yuan dynasty , however , was an intractable problem , later causing much strife and internal struggle .
This emerged as early as the end of Kublai 's reign .
Temür Khan decided to maintain and continue much of the work begun by his grandfather .
He also made peace with the western Mongol khanates as well as neighboring countries such as Vietnam , which recognized his nominal suzerainty and paid tributes for a few decades .
However , the corruption in the Yuan dynasty began during the reign of Temür Khan .
Also , he codified much of the law , as well as publishing or translating a number of Chinese books and works .
They placed Yesün Temür -LRB- or Taidingdi -RRB- on the throne , and , after an unsuccessful attempt to calm the princes , he also succumbed to regicide .
He was installed as the emperor -LRB- Emperor Wenzong -RRB- in Khanbaliq , while Yesün Temür 's son Ragibagh succeeded to the throne in Shangdu with the support of Yesün Temür 's favorite retainer Dawlat Shah .
Afterwards , Tugh Temür abdicated in favour of his brother Kusala , who was backed by Chagatai Khan Eljigidey , and announced Khanbaliq 's intent to welcome him .
Tugh Temür also managed to send delegates to the western Mongol khanates such as Golden Horde and Ilkhanate to be accepted as the suzerain of Mongol world .
However , he was mainly a puppet of the powerful official El Temür during his latter three-year reign .
El Temür purged pro-Kusala officials and brought power to warlords , whose despotic rule clearly marked the decline of the dynasty .
He adopted many measures honoring Confucianism and promoting Chinese cultural values .
After El Temür 's death , Bayan became as powerful an official as El Temür had been in the beginning of his long reign .
As Toghun Temür grew , he came to disapprove of Bayan 's autocratic rule .
In 1340 he allied himself with Bayan 's nephew Toqto'a , who was in discord with Bayan , and banished Bayan by coup .
With the dismissal of Bayan , Toghtogha seized the power of the court .
His first administration clearly exhibited fresh new spirit .
He also gave a few early signs of a new and positive direction in central government .
Yet , Toghtogha resigned his office with the approval of Toghun Temür , marking the end of his first administration , and he was not called back until 1349 .
Gradually , they lost influence in China as well .
The reigns of the later Yuan emperors were short and marked by intrigues and rivalries .
This resulted in Toghun Temür 's restoration of power on the one hand and a rapid weakening of the central government on the other .
He had no choice but to rely on local warlords ' military power , and gradually lost his interest in politics and ceased to intervene in political struggles .
He had tried to regain Khanbaliq , which eventually failed ; he died in Yingchang -LRB- located in present-day Inner Mongolia -RRB- two years later -LRB- 1370 -RRB- .
Yingchang was seized by the Ming shortly after his death .
Some royal family members still lived in Henan today .
A rich cultural diversity developed during the Yuan dynasty .
The major cultural achievements were the development of drama and the novel and the increased use of the written vernacular .
The other cultures and peoples in the Mongol World Empire also very much influenced China .
Buddhism had a great influence in the Yuan government , and the Tibetan-rite Tantric Buddhism had significantly influenced China during this period .
The Muslims of the Yuan dynasty introduced Middle Eastern cartography , astronomy , medicine , clothing , and diet in East Asia .
From this period dates the conversion to Islam , by Muslims of Central Asia , of growing numbers of Chinese in the northwest and southwest .
The first recorded travels by Europeans to China and back date from this time .
Some argue over the accuracy of Marco Polo 's accounts due to the lack of mentioning the Great Wall of China , tea houses , which would have been a prominent sight since Europeans had yet to adopt a tea culture , as well the practice of foot binding by the women in capital of the Great Khan .
The Yuan undertook extensive public works .
Road and water communications were reorganized and improved .
The city of Beijing was rebuilt with new palace grounds that included artificial lakes , hills and mountains , and parks .
These commercially oriented improvements encouraged overland and maritime commerce throughout Asia and facilitated direct Chinese contacts with Europe .
Chinese travelers to the West were able to provide assistance in such areas as hydraulic engineering .
In the historiography of Mongolia , it is generally considered to be the continuation of the Mongol Empire .
Note , however , Yuan dynasty is traditionally often extended to cover the Mongol Empire before Kublai Khan 's formal establishment of the Yuan in 1271 , partly because Kublai had his grandfather Genghis Khan placed on the official record as the founder of the dynasty or Taizu -LRB- Chinese : 太祖 -RRB- .
Despite the traditional historiography as well as the official views -LRB- including the government of the Ming dynasty which overthrew the Yuan dynasty -RRB- , there also exist Chinese people -LSB- who ? -RSB-
The latter believe that Han Chinese were treated as second-class citizens , -LSB- citation needed -RSB- and that China stagnated economically and scientifically .
While the official terminology of the institutions may indicate the government structure was almost purely that of native Chinese dynasties , the Yuan bureaucracy actually consisted of a mix of elements from different cultures .
The actual functions of both central and local government institutions , however , showed a major overlap between the civil and military jurisdictions , due to the Mongol traditional reliance on military institutions and offices as the core of governance .
Nevertheless , such a civilian bureaucracy , with the Central Secretariat as the top institution that was -LRB- directly or indirectly -RRB- responsible for most other governmental agencies -LRB- such as the traditional Chinese-style Six Ministries -RRB- , was created in China .
At various times another central government institution called the Department of State Affairs -LRB- Shangshu Sheng -RRB- that mainly dealt with finance was established -LRB- such as during the reign of Külüg Khan or Emperor Wuzong -RRB- , but was usually abandoned shortly afterwards .
Cases involving members of more than one ethnic group were decided by a mixed board consisting of Chinese and Mongols .
The Mongol Emperors had built large palaces and pavilions , but some still continued to live as nomads at times .
Kublai wished to persuade the Chinese that he was becoming increasingly sinicized while maintaining his Mongolian credentials with his own people .
He set up a civilian administration to rule , built a capital within China , supported Chinese religions and culture , and devised suitable economic and political institutions for the court .
But at the same time he never abandoned his Mongolian heritage .
In the area of Chinese painting during the Yuan dynasty there were many famous painters .
In the area of calligraphy many of the great calligraphers were from the Yuan dynasty era .
Many of the poets were also involved in the major developments in the theater during this time , and the other way around , with people important in the theater becoming famous through the development of the sanqu type of qu .
One of the important cultural developments during the Yuan era was the consolidation of poetry , painting , and calligraphy into a unified piece of the type that tends to come to mind when people think of classical Chinese art .
Another important aspect of Yuan times is the increasing incorporation of the then current , vernacular Chinese into both the qu form of poetry and the zaju variety show .
Another important consideration regarding Yuan dynasty arts and culture is that so much of it has survived in China , relatively to works from the Tang dynasty and Song dynasty , which have often been better preserved in places such as the Shōsōin , in Japan .
There were many religions practiced during the Yuan dynasty , such as Buddhism , Islam , and Christianity .
The establishment of the Yuan dynasty had dramatically increased the number of Muslims in China .
He and his successors kept a Sakya Imperial Preceptor -LRB- Dishi -RRB- at court .
Before the end of the Yuan dynasty , 14 leaders of the Sakya sect had held the post of Imperial Preceptor , thereby enjoying special power .
Furthermore , Mongol patronage of Buddhism resulted in a number of monuments of Buddhist art .
Mongolian Buddhist translations , almost all from Tibetan originals , began on a large scale after 1300 .
Many Mongols of the upper class such as the Jalayir and the Oronar nobles as well as the emperors also patronized Confucian scholars and institutions .
A considerable number of Confucian and Chinese historical works were translated into the Mongolian language .
Zhu used a method of elimination to reduce the simultaneous equations to a single equation with only one unknown .
The opening pages contain a diagram of Pascal 's triangle .
The summation of a finite arithmetic series is also covered in the book .
He was one of the first mathematicians in China to work on spherical trigonometry .
The calendar may have been influenced solely by the work of Song dynasty astronomer Shen Kuo or possibly by the work of Arab astronomers .
There are no explicit signs of Muslim influences in the Shoushi calendar , but Mongol rulers were known to be interested in Muslim calendars .
Mathematical knowledge from the Middle East was introduced to China under the Mongols , and Muslim astronomers brought Arabic numerals to China in the 13th century .
The physicians of the Yuan court came from diverse cultures .
Physicians received official support from the Yuan government and were given special legal privileges .
Under the Mongols , the practice of Chinese medicine spread to other parts of the empire .
Several medical advances were made in the Yuan period .
The Mongol physician Hu Sihui described the importance of a healthy diet in a 1330 medical treatise .
Huihui doctors staffed at two imperial hospitals were responsible for treating the imperial family and members of the court .
No Chinese translation of Western medical works is known , but it is possible that the Chinese had access to Avicenna 's The Canon of Medicine .
The Mongol rulers patronized the Yuan printing industry .
However , most published works were still produced through traditional block printing techniques .
The Yuan government established centers for printing throughout China .
Local schools and government agencies were funded to support the publishing of books .
The Mongols experimented with establishing the Chinese-style paper monetary system in Mongol-controlled territories outside of China .
The Yuan minister Bolad was sent to Iran , where he explained Yuan paper money to the Il-khanate court of Gaykhatu .
Nevertheless , socially the educated Chinese elite were in general not given the degree of esteem that they had been accorded previously under native Chinese dynasties .
The unequal treatment is possibly due to the fear of transferring power to the ethnic Chinese under their rule .
The Mongols and Semuren were given certain advantages in the dynasty , and this would last even after the restoration of the imperial examination in the early 14th century .
Later the Yongle Emperor of the Ming dynasty also mentioned the discrimination that existed during the Yuan dynasty .
In response to an objection against the use of `` barbarians '' in his government , the Yongle Emperor answered : '' ... Discrimination was used by the Mongols during the Yuan dynasty , who employed only `` Mongols and Tartars '' and discarded northern and southern Chinese and this was precisely the cause that brought disaster upon them '' .
Alans were recruited into the Mongol forces with one unit called `` Right Alan Guard '' which was combined with `` recently surrendered '' soldiers , Mongols , and Chinese soldiers stationed in the area of the former Kingdom of Qocho and in Besh Balikh the Mongols established a Chinese military colony led by Chinese general Qi Kongzhi -LRB- Ch ' i Kung-chih -RRB- .
After the Mongol conquest of Central Asia by Genghis Khan , foreigners were chosen as administrators and co-management with Chinese and Qara-Khitays -LRB- Khitans -RRB- of gardens and fields in Samarqand was put upon the Muslims as a requirement since Muslims were not allowed to manage without them .
Toward the end , corruption and the persecution became so severe that Muslim generals joined Han Chinese in rebelling against the Mongols .
Many Hui Muslims claim this is because that they played an important role in overthrowing the Mongols and it was given in thanks by the Han Chinese for assisting them .
During the war fighting the Mongols , among the Ming Emperor Zhu Yuanzhang 's armies was the Hui Muslim Feng Sheng .
The reason for the order of the classes and the reason why people were placed in a certain class was the date they surrendered to the Mongols , and had nothing to do with their ethnicity .
Kenya 's territory lies on the equator and overlies the East African Rift covering a diverse and expansive terrain that extends roughly from Lake Victoria to Lake Turkana -LRB- formerly called Lake Rudolf -RRB- and further south-east to the Indian Ocean .
Further inland , in the Nyanza region , there is a hot and dry climate which becomes humid around Lake Victoria , the largest tropical fresh-water lake in the world .
This gives way to temperate and forested hilly areas in the neighboring western region .
Kenya has several world heritage sites such as Lamu and numerous beaches , including in Diani , Bamburi and Kilifi , where international yachting competitions are held every year .
The borders of the modern state consequently comprise the crossroads of the Niger-Congo , Nilo-Saharan and Afroasiatic areas of the continent , representing most major ethnolinguistic groups found in Africa .
The British Empire established the East Africa Protectorate in 1895 , which starting in 1920 gave way to the Kenya Colony .
Following a referendum in August 2010 and adoption of a new constitution , Kenya is now divided into 47 semi-autonomous counties , governed by elected governors .
If so , then the British may not so much have mispronounced it -LRB- ` Keenya ' -RRB- , as misspelled it .
Prehistoric volcanic eruptions of Mount Kenya -LRB- now extinct -RRB- may have resulted in its association with divinity and creation among the indigenous Bantu ethnic groups , who are the native inhabitants of the agricultural land surrounding Mount Kenya .
-LSB- original research ? -RSB-
Controversy over the actual meaning of the word Kenya notwithstanding , it is clear that the mountain 's name became widely accepted , pars pro toto , as the name of the country .
A significant population of other wild animals , reptiles and birds can be found in the national parks and game reserves in the country .
This Serengeti Migration of the wildebeest is a curious spectacle listed among the 10 Natural Wonders of Africa .
Later work at the former site was undertaken by Glynn Isaac .
Malindi has traditionally been a friendly port city for foreign powers .
In 1414 , the Chinese trader and explorer Zheng He representing the Ming Dynasty visited the East African coast on one of his last ` treasure voyages ' .
Malindi authorities welcomed the Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama in 1498 .
A massive exodus to the cities ensued as their ability to provide a living from the land dwindled .
The operation effectively placed Nairobi under military siege , and the occupants were screened and the Mau Mau supporters moved to detention camps .
The Home Guard formed the core of the government 's strategy as it was composed of loyalist Africans , not foreign forces like the British Army and King 's African Rifles .
The capture of Dedan Kimathi on 21 October 1956 in Nyeri signified the ultimate defeat of the Mau Mau and essentially ended the military offensive .
During this period , substantial governmental changes to land tenure occurred .
The United Kingdom ceded sovereignty over the Colony of Kenya and , under an agreement dated 8 October 1963 , the Sultan of Zanzibar agreed that simultaneous with independence for the Colony of Kenya , the Sultan would cease to have sovereignty over the Protectorate of Kenya so that all of Kenya would be one sovereign , independent state .
Several contentious clauses , including one that allowed for only one political party were changed in the following years .
There was growing concern especially during former president Daniel arap Moi 's tenure that the executive was increasingly meddling with the affairs of the judiciary .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The elections were seen to have been flawed with international observers saying that they were below international standards .
After a split which took a crucial 8 % of the votes away from the ODM to the newly formed Orange Democratic Movement-Kenya -LRB- ODM-K -RRB- 's candidate , Kalonzo Musyoka , the race tightened between ODM candidate Raila Odinga and Kibaki .
As the count came into the Electoral Commission of Kenya -LRB- ECK -RRB- headquarters , Odinga was shown to have a slight , and then substantial lead as the results from his strongholds came in early .
The agreement stipulated that the cabinet would include a vice-president and two deputy Prime Ministers .
Kenyan lawmakers unanimously approved a power-sharing deal 18 March 2008 , aimed at salvaging a country usually seen as one of the most stable and prosperous in Africa .
The event was attended by various African leaders and praised by the international community .
Through the Jubillee Coalition , the Bill was later passed on 19 December in the National Assembly under acrimonious circumstances .
This has changed recently .
The important agricultural sector is one of the least developed and largely inefficient , employing 75 % of the workforce compared to less than 3 % in the food secure developed countries .
contributes 62 % of GDP .
The service , industry and manufacturing sectors only employ 25 % of the labour force but contribute 75 % of GDP .
Tourism has seen a substantial revival over the past several years and is the major contributor to the pick-up in the country 's economic growth .
Tourism is now Kenya 's largest foreign exchange earning sector , followed by flowers , tea , and coffee .
In 2006 tourism generated US$ 803 million , up from US$ 699 million the previous year .
Presently , there are also numerous Shopping Malls in Kenya .
In addition , there are four main hypermarket chains in Kenya .
Horticultural produce and tea are the main growth sectors and the two most valuable of all of Kenya 's exports .
Production downturns periodically necessitate food aid -- for example , in 2004 aid for 1.8 million people because of one of Kenya 's intermittent droughts .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Coconuts , pineapples , cashew nuts , cotton , sugarcane , sisal , and corn are grown in the lower-lying areas .
Poor roads , an inadequate railway network , under-used water transport and expensive air transport have isolated mostly arid and semi-arid areas and farmers in other regions often leave food to rot in the fields because they can not access markets .
There is a cement production industry .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Kenya has an oil refinery that processes imported crude petroleum into petroleum products , mainly for the domestic market .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Other initiatives to strengthen manufacturing have been the new government 's favourable tax measures , including the removal of duty on capital equipment and other raw materials .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
A petroleum-fired plant on the coast , geothermal facilities at Olkaria -LRB- near Nairobi -RRB- , and electricity imported from Uganda make up the rest of the supply .
Kenya 's installed capacity stood at 1,142 megawatts between 2001 and 2003 .
Shortfalls of electricity occur periodically , when drought reduces water flow .
To become energy sufficient , Kenya aims to build a nuclear power plant by 2017 .
Kenya currently imports all crude petroleum requirements .
Kenya , east Africa 's largest economy , has no strategic reserves and relies solely on oil marketers ' 21-day oil reserves required under industry regulations .
About 25,000 tonnes of ilmenite was flagged off the Kenyan coastal town of Kilifi .
The first shipment was expected to earn Kenya about Shs15 -- Shs20 Billion in earnings .
The 200-page Action Plan , developed with support from the Climate & Development Knowledge Network , sets out the Government of Kenya 's vision for a ` low carbon climate resilient development pathway ' .
This will create a direct and robust delivery framework for the Action Plan and ensure climate change is treated as an economy-wide issue .
Child labour is common in Kenya .
The Ministry of Gender and Child Affairs employed 400 child protection officers in 2009 .
Kenya has ratified Convention No. 81 on labour inspection in industries and Convention No. 129 on labour inspection in agriculture .
Peri-urban and rural dwellers are less multilingual , with many in rural areas speaking only their native languages .
Additionally , a distinct local dialect , Kenyan English , is used by some communities and individuals in the country , and contains features unique to it that were derived from local Bantu languages , such as Swahili and Kikuyu .
It has been developing since colonisation and also contains certain elements of American English .
Sheng is a Swahili-based cant spoken in some urban areas .
Primarily consisting of a mixture of Swahili and English , it is an example of linguistic code-switching .
There are smaller conservative Reformed churches , the Africa Evangelical Presbyterian Church , the Independent Presbyterian Church in Kenya , and the Reformed Church of East Africa .
621,200 of Kenyans are Orthodox Christians .
Notably , Kenya has the highest number of Quakers in the world , with around 133,000 members .
Roughly 4 % of Muslims are Ahmadiyya , 8 % Shia and another 8 % are non-denominational Muslims , while 73 % are Sunni .
The upper part of Kenya 's Eastern Region is home to 10 % of the country 's Muslims , where they constitute the majority religious group .
According to 2009 estimates , HIV prevalence is about 6.3 % of the adult population .
However , the 2011 UNAIDS Report suggests that the HIV epidemic may be improving in Kenya , as HIV prevalence is declining among young people -LRB- ages 15 -- 24 -RRB- and pregnant women .
Changes in the subject content of history and geography were made to reflect national cohesion .
All schools had a common curriculum .
Secondary and tertiary education enrolment has not increased proportionally because payment is still required for attendance .
In 2007 the government issued a statement declaring that from 2008 , secondary education would be heavily subsidiszed , with the government footing all tuition fees .
Graduates from the polytechnics and colleges can then join the workforce and later obtain a specialised higher diploma qualification after a further one to two years of training , or join the university -- usually in the second or third year of their respective course .
The higher diploma is accepted by many employers in place of a bachelor 's degree and direct or accelerated admission to post-graduate studies is possible in some universities .
The result of this examination is needed for placement at secondary school .
Primary school age is 6/7-13 / 14 years .
Students sit examinations in eight subjects of their choosing .
However , English , Kiswahili -LRB- languages -RRB- and mathematics are compulsory subjects .
In addition , some of the counties within the country have either established or taken over libraries within their regions .
Nairobi County operates four libraries within their network , which included the McMillan Memorial Library located at the central business district of Nairobi .
Kenya 's best-known athletes included the four-time women 's Boston Marathon winner and two-time world champion Catherine Ndereba , 800m world record holder David Rudisha , former Marathon world record-holder Paul Tergat , and John Ngugi .
Retired Olympic and Commonwealth Games champion Kipchoge Keino helped usher in Kenya 's ongoing distance dynasty in the 1970s and was followed by Commonwealth Champion Henry Rono 's spectacular string of world record performances .
The Kenyan Ministry of Sports has tried to stop the defections , but they have continued anyway , with Bernard Lagat the latest , choosing to represent the United States .
Some elite Kenyan runners who can not qualify for their country 's strong national team find it easier to qualify by running for other countries .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The women 's team has competed at the Olympics and World Championships but without any notable success .
Kenya has competed in the Cricket World Cup since 1996 .
They won the inaugural World Cricket League Division 1 hosted in Nairobi and participated in the World T20 .
They participated in the ICC Cricket World Cup 2011 .
Kenya is represented by Lucas Onyango as a professional rugby league player who plays with Oldham Roughyeds .
Besides the former European Super League team , he has played for Widnes Vikings and rugby union with Sale Sharks .
Rugby union is increasing in popularity , especially with the annual Safari Sevens tournament .
Kenya sevens team ranked 9th in IRB Sevens World Series for the 2006 season .
Kenya was also a regional powerhouse in soccer .
It was a part of the World Rally Championship for many years until its exclusion after the 2002 event owing to financial difficulties .
Although the rally still runs annually as part of the Africa rally championship , the organisers are hoping to be allowed to rejoin the World Rally championship in the next couple of years .
Regional variations and dishes also exist .
Membership of the IPCC is open to all members of the WMO and UNEP .
IPCC reports cover `` the scientific , technical and socio-economic information relevant to understanding the scientific basis of risk of human-induced climate change , its potential impacts and options for adaptation and mitigation . ''
The chair is assisted by an elected bureau including vice-chairs , working group co-chairs , and a secretariat .
Participation of delegates with appropriate expertise is encouraged .
Plenary sessions of the IPCC and IPCC Working groups are held at the level of government representatives .
Non Governmental and Intergovernmental Organizations may be allowed to attend as observers .
Sessions of the IPCC Bureau , workshops , expert and lead authors meetings are by invitation only .
After the opening ceremonies , closed plenary sessions were held .
Annual cash contributions to the Trust Fund are made by the WMO , by UNEP , and by IPCC Members ; the scale of payments is determined by the IPCC Panel , which is also responsible for considering and adopting by consensus the annual budget .
According to IPCC guidelines , authors should give priority to peer-reviewed sources .
Each subsequent IPCC report notes areas where the science has improved since the previous report and also notes areas where further research is required .
Each chapter has a number of authors who are responsible for writing and editing the material .
Lead authors are responsible for writing sections of chapters .
Contributing authors prepare text , graphs or data for inclusion by the lead authors .
The unequivocal detection of the enhanced greenhouse effect is not likely for a decade or more .
The joint statement was made by the Australian Academy of Science , the Royal Flemish Academy of Belgium for Science and the Arts , the Brazilian Academy of Sciences , the Royal Society of Canada , the Caribbean Academy of Sciences , the Chinese Academy of Sciences , the French Academy of Sciences , the German Academy of Natural Scientists Leopoldina , the Indian National Science Academy , the Indonesian Academy of Sciences , the Royal Irish Academy , Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei -LRB- Italy -RRB- , the Academy of Sciences Malaysia , the Academy Council of the Royal Society of New Zealand , the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences , and the Royal Society -LRB- UK -RRB- .
The TAR has also been endorsed by the Canadian Foundation for Climate and Atmospheric Sciences , Canadian Meteorological and Oceanographic Society , and European Geosciences Union -LRB- refer to `` Endorsements of the IPCC '' -RRB- .
For example , Lindzen states that the SPM understates the uncertainty associated with climate models .
In addition to climate assessment reports , the IPCC is publishing Special Reports on specific topics .
This projection was not included in the final summary for policymakers .
That is worrying .
The IPCC needs to look at this trend in the errors and ask why it happened '' .
This graph extended the similar graph in Figure 3.20 from the IPCC Second Assessment Report of 1995 , and differed from a schematic in the first assessment report that lacked temperature units , but appeared to depict larger global temperature variations over the past 1000 years , and higher temperatures during the Medieval Warm Period than the mid 20th century .
The schematic was not an actual plot of data , and was based on a diagram of temperatures in central England , with temperatures increased on the basis of documentary evidence of Medieval vineyards in England .
Even with this increase , the maximum it showed for the Medieval Warm Period did not reach temperatures recorded in central England in 2007 .
The Jones et al. and Briffa reconstructions were overlaid with the MBH99 reconstruction in Figure 2.21 of the IPCC report .
Contrarian John Lawrence Daly featured a modified version of the IPCC 1990 schematic , which he mis-identified as appearing in the IPCC 1995 report , and argued that `` Overturning its own previous view in the 1995 report , the IPCC presented the ` Hockey Stick ' as the new orthodoxy with hardly an apology or explanation for the abrupt U-turn since its 1995 report '' .
Criticism of the MBH99 reconstruction in a review paper , which was quickly discredited in the Soon and Baliunas controversy , was picked up by the Bush administration , and a Senate speech by US Republican senator James Inhofe alleged that `` manmade global warming is the greatest hoax ever perpetrated on the American people '' .
The data and methodology used to produce the `` hockey stick graph '' was criticized in papers by Stephen McIntyre and Ross McKitrick , and in turn the criticisms in these papers were examined by other studies and comprehensively refuted by Wahl & Ammann 2007 , which showed errors in the methods used by McIntyre and McKitrick .
The National Research Council 's report agreed that there were some statistical failings , but these had little effect on the graph , which was generally correct .
In a 2006 letter to Nature , Mann , Bradley , and Hughes pointed out that their original article had said that `` more widespread high-resolution data are needed before more confident conclusions can be reached '' and that the uncertainties were `` the point of the article '' .
In addition , analysis of the Medieval Warm Period cited reconstructions by Crowley & Lowery 2000 -LRB- as cited in the TAR -RRB- and Osborn & Briffa 2006 .
Most reconstructions shared some data series , particularly tree ring data , but newer reconstructions used additional data and covered a wider area , using a variety of statistical methods .
The study compared IPCC 2001 projections on temperature and sea level change with observations .
This may have been due , in part , to the expanding human understanding of climate .
It has become more important to provide a broader exploration of uncertainties .
Others see as well mixed blessings of the drive for consensus within the IPCC process and ask to include dissenting or minority positions or to improve statements about uncertainties .
The IPCC process on climate change and its efficiency and success has been compared with dealings with other environmental challenges -LRB- compare Ozone depletion and global warming -RRB- .
The Ozone case was used to assess the efficiency of the IPCC process .
The underlying linear model of policy-making of more knowledge we have , the better the political response will be is being doubted .
The ozone case communicated to lay persons `` with easy-to-understand bridging metaphors derived from the popular culture '' and related to `` immediate risks with everyday relevance '' , while the public opinion on climate change sees no imminent danger .
In an area of science where our scientific understanding is rapidly changing , this has been raised as a serious shortcoming in a body which is widely regarded as the ultimate authority on the science .
However , there has generally been a steady evolution of key findings and levels of scientific confidence from one assessment report to the next .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Chloroplasts carry out a number of other functions , including fatty acid synthesis , much amino acid synthesis , and the immune response in plants .
Chloroplasts are one of many types of organelles in the plant cell .
They are considered to have originated from cyanobacteria through endosymbiosis -- when a eukaryotic cell engulfed a photosynthesizing cyanobacterium that became a permanent resident in the cell .
Mitochondria are thought to have come from a similar event , where an aerobic prokaryote was engulfed .
Like chloroplasts , they have thylakoids within .
On the thylakoid membranes are photosynthetic pigments , including chlorophyll a. Phycobilins are also common cyanobacterial pigments , usually organized into hemispherical phycobilisomes attached to the outside of the thylakoid membranes -LRB- phycobilins are not shared with all chloroplasts though -RRB- .
The new cellular resident quickly became an advantage , providing food for the eukaryotic host , which allowed it to live within it .
Some of its proteins were then synthesized in the cytoplasm of the host cell , and imported back into the chloroplast -LRB- formerly the cyanobacterium -RRB- .
The glaucophyte chloroplast group is the smallest of the three primary chloroplast lineages , being found in only 13 species , and is thought to be the one that branched off the earliest .
Glaucophytes have chloroplasts that retain a peptidoglycan wall between their double membranes , like their cyanobacterial parent .
The starch that they synthesize collects outside the chloroplast .
Like cyanobacteria , glaucophyte chloroplast thylakoids are studded with light collecting structures called phycobilisomes .
For these reasons , glaucophyte chloroplasts are considered a primitive intermediate between cyanobacteria and the more evolved chloroplasts in red algae and plants .
Some contain pyrenoids .
However , since they also contain the blue-green chlorophyll a and other pigments , many are reddish to purple from the combination .
The chloroplastidan chloroplasts , or green chloroplasts , are another large , highly diverse primary chloroplast lineage .
Their host organisms are commonly known as the green algae and land plants .
Cryptophyte chloroplasts have four membranes , the outermost of which is continuous with the rough endoplasmic reticulum .
They were once thought to be related to the helicosproidia , but it is now known that the helicosproida are green algae rather than chromalveolates .
Other apicomplexans like Cryptosporidium have lost the chloroplast completely .
The fact that apicomplexans still keep their nonphotosynthetic chloroplast around demonstrates how the chloroplast carries out important functions other than photosynthesis .
The outermost membrane is not connected to the endoplasmic reticulum .
Starch is found outside the chloroplast An important feature of these chloroplasts is that their chloroplast DNA is highly reduced and fragmented into many small circles .
Most of the genome has migrated to the nucleus , and only critical photosynthesis-related genes remain in the chloroplast .
Karlodinium and Karenia probably took up different heterokontophytes .
However , the haptophyte was heavily reduced , stripped of a few membranes and its nucleus , leaving only its chloroplast -LRB- with its original double membrane -RRB- , and possibly one or two additional membranes around it .
Cryptophyte chloroplasts require their nucleomorph to maintain themselves , and Dinophysis species grown in cell culture alone can not survive , so it is possible -LRB- but not confirmed -RRB- that the Dinophysis chloroplast is a kleptoplast -- if so , Dinophysis chloroplasts wear out and Dinophysis species must continually engulf cryptophytes to obtain new chloroplasts to replace the old ones .
The diatom endosymbiont has been reduced relatively little -- it still retains its original mitochondria , and has endoplasmic reticulum , ribosomes , a nucleus , and of course , red algal derived chloroplasts -- practically a complete cell , all inside the host 's endoplasmic reticulum lumen .
The diatom endosymbiont 's nucleus is present , but it probably ca n't be called a nucleomorph because it shows no sign of genome reduction , and might have even been expanded .
Diatoms have been engulfed by dinoflagellates at least three times .
The endosymbiotic event that led to this chloroplast was serial secondary endosymbiosis rather than tertiary endosymbiosis -- the endosymbiont was a green alga containing a primary chloroplast -LRB- making a secondary chloroplast -RRB- .
It is not clear whether that symbiont is closely related to the ancestral chloroplast of other eukaryotes .
Being in the early stages of endosymbiosis , Paulinella chromatophora can offer some insights into how chloroplasts evolved .
Paulinella cells contain one or two sausage shaped blue-green photosynthesizing structures called chromatophores , descended from the cyanobacterium Synechococcus .
Chromatophores can not survive outside their host .
Chromatophores have transferred much less of their DNA to the nucleus of their host .
About 0.3 -- 0.8 % of the nuclear DNA in Paulinella is from the chromatophore , compared with 11 -- 14 % from the chloroplast in plants .
Since then , hundreds of chloroplast DNAs from various species have been sequenced , but they 're mostly those of land plants and green algae -- glaucophytes , red algae , and other algal groups are extremely underrepresented , potentially introducing some bias in views of `` typical '' chloroplast DNA structure and content .
The results of the microscopy experiments led to the idea that chloroplast DNA replicates using a double displacement loop -LRB- D-loop -RRB- .
Transcription starts at specific points of origin .
Multiple replication forks open up , allowing replication machinery to transcribe the DNA .
As replication continues , the forks grow and eventually converge .
The new cpDNA structures separate , creating daughter cpDNA chromosomes .
When replication forks form , the strand not being copied is single stranded , and thus at risk for A → G deamination .
Therefore , gradients in deamination indicate that replication forks were most likely present and the direction that they initially opened -LRB- the highest gradient is most likely nearest the start site because it was single stranded for the longest amount of time -RRB- .
When the original experiments on cpDNA were performed , scientists did notice linear structures ; however , they attributed these linear forms to broken circles .
If the branched and complex structures seen in cpDNA experiments are real and not artifacts of concatenated circular DNA or broken circles , then a D-loop mechanism of replication is insufficient to explain how those structures would replicate .
At the same time , homologous recombination does not expand the multiple A -- > G gradients seen in plastomes .
In those cases , chloroplast-targeted proteins do initially travel along the secretory pathway -RRB- .
This is important because it prevents chloroplast proteins from assuming their active form and carrying out their chloroplast functions in the wrong place -- the cytosol .
At the same time , they have to keep just enough shape so that they can be recognized by the chloroplast .
These proteins also help the polypeptide get imported into the chloroplast .
Some algae have two chloroplasts in each cell ; they are star-shaped in Zygnema , or may follow the shape of half the cell in order Desmidiales .
In some algae , the chloroplast takes up most of the cell , with pockets for the nucleus and other organelles -LRB- for example some species of Chlorella have a cup-shaped chloroplast that occupies much of the cell -RRB- .
There are some common misconceptions about the outer and inner chloroplast membranes .
Even so , in terms of `` in-out '' , the direction of chloroplast H + ion flow is in the opposite direction compared to oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria .
However , there is a growing body of evidence that stromules are functional , integral features of plant cell plastids , not merely artifacts .
Some chloroplasts contain a structure called the chloroplast peripheral reticulum .
They take mRNAs transcribed from the chloroplast DNA and translate them into protein .
While similar to bacterial ribosomes , chloroplast translation is more complex than in bacteria , so chloroplast ribosomes include some chloroplast-unique features .
Such loss is also rarely observed in other plastids and prokaryotes .
Plastoglobuli are found in all chloroplasts , but become more common when the chloroplast is under oxidative stress , or when it ages and transitions into a gerontoplast .
Plastoglobuli also exhibit a greater size variation under these conditions .
They are also common in etioplasts , but decrease in number as the etioplasts mature into chloroplasts .
They are not found in higher plants .
They consist of a matrix opaque to electrons , surrounded by two hemispherical starch plates .
The starch is accumulated as the pyrenoids mature .
In algae with carbon concentrating mechanisms , the enzyme rubisco is found in the pyrenoids .
Starch can also accumulate around the pyrenoids when CO2 is scarce .
The helices ascend at an angle of 20 -- 25 ° , connecting to each granal thylakoid at a bridge-like slit junction .
The helicoids may extend as large sheets that link multiple grana , or narrow to tube-like bridges between grana .
While different parts of the thylakoid system contain different membrane proteins , the thylakoid membranes are continuous and the thylakoid space they enclose form a single continuous labyrinth .
Embedded in the thylakoid membranes are important protein complexes which carry out the light reactions of photosynthesis .
Stromal thylakoids are helicoid sheets that spiral around grana .
The flat tops and bottoms of granal thylakoids contain only the relatively flat photosystem II protein complex .
This allows them to stack tightly , forming grana with many layers of tightly appressed membrane , called granal membrane , increasing stability and surface area for light capture .
In addition to chlorophylls , another group of yellow -- orange pigments called carotenoids are also found in the photosystems .
Many other forms of carotenoids exist that are only found in certain groups of chloroplasts .
Like photosystem I and ATP synthase , phycobilisomes jut into the stroma , preventing thylakoid stacking in red algal chloroplasts .
Cryptophyte chloroplasts and some cyanobacteria do n't have their phycobilin pigments organized into phycobilisomes , and keep them in their thylakoid space instead .
As a result , chloroplasts in C4 mesophyll cells and bundle sheath cells are specialized for each stage of photosynthesis .
The four-carbon compound is then transported to the bundle sheath chloroplasts , where it drops off CO2 and returns to the mesophyll .
Bundle sheath chloroplasts do not carry out the light reactions , preventing oxygen from building up in them and disrupting rubisco activity .
Because of this , they lack thylakoids organized into grana stacks -- though bundle sheath chloroplasts still have free-floating thylakoids in the stroma where they still carry out cyclic electron flow , a light-driven method of synthesizing ATP to power the Calvin cycle without generating oxygen .
They lack photosystem II , and only have photosystem I -- the only protein complex needed for cyclic electron flow .
Not all cells in a multicellular plant contain chloroplasts .
A typical chlorenchyma cell of a land plant contains about 10 to 100 chloroplasts .
Chloroplasts can also be found in the bundle sheath cells of a leaf , especially in C4 plants , which carry out the Calvin cycle in their bundle sheath cells .
They are often absent from the epidermis of a leaf .
The chloroplasts of plant and algal cells can orient themselves to best suit the available light .
Chloroplast movement is considered one of the most closely regulated stimulus-response systems that can be found in plants .
High levels of reactive oxygen species will cause the hypersensitive response .
The reactive oxygen species also directly kill any pathogens within the cell .
Lower levels of reactive oxygen species initiate systemic acquired resistance , triggering defense-molecule production in the rest of the plant .
Chloroplasts can serve as cellular sensors .
Photosynthesis is divided into two stages -- the light reactions , where water is split to produce oxygen , and the dark reactions , or Calvin cycle , which builds sugar molecules from carbon dioxide .
The two phases are linked by the energy carriers adenosine triphosphate -LRB- ATP -RRB- and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate -LRB- NADP + -RRB- .
The two photosystems capture light energy to energize electrons taken from water , and release them down an electron transport chain .
The hydrogen ions in the thylakoid space then diffuse back down their concentration gradient , flowing back out into the stroma through ATP synthase .
Because chloroplast ATP synthase projects out into the stroma , the ATP is synthesized there , in position to be used in the dark reactions .
While photosystem II photolyzes water to obtain and energize new electrons , photosystem I simply reenergizes depleted electrons at the end of an electron transport chain .
The ATP and NADPH made in the light reactions is used to convert the 3-PGA into glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate , or G3P sugar molecules .
The starch granules displace the thylakoids , but leave them intact .
This depletes a plant 's free phosphate supply , which indirectly stimulates chloroplast starch synthesis .
Several mechanisms have evolved in different lineages that raise the carbon dioxide concentration relative to oxygen within the chloroplast , increasing the efficiency of photosynthesis .
These mechanisms are called carbon dioxide concentrating mechanisms , or CCMs .
These include Crassulacean acid metabolism , C4 carbon fixation , and pyrenoids .
There are many other types of plastids , which carry out various functions .
Within a few minutes of light exposure , the prolamellar body begins to reorganize into stacks of thylakoids , and chlorophyll starts to be produced .
This process , where the etioplast becomes a chloroplast , takes several hours .
Plastid differentiation is not permanent , in fact many interconversions are possible .
Chromoplasts and amyloplasts can also become chloroplasts , like what happens when a carrot or a potato is illuminated .
Chloroplast , amyloplast , chromoplast , proplast , etc. , are not absolute states -- intermediate forms are common .
The protein MinD prevents FtsZ from linking up and forming filaments .
Another protein ARC3 may also be involved , but it is not very well understood .
These proteins are active at the poles of the chloroplast , preventing Z-ring formation there , but near the center of the chloroplast , MinE inhibits them , allowing the Z-ring to form .
The inner plastid-dividing ring is located in the inner side of the chloroplast 's inner membrane , and is formed first .
The outer plastid-dividing ring is found wrapped around the outer chloroplast membrane .
This is when chloroplast constriction begins .
Exposure to white light can stimulate these chloroplasts to divide and reduce the population of dumbbell-shaped chloroplasts .
Recently , chloroplasts have caught attention by developers of genetically modified crops .
This biological containment strategy is therefore suitable for establishing the coexistence of conventional and organic agriculture .
For example , 5 is prime because 1 and 5 are its only positive integer factors , whereas 6 is composite because it has the divisors 2 and 3 in addition to 1 and 6 .
It consists of testing whether n is a multiple of any integer between 2 and .
Algorithms much more efficient than trial division have been devised to test the primality of large numbers .
Particularly fast methods are available for numbers of special forms , such as Mersenne numbers .
There is no known simple formula that separates prime numbers from composite numbers .
Hence , 6 is not prime .
The image at the right illustrates that 12 is not prime : 12 = 3 · 4 .
This implies that n is not prime .
By the Middle Ages and Renaissance many mathematicians included 1 as the first prime number .
In the 19th century many mathematicians still considered the number 1 to be a prime .
Henri Lebesgue is said to be the last professional mathematician to call 1 prime .
For example , the number 15 can be factored as 3 · 5 and 1 · 3 · 5 ; if 1 were admitted as a prime , these two presentations would be considered different factorizations of 15 into prime numbers , so the statement of that theorem would have to be modified .
After the Greeks , little happened with the study of prime numbers until the 17th century .
However , the very next Fermat number 232 + 1 is composite -LRB- one of its prime factors is 641 -RRB- , as Euler discovered later , and in fact no further Fermat numbers are known to be prime .
They are called Mersenne primes in his honor .
If the result of any of these divisions is an integer , then n is not a prime , otherwise it is a prime .
Indeed , if is composite -LRB- with a and b ≠ 1 -RRB- then one of the factors a or b is necessarily at most .
For example , for , the trial divisions are by m = 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , and 6 .
None of these numbers divides 37 , so 37 is prime .
Deterministic algorithms provide a way to tell for sure whether a given number is prime or not .
Probabilistic algorithms are normally faster , but do not completely prove that a number is prime .
These tests rely on testing a given number in a partly random way .
For example , a given test might pass all the time if applied to a prime number , but pass only with probability p if applied to a composite number .
On the other hand , if the test ever fails , then we know that the number is composite .
If we have a number b that we want to test for primality , then we work out nb -LRB- mod b -RRB- for a random value of n as our test .
Carmichael numbers are substantially rarer than prime numbers , though , so this test can be useful for practical purposes .
are prime .
Prime numbers of this form are known as factorial primes .
This is why the largest known prime has almost always been a Mersenne prime since the dawn of electronic computers .
The following table gives the largest known primes of the mentioned types .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
are prime for any natural number n .
However , computing A or μ requires the knowledge of infinitely many primes to begin with .
The picture below illustrates this with q = 9 : the numbers are `` wrapped around '' as soon as a multiple of 9 is passed .
Primes are highlighted in red .
The connection to prime numbers is that it essentially says that the primes are as regularly distributed as possible .
This hypothesis is generally believed to be correct .
In particular , the simplest assumption is that primes should have no significant irregularities without good reason .
In addition to the Riemann hypothesis , many more conjectures revolving about primes have been posed .
Also , any even integer can be written as the sum of six primes .
The branch of number theory studying such questions is called additive number theory .
A third type of conjectures concerns aspects of the distribution of primes .
Legendre 's conjecture states that there is a prime number between n2 and -LRB- n + 1 -RRB- 2 for every positive integer n .
It is implied by the stronger Cramér 's conjecture .
Giuga 's conjecture says that this equation is also a sufficient condition for p to be prime .
is divisible by n.
.
RSA relies on the assumption that it is much easier -LRB- i.e. , more efficient -RRB- to perform the multiplication of two -LRB- large -RRB- numbers x and y than to calculate x and y -LRB- assumed coprime -RRB- if only the product xy is known .
If Magicicadas appeared at a non-prime number intervals , say every 12 years , then predators appearing every 2 , 3 , 4 , 6 , or 12 years would be sure to meet them .
Though small , this advantage appears to have been enough to drive natural selection in favour of a prime-numbered life-cycle for these insects .
The concept of prime number is so important that it has been generalized in different ways in various branches of mathematics .
It is either Q or the finite field with p elements , whence the name .
Prime models and prime 3-manifolds are other examples of this type .
In the ring Z of integers , the set of prime elements equals the set of irreducible elements , which is
Its prime elements are known as Gaussian primes .
Not every prime -LRB- in Z -RRB- is a Gaussian prime : in the bigger ring Z -LSB- i -RSB- , 2 factors into the product of the two Gaussian primes -LRB- 1 + i -RRB- and -LRB- 1 − i -RRB- .
Arithmetic geometry also benefits from this notion , and many concepts exist in both geometry and number theory .
Such ramification questions occur even in number-theoretic questions solely concerned with integers .
These are essentially all possible ways to complete Q , by Ostrowski 's theorem .
Prime numbers have influenced many artists and writers .
The diphthong in modern German Rhein -LRB- also adopted in Romansh Rein , Rain -RRB- is a Central German development of the early modern period , the Alemannic name Rī -LRB- n -RRB- retaining the older vocalism , -LSB- note 4 -RSB- as does Ripuarian Rhing , while Palatine has diphthongized Rhei , Rhoi .
Spanish is with French in adopting the Germanic vocalism Rin - , while Italian , Occitan and Portuguese retain the Latin Ren - .
-LSB- note 7 -RSB- The `` total length of the Rhine '' , to the inclusion of Lake Constance and the Alpine Rhine is more difficult to measure objectively ; it was cited as 1,232 kilometres -LRB- 766 miles -RRB- by the Dutch Rijkswaterstaat in 2010 .
-LSB- note 1 -RSB-
Near Tamins-Reichenau the Anterior Rhine and the Posterior Rhine join and form the Rhine .
Most of the delta is a nature reserve and bird sanctuary .
It includes the Austrian towns of Gaißau , Höchst and Fußach .
Many local fields have an official name containing this element .
Its water has a darker color than the Rhine ; the latter 's lighter suspended load comes from higher up the mountains .
This has already happened to the former Lake Tuggenersee .
The flow of cold , gray mountain water continues for some distance into the lake .
The cold water flows near the surface and at first does n't mix with the warmer , green waters of Upper Lake .
The water then follows the northern shore until Hagnau am Bodensee .
The most important tributaries in this area are the Ill below of Strasbourg , the Neckar in Mannheim and the Main across from Mainz .
In Mainz , the Rhine leaves the Upper Rhine Valley and flows through the Mainz Basin .
Dead branches dried up and the amount of forests on the flood plains decreased sharply .
The rate of erosion equaled the uplift in the region , such that the river was left at about its original level while the surrounding lands raised .
It contributes 70 m3/s -LRB- 2,500 cu ft/s -RRB- to the Rhine .
Other rivers in the Ruhr Area , above all , the Emscher , still carry a considerable degree of pollution .
Its banks are usually heavily populated and industrialized , in particular the agglomerations Cologne , Düsseldorf and Ruhr area .
The region downstream of Duisburg is more agricultural .
Near Krefeld , the river crosses the Uerdingen line , the line which separates the areas where Low German and High German are spoken .
The Beneden Merwede branches off , near Hardinxveld-Giessendam and continues as the Noord , to join the Lek , near the village of Kinderdijk , to form the Nieuwe Maas ; then flows past Rotterdam and continues via Het Scheur and the Nieuwe Waterweg , to the North Sea .
The latter flows west into a sluice at Katwijk , where its waters can be discharged into the North Sea .
This branch once formed the line along which the Limes Germanicus were built .
During periods of lower sea levels within the various ice ages , the Rhine took a left turn , creating the Channel River , the course of which now lies below the English Channel .
However , this name is also used for the river delta where the Rhine flows into Lake Constance , so it is clearer to call the larger one Rhine-Meuse delta , or even Rhine -- Meuse -- Scheldt delta , as the Scheldt ends in the same delta .
The middle flow begins as Nederrijn , then changes into Lek , then joins the Noord , thereby forming Nieuwe Maas .
The northern flow keeps the name IJssel until it flows into Lake IJsselmeer .
This system of numerous bays , estuary-like extended rivers , many islands and constant changes of the coastline , is hard to imagine today .
For flood protection reasons , the Meuse was separated from the Waal through a lock and diverted into a new outlet called `` Bergse Maas '' , then Amer and then flows into the former bay Hollands Diep .
The hydrography of the current delta is characterized by the delta 's main arms , disconnected arms -LRB- Hollandse IJssel , Linge , Vecht , etc. -RRB- and smaller rivers and streams .
Currently Rhine water runs into the sea , or into former marine bays now separated from the sea , in five places , namely at the mouths of the Nieuwe Merwede , Nieuwe Waterway -LRB- Nieuwe Maas -RRB- , Dordtse Kil , Spui and IJssel .
Before the construction of the Delta Works , tidal influence was palpable up to Nijmegen , and even today , after the regulatory action of the Delta Works , the tide acts far inland .
The compression and orogeny continue today , as shown by the ongoing raising of the mountains a small amount each year and the active volcanoes .
The northern Alps were then drained by the Rhone .
By the early Pleistocene period , the Rhine had captured most of its current Alpine watershed from the Rhône , including the Aar .
Since that time , the Rhine has added the watershed above Lake Constance -LRB- Vorderrhein , Hinterrhein , Alpenrhein ; captured from the Rhône -RRB- , the upper reaches of the Main , beyond Schweinfurt and the Vosges Mountains , captured from the Meuse , to its watershed .
During the so-called Anglian glaciation -LRB- ~ 450,000 yr BP , marine oxygen isotope stage 12 -RRB- , the northern part of the present North Sea was blocked by the ice and a large lake developed , that overflowed through the English Channel .
This caused the Rhine 's course to be diverted through the English Channel .
During interglacials , when sea level rose to approximately the present level , the Rhine built deltas , in what is now the Netherlands .
In northwest Europe , it saw two very cold phases , peaking around 70,000 BP and around 29,000 -- 24,000 BP .
The last phase slightly predates the global last ice age maximum -LRB- Last Glacial Maximum -RRB- .
With globally shrinking ice-cover , ocean water levels rose and the English Channel and North Sea re-inundated .
Meltwater , adding to the ocean and land subsidence , drowned the former coasts of Europe transgressionally .
As a meandering river , it reworked its ice-age braidplain .
Coeval absolute sea-level rise and tectonic subsidence have strongly influenced delta evolution .
Other factors of importance to the shape of the delta are the local tectonic activities of the Peel Boundary Fault , the substrate and geomorphology , as inherited from the Last Glacial and the coastal-marine dynamics , such as barrier and tidal inlet formations .
The shifting of river channels to new locations , on the floodplain -LRB- termed avulsion -RRB- , was the main process distributing sediment across the subrecent delta .
Direct human impact in the delta started with peat mining , for salt and fuel , from Roman times onward .
Thereafter , canals were dug , bends were short cut and groynes were built , to prevent the river 's channels from migrating or silting up .
This discharge distribution has been maintained since 1709 , by river engineering works , including the digging of the Pannerdens canal and since the 20th century , with the help of weirs in the Nederrijn river .
Beyond these rivers she held only the fertile plain of Frankfurt , opposite the Roman border fortress of Moguntiacum -LRB- Mainz -RRB- , the southernmost slopes of the Black Forest and a few scattered bridge-heads .
The upper Rhine and upper Danube are easily crossed .
The frontier which they form is inconveniently long , enclosing an acute-angled wedge of foreign territory between the modern Baden and Württemberg .
The mouths of the Rhine , in the county of Holland , fell to the Burgundian Netherlands in the 15th century ; Holland remained contentious territory throughout the European wars of religion and the eventual collapse of the Holy Roman Empire , when the length of the Rhine fell to the First French Empire and its client states .
The numerous historic castles in Rhineland-Palatinate attest to the importance of the river as a commercial route .
French leaders , such as Louis XIV and Napoleon Bonaparte , tried with varying degrees of success to annex lands west of the Rhine .
Although the allies could probably have prevented the re-occupation , Britain and France were not inclined to do so , a feature of their policy of appeasement to Hitler .
The bridges at Nijmegen , over the Waal distributary of the Rhine , were also an objective of Operation Market Garden .
This also became the subject of a film , The Bridge at Remagen .
After this number was placed into the authoritative Brockhaus Enzyklopädie , it became generally accepted and found its way into numerous textbooks and official publications .
-LSB- note 1 -RSB-
The British Parliament retains the ability to amend the terms of reference of the Scottish Parliament , and can extend or reduce the areas in which it can make laws .
The first meeting of the new Parliament took place on 12 May 1999 .
One of the principal objectives of the commission was to examine ways of enabling more self-government for Scotland , within the unitary state of the United Kingdom .
Throughout the building there are many repeated motifs , such as shapes based on Raeburn 's Skating Minister .
Crow-stepped gables and the upturned boat skylights of the Garden Lobby , complete the unique architecture .
Principally , the role of the Presiding Officer is to chair chamber proceedings and the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body .
When chairing meetings of the Parliament , the Presiding Officer and his/her deputies must be politically impartial .
During debates , the Presiding Officer -LRB- or the deputy -RRB- is assisted by the parliamentary clerks , who give advice on how to interpret the standing orders that govern the proceedings of meetings .
Amongst the duties of the Bureau are to agree the timetable of business in the chamber , establish the number , remit and membership of parliamentary committees and regulate the passage of legislation -LRB- bills -RRB- through the Parliament .
Members are able to sit anywhere in the debating chamber , but typically sit in their party groupings .
The First Minister , Scottish cabinet ministers and Law officers sit in the front row , in the middle section of the chamber .
The largest party in the Parliament sits in the middle of the semicircle , with opposing parties on either side .
The Presiding Officer , parliamentary clerks and officials sit opposite members at the front of the debating chamber .
The words There shall be a Scottish Parliament , which are the first words of the Scotland Act , are inscribed around the head of the mace , which has a formal ceremonial role in the meetings of Parliament , reinforcing the authority of the Parliament in its ability to make laws .
At the beginning of each sitting in the chamber , the lid of the case is rotated so that the mace is above the glass , to symbolise that a full meeting of the Parliament is taking place .
Meetings are broadcast on the Parliament 's own channel Holyrood.tv and on the BBC 's parliamentary channel BBC Parliament .
This contrasts with the formal style of `` Prayers '' , which is the first item of business in meetings of the House of Commons .
The Presiding Officer can reduce speaking time if a large number of members wish to participate in the debate .
Debate is more informal than in some parliamentary systems .
Members may call each other directly by name , rather than by constituency or cabinet position , and hand clapping is allowed .
Speeches to the chamber are normally delivered in English , but members may use Scots , Gaelic , or any other language with the agreement of the Presiding Officer .
At Decision Time , the Presiding Officer puts questions on the motions and amendments by reading out the name of the motion or amendment as well as the proposer and asking `` Are we all agreed ? ''
, to which the chamber first votes orally .
Each MSP has a unique access card with a microchip which , when inserted into the console , identifies them and allows them to vote .
MSPs do not tend to vote against such instructions , since those who do are unlikely to reach higher political ranks in their parties .
Thus , as with many Parliaments , the independence of Members of the Scottish Parliament tends to be low , and backbench rebellions by members who are discontent with their party 's policies are rare .
In some circumstances , however , parties announce `` free votes '' , which allows Members to vote as they please .
Such motions are on issues which may be of interest to a particular area such as a member 's own constituency , an upcoming or past event or any other item which would otherwise not be accorded official parliamentary time .
Committee meetings take place on Tuesday , Wednesday and Thursday morning when Parliament is sitting .
However , under the terms of the Scotland Act , Westminster agreed to devolve some of its responsibilities over Scottish domestic policy to the Scottish Parliament .
Such `` devolved matters '' include education , health , agriculture and justice .
The Scotland Act enabled the Scottish Parliament to pass primary legislation on these issues .
A degree of domestic authority , and all foreign policy , remain with the UK Parliament in Westminster .
Another of the roles of the Parliament is to hold the Scottish Government to account .
Most importantly , this includes agriculture , fisheries and forestry , economic development , education , environment , food standards , health , home affairs , Scots law -- courts , police and fire services , local government , sport and the arts , transport , training , tourism , research and statistics and social work .
These include abortion , broadcasting policy , civil service , common markets for UK goods and services , constitution , electricity , coal , oil , gas , nuclear energy , defence and national security , drug policy , employment , foreign policy and relations with Europe , most aspects of transport safety and regulation , National Lottery , protection of borders , social security and stability of UK 's fiscal , economic and monetary system .
Most draft laws are government bills introduced by ministers in the governing party .
Acts of the Scottish Parliament do not begin with a conventional enacting formula .
Normally , the leader of the largest party is returned as First Minister , and head of the Scottish Government .
Theoretically , Parliament also elects the Scottish Ministers who form the government of Scotland and sit in the Scottish cabinet , but such ministers are , in practice , appointed to their roles by the First Minister .
Junior ministers , who do not attend cabinet , are also appointed to assist Scottish ministers in their departments .
The following ordinary election reverts to the first Thursday in May , a multiple of four years after 1999 -LRB- i.e. , 5 May 2011 , 7 May 2015 , etc. -RRB- .
At 2.30 pm , a 40-minute long themed `` Question Time '' takes place , where members can ask questions of ministers in departments that are selected for questioning that sitting day , such as health and justice or education and transport .
Between 12 p.m. and 12:30 p.m. on Thursdays , when Parliament is sitting , First Minister 's Question Time takes place .
Opposition leaders ask a general question of the First Minister and then supplementary questions .
Such a practice enables a `` lead-in '' to the questioner , who then uses their supplementary question to ask the First Minister any issue .
Given the geographical distribution of population in Scotland , this results in constituencies of a smaller area in the Central Lowlands , where the bulk of Scotland 's population live , and much larger constituency areas in the north and west of the country , which have a low population density .
If a Constituency MSP resigns from Parliament , this triggers a by-election in his or her constituency , where a replacement MSP is returned from one of the parties by the plurality system .
For example , to determine who is awarded the first list seat , the number of list votes cast for each party is divided by one plus the number of seats the party won in the region -LRB- at this point just constituency seats -RRB- .
Nevertheless , she too announced she would step down as leader of the party .
The movements have `` arguably altered the Middle East more than any trend since the modern states gained independence '' , redefining `` politics and even borders '' according to one journalist -LRB- Robin Wright -RRB- .
Jamaat-e-Islami of Pakistan is basically a socio-political and democratic Vanguard party but has also gained political influence through military coup d'état in past .
At the same time , their popularity is such that no government can call itself democratic that excludes mainstream Islamist groups .
Scholars and observers who do not believe that Islam is merely a political ideology include Fred Halliday , John Esposito and Muslim intellectuals like Javed Ahmad Ghamidi .
His `` encouraging of the emergence of the Islamist movement '' was said to have been `` imitated by many other Muslim leaders in the years that followed . ''
The French government has also been reported to have promoted Islamist preachers `` in the hope of channeling Muslim energies into zones of piety and charity . ''
While dividing his time between law practice and philosophical poetry , Iqbal had remained active in the Muslim League .
He did not support Indian involvement in World War I and remained in close touch with Muslim political leaders such as Muhammad Ali Johar and Muhammad Ali Jinnah .
These lectures dwell on the role of Islam as a religion as well as a political and legal philosophy in the modern age .
In his Allahabad Address on 29 December 1930 , Iqbal outlined a vision of an independent state for Muslim-majority provinces in northwestern India .
His was arguably the first , largest and most influential modern Islamic political/religious organization .
He was deposed during the 2013 Egyptian coup d'état .
Leading this pan-Islamic effort was Palestinian sheikh Abdullah Yusuf Azzam .
Victims of their campaign against the Egyptian state in the 1990s included the head of the counter-terrorism police -LRB- Major General Raouf Khayrat -RRB- , a parliamentary speaker -LRB- Rifaat al-Mahgoub -RRB- , dozens of European tourists and Egyptian bystanders , and over 100 Egyptian police .
It was soon competing with and then overtaking the PLO for control of the intifada .
Zia ul Haq was an admirer of Mawdudi and Mawdudi 's party Jamaat-e-Islami became the `` regime 's ideological and political arm '' .
Unlike neighboring Iran , Zia-ul-Haq 's policies were intended to `` avoid revolutionary excess '' , and not to strain relations with his American and Persian Gulf state allies .
The group also operates or has affiliates in other parts of the world , including North Africa and South Asia .
The group gained prominence after it drove Iraqi government forces out of key cities in western Iraq in a 2014 offensive .
The group is adept at social media , posting Internet videos of beheadings of soldiers , civilians , journalists and aid workers , and is known for its destruction of cultural heritage sites .
The United Nations has held ISIL responsible for human rights abuses and war crimes , and Amnesty International has reported ethnic cleansing by the group on a `` historic scale '' .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
There have been calls to create an independent agency in the U.S. with a specific mission of undermining Islamism and jihadism .
Imperialism is a type of advocacy of empire .
Imperialism has greatly shaped the contemporary world .
Its precise meaning continues to be debated by scholars .
Some writers , such as Edward Said , use the term more broadly to describe any system of domination and subordination organised with an imperial center and a periphery .
Imperialism is particularly focused on the control that one group , often a state power , has on another group of people .
There are `` formal '' or `` informal '' imperialisms .
Further on , some writers -LSB- who ? -RSB-
used the term imperialism , in slightly more discriminating fashion , to mean all kinds of domination or control by a group of people over another .
Informal rule is generally less costly than taking over territories formally .
`` The word ` empire ' comes from the Latin word imperium ; for which the closest modern English equivalent would perhaps be ` sovereignty ' , or simply ` rule ' '' .
Political power grew from conquering land , however cultural and economic aspects flourished through sea and trade routes .
A distinction about empires is `` that although political empires were built mostly by expansion overland , economic and cultural influences spread at least as much by sea '' .
Some of the main aspects of trade that went overseas consisted of animals and plant products .
The two main regions are the core and the periphery .
The core consists of high areas of income and profit ; the periphery is on the opposing side of the spectrum consisting of areas of low income and profit .
These critical theories of Geo-politics have led to increased discussion of the meaning and impact of imperialism on the modern post-colonial world .
This idea from Lenin stresses how important new political world order has become in our modern era .
Colonialism in modern usage also tends to imply a degree of geographic separation between the colony and the imperial power .
Particularly , Edward Said distinguishes the difference between imperialism and colonialism by stating ; `` imperialism involved ` the practice , the theory and the attitudes of a dominating metropolitan center ruling a distant territory ' , while colonialism refers to the ` implanting of settlements on a distant territory . '
-LSB- further explanation needed -RSB-
Colonialism is seen to be the architect deciding how to start dominating areas and then imperialism can be seen as creating the idea behind conquest cooperating with colonialism .
Colonialism is when the imperial nation begins a conquest over an area and then eventually is able to rule over the areas the previous nation had controlled .
Colonialism is the builder and preserver of the colonial possessions in an area by a population coming from a foreign region .
Many others argued that imperialism is justified for several different reasons .
Halford Mackinder felt that Great Britain needed to be one of the greatest imperialists and therefore justified imperialism .
Ratzel believed expansion was necessary for a state 's survival while Mackinder supported Britain 's imperial expansion ; these two arguments dominated the discipline for decades .
This imaginative geography relies on an essentializing discourse that represents neither the diversity nor the social reality of the East .
Rather , by essentializing the East , this discourse uses the idea of place-based identities to create difference and distance between `` we '' the West and `` them '' the East , or `` here '' in the West and `` there '' in the East .
Imperialism has played an important role in the histories of Japan , Korea , the Assyrian Empire , the Chinese Empire , the Roman Empire , Greece , the Byzantine Empire , the Persian Empire , the Ottoman Empire , Ancient Egypt , the British Empire , India , and many other empires .
Historically recognized Muslim empires number in the dozens .
This is more than just `` foreign '' music , television or film becoming popular with young people , but that popular culture changing their own expectations of life and their desire for their own country to become more like the foreign country depicted .
They claim that European imperialism was influential , and Europeans rejected the notion that `` imperialism '' required formal , legal control by one government over another country .
`` In their view , historians have been mesmerized by formal empire and maps of the world with regions colored red .
The bulk of British emigration , trade , and capital went to areas outside the formal British Empire .
Key to their thinking is the idea of empire ` informally if possible and formally if necessary . ' ''
Although a substantial number of colonies had been designed to provide economic profit and to ship resources to home ports in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries , Fieldhouse suggests that in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries in places such as Africa and Asia , this idea is not necessarily valid :
It was shortly appropriated by supporters of `` imperialism '' such as Joseph Chamberlain .
Liberal John A. Hobson and Marxist Vladimir Lenin added a more theoretical macroeconomic connotation to the term .
Lenin in particular exerted substantial influence over later Marxist conceptions of imperialism with his work Imperialism , the Highest Stage of Capitalism .
This conception of imperialism as a structural feature of capitalism is echoed by later Marxist theoreticians .
Many theoreticians on the left have followed in emphasizing the structural or systemic character of `` imperialism '' .
Such writers have expanded the time period associated with the term so that it now designates neither a policy , nor a short space of decades in the late 19th century , but a world system extending over a period of centuries , often going back to Christopher Columbus and , in some accounts , to the Crusades .
As the application of the term has expanded , its meaning has shifted along five distinct but often parallel axes : the moral , the economic , the systemic , the cultural , and the temporal .
Those changes reflect - among other shifts in sensibility - a growing unease , even squeamishness , with the fact of power , specifically , Western power .
Much of the debate was pioneered by such theorists as J. A. Hobson -LRB- 1858 -- 1940 -RRB- , Joseph Schumpeter -LRB- 1883 -- 1950 -RRB- , Thorstein Veblen -LRB- 1857 -- 1929 -RRB- , and Norman Angell -LRB- 1872 -- 1967 -RRB- .
Alternatively , tropical climates yielded lazy attitudes , sexual promiscuity , exotic culture , and moral degeneracy .
It also provided crucial manpower in both World Wars .
Its settlers and many local supporters relocated to France .
It has repeatedly sent troops to assist its former colonies in Africa in suppressing insurrections and coups d'état .
However , there was no real systemic continuity from the Western Roman Empire to its German successor which was famously described as `` not holy , not Roman , and not an empire '' , as a great number of small states and principalities existed in the loosely autonomous confederation .
The participation of Austria was primarily as a result of Habsburg control of the First Empire , the Spanish throne , and other royal houses .
Historians have debated exactly why Germany made this sudden and short-lived move .
Korea was annexed in 1910 .
During World War I , Japan took German-leased territories in China 's Shandong Province , as well as the Mariana , Caroline , and Marshall Islands .
In 1918 , Japan occupied parts of far eastern Russia and parts of eastern Siberia as a participant in the Siberian Intervention .
During the Second Sino-Japanese War in 1937 , Japan 's military invaded central China and by the end of the Pacific War , Japan had conquered much of the Far East , including Hong Kong , Vietnam , Cambodia , Myanmar , the Philippines , Indonesia , part of New Guinea and some islands of the Pacific Ocean .
Its colonial ambitions were ended by the victory of the United States in the Second World War and the following treaties which remanded those territories to American administration or their original owners .
Beginning in 1923 , the policy of `` Indigenization '' -LSB- korenizatsiia -RSB- was intended to support non-Russians develop their national cultures within a socialist framework .
The internationalist tendencies of the early revolution would be abandoned until they returned in the framework of a client state in competition with the Americans during the Cold War .
In his speech on the UN conference in 1960 , he announced the continuation of the war on imperialism , stating that soon the people of different countries will come together and overthrow their imperialist leaders .
Although the Soviet Union declared itself anti-imperialist , critics argue that it exhibited tendencies common to historic empires .
Some scholars hold that the Soviet Union was a hybrid entity containing elements common to both multinational empires and nation states .
It has also been argued that the USSR practiced colonialism as did other imperial powers and was carrying on the old Russian tradition of expansion and control .
Moreover , the ideas of imperialism were widely spread in action on the higher levels of government .
Non Russian Marxists within the Russian Federation and later the USSR , like Sultan Galiev and Vasyl Shakhrai , considered the Soviet Regime a renewed version of the Russian imperialism and colonialism .
After losing its first Empire to the Americans , Britain then turned its attention towards Asia , Africa , and the Pacific .
Increasing degrees of internal autonomy were granted to its white settler colonies in the 20th century .
Other influential spokesmen included Lord Cromer , Lord Curzon , General Kitchner , Lord Milner , and the writer Rudyard Kipling .
Its power , both military and economic , remained unmatched .
They were often backed by military force , but were more often affected from behind the scenes .
This is consistent with the general notion of hegemony and imperium of historical empires .
He said , `` Looking back on it , I might have given Al Capone a few hints .
The best he could do was to operate his racket in three districts .
I operated on three continents '' .
Bowman was the director of the American Geographical Society in 1914 .
This internal form is distinct from informal U.S. imperialism in the form of political and financial hegemony .
This internal form of imperialism is also distinct from the United States ' formation of `` colonies '' abroad .
Through the treatment of its indigenous peoples during westward expansion , the United States took on the form of an imperial power prior to any attempts at external imperialism .
However , this internal colonialism faced resistance , as external colonialism did , but the anti-colonial presence was far less prominent due to the nearly complete dominance that the United States was able to assert over both indigenous peoples and African-Americans .
The western world forgets during this process of converting the other that enlightenment and democracy are concepts that not all will agree upon '' .
Some of these were later absorbed into the empire , while others were granted various types of autonomy during the course of centuries .
Following a long period of military setbacks against European powers , the Ottoman Empire gradually declined into the late nineteenth century .
In the 19th century its main predecessor was a leader in Evangelicalism .
It embraces both liturgical and evangelical elements .
As of 2014 , worldwide membership was about 12 million : 7.2 million in the United States , and 4.4 million in Africa , Asia and Europe .
It is a member of the World Council of Churches , the World Methodist Council , and other religious associations .
A small group of students , including John Wesley , Charles Wesley and George Whitefield , met on the Oxford University campus .
They focused on Bible study , methodical study of scripture and living a holy life .
Eventually , the so-called Methodists started individual societies or classes for members of the Church of England who wanted to live a more religious life .
In less than two years , the `` Holy Club '' disbanded .
John Wesley returned to England and met with a group of clergy he respected .
He said `` they appeared to be of one heart , as well as of one judgment , resolved to be Bible-Christians at all events ; and , wherever they were , to preach with all their might plain , old , Bible Christianity '' .
The ministers retained their membership in the Church of England .
Three teachings they saw as the foundation of Christian faith were :
Together with Coke , Wesley sent a revision of the Anglican Prayerbook and the Articles of Religion which were received and adopted by the Baltimore Christmas Conference of 1784 , officially establishing the Methodist Episcopal Church .
Three years later , protesting racial segregation in the worship services , Allen led most of the black members out of St. George 's ; eventually they founded the Mother Bethel A.M.E. Church and the African Methodist Episcopal denomination .
Absalom Jones became an Episcopal priest .
In 1836 , the church 's basement was excavated to make room for a Sunday School .
In the 1920s a court case saved the church from being demolished to make way for the Benjamin Franklin Bridge .
The case resulted in the bridge being relocated .
Historic St Georges welcomes visitors and is home to archives and a museum on Methodism .
In the more than 220 years since 1784 , Methodism in the United States , like many other Protestant denominations , has seen a number of divisions and mergers .
With the words , `` Lord of the Church , we are united in Thee , in Thy Church and now in The United Methodist Church '' the new denomination was given birth by the two churches that had distinguished histories and influential ministries in various parts of the world .
Some argue that The United Methodist Church can lay a claim on apostolic succession , as understood in the traditional sense .
Coke was then `` set apart '' as a superintendent -LRB- bishop -RRB- by Wesley and dispatched with Vasey and Whatcoat to America to take charge of Methodist activities there .
In defense of his action to ordain , Wesley himself cited an ancient opinion from the Church of Alexandria , which held that bishops and presbyters constituted one order and therefore , bishops are to be elected from and by the presbyterate .
He knew that for two centuries the succession of bishops in the Church of Alexandria was preserved through ordination by presbyters alone and was considered valid by the ancient church .
Methodists today who would argue for apostolic succession would do so on these grounds .
While many United Methodist congregations operate in the evangelical tradition , others reflect the mainline Protestant traditions .
Outler 's work proved pivotal in the work of union , and he is largely considered the first United Methodist theologian .
It is that power which enables us to love and motivates us to seek a relationship with God through Jesus Christ .
This grace is the present work of God to turn us from our sin-corrupted human will to the loving will of the Father .
In this work , God desires that we might sense both our sinfulness before God and God 's offer of salvation .
It is in justifying grace we are received by God , in spite of our sin .
In this reception , we are forgiven through the atoning work of Jesus Christ on the cross .
This experience can occur in different ways ; it can be one transforming moment , such as an altar call experience , or it may involve a series of decisions across a period of time .
Sanctifying grace enables us to respond to God by leading a Spirit-filled and Christ-like life aimed toward love .
Wesley never claimed this state of perfection for himself but instead insisted the attainment of perfection was possible for all Christians .
Here the English Reformer parted company with both Luther and Calvin , who denied that a man would ever reach a state in this life in which he could not fall into sin .
Such a man can lose all inclination to evil and can gain perfection in this life .
It has been characterized as Arminian theology with an emphasis on the work of the Holy Spirit to bring holiness into the life of the participating believer .
Comparatively , the UMC stands to the right of liberal and progressive Protestant groups such as the United Church of Christ and the Episcopal Church on certain issues -LRB- especially regarding sexuality -RRB- , but to the left of historically conservative evangelical traditions such as the Southern Baptists and Pentecostalism , in regard to theological matters such as social justice and Biblical interpretation .
However , it should be noted that the UMC is made up of a broad diversity of thought , and so there are many clergy and laity within the UMC that hold differing viewpoints on such theological matters .
The United Methodist Church upholds the sanctity of human life both of the child and the mother .
As a result , the church is `` reluctant to affirm abortion as an acceptable practice , '' and condemns the use of late-term or partial birth abortion except as a medical necessity .
The denomination as a whole is committed to `` assist -LSB- ing -RSB- the ministry of crisis pregnancy centers and pregnancy resource centers that compassionately help women find feasible alternatives to abortion . ''
In continuity with past Christian teaching , we recognize tragic conflicts of life with life that may justify abortion , and in such cases we support the legal option of abortion under proper medical procedures . ''
The church cautions that `` Governmental laws and regulations do not provide all the guidance required by the informed Christian conscience . ''
At one time , Methodist ministers had to take a pledge not to drink and encouraged their congregations to do the same .
Today the United Methodist Church states that it `` affirms our long-standing support of abstinence from alcohol as a faithful witness to God 's liberating and redeeming love for persons . ''
The Church also holds that the death penalty falls unfairly and unequally upon marginalized persons including the poor , the uneducated , ethnic and religious minorities , and persons with mental and emotional illnesses .
It forbids any United Methodist board , agency , committee , commission , or council to give United Methodist funds to any gay organization or group , or otherwise use such funds to promote the acceptance of homosexuality .
Other ministers have been defrocked for officiating at same-sex weddings and several trials of others are scheduled .
Still , some congregations have sought other ways to recognize same-sex couples .
For example , one congregation hosted a proposal for a same-sex couple announcing their engagement .
In April of 2016 , a United Methodist bishop made a bold statement by performing a same-sex marriage in church as a clear sign of his advocacy for change .
Nevertheless , The United Methodist Church `` implore -LSB- s -RSB- families and churches not to reject or condemn lesbian and gay members and friends '' and commits itself to be in ministry with all persons , affirming that God 's grace , love , and forgiveness is available to all .
The Judicial Council also affirmed that a Virginia pastor had the right to deny local church membership to a man in an openly gay relationship .
This affirmation , however , was based upon a senior pastor 's right to judge the readiness of a congregant to join as a full member of the church .
However , at the same time , the UMC Judicial Council , in 2008 , ruled that conferences can determine their own policy related to transgender pastors , and therefore some regional conferences have voted to recognize ordained transgender pastors .
However , the United Methodist Church also supports and extends its ministry to those persons who conscientiously choose to serve in the armed forces or to accept alternative service .
It insists that the first moral duty of all nations is to resolve by peaceful means every dispute that arises between or among them ; that human values must outweigh military claims as governments determine their priorities ; that the militarization of society must be challenged and stopped ; that the manufacture , sale , and deployment of armaments must be reduced and controlled ; and that the production , possession , or use of nuclear weapons be condemned .
It is harmful and is generally addictive .
The common pattern comes from John Wesley , who wrote that `` there is no Liturgy in the world , either in ancient or modern language , which breathes more of a solid , scriptural , rational piety , than the Common Prayer of the Church of England . ''
Wesley 's Sunday Service has shaped the official liturgies of the Methodists ever since .
Like other historic Christian churches , The United Methodist Church has official liturgies for services of Holy Communion , baptism , weddings , funerals , ordination , anointing of the sick and daily office prayer services .
Along with these , there are also special services for holy days such as All Saints Day , Ash Wednesday , Maundy Thursday , Good Friday , and Easter Vigil .
These services are contained in The United Methodist Hymnal and The United Methodist Book of Worship -LRB- 1992 -RRB- .
In most cases , congregations also use other elements of liturgical worship , such as candles , vestments , paraments , banners , and liturgical art .
Methodists also honor notable heroes and heroines of the Christian faith and look to these prominent saints as providing examples of holy living and commitment to Christ that are worthy of imitation -LRB- see 1 Corinthians 11:1 -RRB- .
Non-legislative resolutions are recorded in the Book of Resolutions , which is published after each General Conference , and expire after eight years unless passed again by a subsequent session of General Conference .
The last General Conference was held in Tampa , Florida , in 2012 .
The event is currently rotated between the U.S. jurisdictions of the church .
The 2016 General Conference will be in Portland , Oregon .
Bishops , Councils , Committees , Boards , Elders , etc. , are not permitted to speak on behalf of The United Methodist Church as this authority is reserved solely for the General Conference in accordance with the Book of Discipline .
Subordinate to the General Conference are the jurisdictional and central conferences which also meet every four years .
The decision generated controversy in light of Bush 's support of the Iraq War which the church bishops have criticized .
A debate over whether the decision should or could be submitted for approval by the Southern Jurisdictional Conference at its July 2008 meeting in Dallas , Texas , remains unresolved .
The ratio of laity to clergy alternates every eight years .
The Judicial Council interprets the Book of Discipline between sessions of General Conference , and during General Conference , the Judicial Council rules on the constitutionality of laws passed by General Conference .
The Council also determines whether actions of local churches , annual conferences , church agencies , and bishops are in accordance with church law .
The Council reviews all decisions of law made by bishops The Judicial Council can not create any legislation ; it can only interpret existing legislation .
The Judicial Council also hears appeals from those who have been accused of chargeable offenses that can result in defrocking or revocation of membership .
In many ways , the United Methodist Church operates in a connectional organization of the Annual Conferences , and actions taken by one conference are not binding upon another .
All churches must also have a nominations committee , a finance committee and a church council or administrative council .
Other committees are suggested but not required such as a missions committee , or evangelism or worship committee .
Term limits are set for some committees but not for all .
This committee has the exclusive power to set pastors ' salaries -LRB- compensation packages for tax purposes -RRB- and to elect officers to the committees .
Throughout its history , the United Methodist Church has placed great emphasis on the importance of education .
Today , the clergy includes men and women who are ordained by bishops as elders and deacons and are appointed to various ministries .
Elders in the United Methodist Church itenerate and are subject to the authority and appointment of their bishops .
Deacons are in service ministry and may serve as musicians , liturgists , educators , business administrators , and a number of other areas .
Elders and deacons are required to obtain a master 's degree -LRB- generally an M.Div . -RRB-
, or another equivalent degree , before commissioning and then ultimately ordination .
Many Annual Conferences try to avoid making appointment changes between sessions of Annual Conference .
Appointment tenures in extension ministries , such as military chaplaincy , campus ministry , missions , higher education and other ministries beyond the local church are often even longer .
Elders are given the authority to preach the Word of God , administer the sacraments of the church , to provide care and counseling , and to order the life of the church for ministry and mission .
Deacons are called by God , affirmed by the church , and ordained by a bishop to servant leadership within the church.They are ordained to ministries of word , service , compassion , and justice .
They may be appointed to ministry within the local church or to an extension ministry that supports the mission of the church .
This created new orders known as `` provisional elder '' or `` provisional deacon '' for those who seek to be ordained in the respective orders .
During this two or three-year period , the provisional elder is granted sacramental ministry in their local appointment .
For the first time in its history non-ordained pastors became a normal expectation , rather than an extraordinary provision for ministry .
Local Pastors are called by God , affirmed by the church , and appointed by a bishop to a ministry of Word , Sacrament , Order and Service within the church .
The Local Pastor are given the authority to preach the Word of God , administer the sacraments of the church , to provide care and counseling , and to order the life of the church for ministry and mission , but are not ordained .
When elders are not available to be appointed to a local church , either through shortage of personnel or financial hardship of a pastoral charge , the bishop may appoint a `` local pastor '' to serve the pastoral appointment .
Local Pastors are often bi-vocational , living out their ministerial call in the local church and in their field of employment .
Full-time and part-time licensed local pastors under appointment are clergy and hold membership in the annual conference and not in the local church .
They also may continue towards ordination if they complete their bachelor 's degree , requirements of their particular Conference Board of Ordained Ministry , as well as an advanced course or study or prescribed seminary courses at an approved seminary .
Upon retirement , local pastors return to their charge conference as lay members .
The United Methodist Church -LRB- UMC -RRB- practices infant and adult baptism .
Individuals who were not previously baptized are baptized as part of their profession of faith and thus become Professing Members in this manner .
The term confirmation is generally reserved for youth , while some variation on membership class is generally used for adults wishing to join the church .
The Book of Discipline normally allows any youth at least completing sixth grade to participate , although the pastor has discretionary authority to allow a younger person to participate .
Another position in the United Methodist Church is that of the lay servant .
Although not considered clergy , lay speakers often preach during services of worship when an ordained elder , Local Pastor , Associate Member or deacon is unavailable .
Each year they must reapply , reporting how they have served and continued to learn during that year .
To be recognized as certified lay servant , they must be recommended by their pastor and Church Council or Charge Conference , complete the basic course and one advanced lay servant course , and be interviewed by the District or Conference Committee on Lay Speaking .
The United Methodist Church is active in ecumenical relations with other Christian groups and denominations .
It is a member of the National Council of Churches , the World Council of Churches , Churches Uniting in Christ , and Christian Churches Together .
Like many other mainline Protestant denominations in the United States , the United Methodist Church has experienced significant membership losses in recent decades .
In 1975 , membership dropped below 10 million for the first time .
Membership is concentrated primarily in the Midwest and in the South .
The states with the highest membership rates are Oklahoma , Iowa , Mississippi , West Virginia , and North Carolina .
Significantly , about 20 % of the conference delegates were from Africa , with Filipinos and Europeans making up another 10 % .
During the conference , the delegates voted to finalize the induction of the Methodist Church of the Ivory Coast and its 700,000 members into the denomination .
Given current trends in the UMC -- with overseas churches growing , especially in Africa , and U.S. churches collectively losing about 1,000 members a week -- it has been estimated that Africans will make up at least 30 % of the delegates at the 2012 General Conference , and it is also possible that 40 % of the delegates will be from outside the U.S. .
One Congolese bishop has estimated that typical Sunday attendance of the UMC is higher in his country than in the entire United States .
The outnumbered French particularly depended on the Indians .
Long in conflict , the metropole nations declared war on each other in 1756 , escalating the war from a regional affair into an intercontinental conflict .
Orders for the deportation were given by William Shirley , Commander-in-Chief , North America , without direction from Great Britain .
The Acadians , both those captured in arms and those who had sworn the loyalty oath to His Britannic Majesty , were expelled .
Native Americans were likewise driven off their land to make way for settlers from New England .
After the disastrous 1757 British campaigns -LRB- resulting in a failed expedition against Louisbourg and the Siege of Fort William Henry , which was followed by Indian torture and massacres of British victims -RRB- , the British government fell .
Between 1758 and 1760 , the British military launched a campaign to capture the Colony of Canada .
They succeeded in capturing territory in surrounding colonies and ultimately Quebec .
The outcome was one of the most significant developments in a century of Anglo-French conflict .
The conflict is known by multiple names .
In British America , wars were often named after the sitting British monarch , such as King William 's War or Queen Anne 's War .
American historians generally use the traditional name or sometimes the Seven Years ' War .
In Europe , the North American theater of the Seven Years ' War usually is not given a separate name .
The entire international conflict is known as the Seven Years ' War .
Fewer lived in New Orleans , Biloxi , Mississippi , Mobile , Alabama and small settlements in the Illinois Country , hugging the east side of the Mississippi River and its tributaries .
Traders married daughters of chiefs , creating high-ranking unions .
Many of the older colonies had land claims that extended arbitrarily far to the west , as the extent of the continent was unknown at the time their provincial charters were granted .
Nova Scotia , which had been captured from France in 1713 , still had a significant French-speaking population .
Britain also claimed Rupert 's Land , where the Hudson 's Bay Company traded for furs with local tribes .
In 1758 the Pennsylvania government successfully negotiated the Treaty of Easton , in which a number of tribes in the Ohio Country promised neutrality in exchange for land concessions and other considerations .
Most of the other northern tribes sided with the French , their primary trading partner and supplier of arms .
The Creek and Cherokee were subject to diplomatic efforts by both the French and British to gain either their support or neutrality in the conflict .
It was not uncommon for small bands to participate on the `` other side '' of the conflict from formally negotiated agreements , as most tribes were decentralized and bands made their own decisions about warfare .
New France was defended by about 3,000 troupes de la marine , companies of colonial regulars -LRB- some of whom had significant woodland combat experience -RRB- .
The colonial government recruited militia support when needed .
It went up the St. Lawrence , continued along the northern shore of Lake Ontario , crossed the portage at Niagara , and followed the southern shore of Lake Erie .
At the Chautauqua Portage -LRB- near present-day Barcelona , New York -RRB- , the expedition moved inland to the Allegheny River , which it followed to the site of present-day Pittsburgh .
There Céloron buried lead plates engraved with the French claim to the Ohio Country .
Disappointed , Céloron returned to Montreal in November 1749 .
I do n't know in what way they could be brought back . ''
Conflicts between the colonies , accomplished through raiding parties that included Indian allies , had taken place for decades , leading to a brisk trade in European colonial captives from either side .
The grant required that it settle 100 families in the territory , and construct a fort for their protection .
But , as the territory was also claimed by Pennsylvania , both colonies began pushing for action to improve their respective claims .
By the late 17th century , the Iroquois had pushed many tribes out of the Ohio Valley , and kept it as hunting ground by right of conquest .
The treaty was primarily focused on resolving issues in Europe .
The disputes also extended into the Atlantic Ocean , where both powers wanted access to the rich fisheries of the Grand Banks off Newfoundland .
His permanent replacement , the Marquis Duquesne , did not arrive in New France until 1752 to take over the post .
The continuing British activity in the Ohio territories prompted Longueuil to dispatch another expedition to the area under the command of Charles Michel de Langlade , an officer in the Troupes de la Marine .
He was reportedly ritually cannibalized by some aboriginal members of the expedition .
Marin followed the route that Céloron had mapped out four years earlier , but where Céloron had limited the record of French claims to the burial of lead plates , Marin constructed and garrisoned forts .
He had a road built to the headwaters of LeBoeuf Creek .
As he moved south , he drove off or captured British traders , alarming both the British and the Iroquois .
He intensely disliked the French -LRB- whom he accused of killing and eating his father -RRB- .
Traveling to Fort Le Boeuf , he threatened the French with military action , which Marin contemptuously dismissed .
The Iroquois sent runners to the manor of William Johnson in upstate New York .
He spoke their languages and had become a respected honorary member of the Iroquois Confederacy in the area .
Later he was commissioned as a colonel of the Western New York Militia .
They met at Albany , New York with Governor Clinton and officials from some of the other American colonies .
When Clinton did not respond to his satisfaction , Chief Hendrick said that the `` Covenant Chain '' , a long-standing friendly relationship between the Iroquois Confederacy and the British Crown , was broken .
When these forces arrived at the fort on April 16 , Contrecœur generously allowed Trent 's small company to withdraw .
After Washington had returned to Williamsburg , Dinwiddie ordered him to lead a larger force to assist Trent in his work .
While en route , Washington learned of Trent 's retreat .
Since Tanaghrisson had promised support to the British , Washington continued toward Fort Duquesne and met with the Mingo leader .
The historian Fred Anderson suggests that Tanaghrisson was acting to gain the support of the British and regain authority over his own people .
They had been inclined to support the French , with whom they had long trading relationships .
One of Tanaghrisson 's men told Contrecoeur that Jumonville had been killed by British musket fire .
News of the two battles reached England in August .
They chose Major General Edward Braddock to lead the expedition .
Admiral Edward Hawke detached a fast squadron to North America in an attempt to intercept the French .
It was attacked by French and Indian soldiers ambushing them from up in trees and behind logs .
Braddock called for a retreat .
He was killed .
The remaining 500 British troops , led by George Washington , retreated to Virginia .
Supplies for use in the projected attack on Niagara were cached at Fort Bull .
He had primarily been concerned about the extended supply line to the forts on the Ohio , and had sent Baron Dieskau to lead the defenses at Frontenac against Shirley 's expected attack .
Dieskau planned to attack the British encampment at Fort Edward at the upper end of navigation on the Hudson River , but Johnson had strongly fortified it , and Dieskau 's Indian support was reluctant to attack .
The two forces finally met in the bloody Battle of Lake George between Fort Edward and Fort William Henry .
Monckton 's forces , including companies of Rogers ' Rangers , forcibly removed thousands of Acadians , chasing down many who resisted , and sometimes committing atrocities .
More than any other factor , the cutting off of supplies to Louisbourg led to its demise .
The Acadian resistance , in concert with native allies , including the Mi ` kmaq , was sometimes quite stiff , with ongoing frontier raids -LRB- against Dartmouth and Lunenburg among others -RRB- .
Bogged down by disagreements and disputes with others , including William Johnson and New York 's Governor Sir Charles Hardy , Shirley 's plan had little support .
Neither of these men had as much campaign experience as the trio of officers France sent to North America .
Governor Vaudreuil , who harboured ambitions to become the French commander in chief -LRB- in addition to his role as governor -RRB- , acted during the winter of 1756 before those reinforcements arrived .
French forces in the Ohio valley also continued to intrigue with Indians throughout the area , encouraging them to raid frontier settlements .
This led to ongoing alarms along the western frontiers , with streams of refugees returning east to get away from the action .
The new British command was not in place until July .
Montcalm took bold action against his inertia .
The Europeans did not consider them prizes and prevented the Indians from stripping the prisoners of their valuables , which angered the Indians .
Beset by delays of all kinds , the expedition was finally ready to sail from Halifax , Nova Scotia in early August .
In the meantime French ships had escaped the British blockade of the French coast , and a fleet outnumbering the British one awaited Loudoun at Louisbourg .
In January they ambushed British rangers near Ticonderoga .
In early August , Montcalm and 7,000 troops besieged the fort , which capitulated with an agreement to withdraw under parole .
The aftermath of the siege may have contributed to the transmission of smallpox into remote Indian populations ; as some Indians were reported to have traveled from beyond the Mississippi to participate in the campaign and returned afterward having been exposed to European carriers .
His schemes to supply the colony inflated prices and were believed by Montcalm to line his pockets and those of his associates .
A massive outbreak of smallpox among western tribes led many of them to stay away from trading in 1758 .
While many parties to the conflict blamed others -LRB- the Indians blamed the French for bringing `` bad medicine '' as well as denying them prizes at Fort William Henry -RRB- , the disease was probably spread through the crowded conditions at William Henry after the battle .
Newcastle and Pitt joined in an uneasy coalition in which Pitt dominated the military planning .
He had been replaced by Abercrombie as commander in chief after the failures of 1757 .
In one piece of good fortune , some French supply ships managed to depart France , eluding the British blockade of the French coast .
The British provided medical treatment for the sick and wounded French soldiers and French regular troops were returned to France aboard British ships with an agreement that they were not to serve again in the present war .
France chose to cede the former , but was able to negotiate the retention of Saint Pierre and Miquelon , two small islands in the Gulf of St. Lawrence , along with fishing rights in the area .
The contemporaneous French philosopher Voltaire referred to Canada disparagingly as nothing more than a few acres of snow .
The British , for their part , were happy to take New France , as defence of their North American colonies would no longer be an issue and also because they already had ample places from which to obtain sugar .
Spain , which traded Florida to Britain to regain Cuba , also gained Louisiana , including New Orleans , from France in compensation for its losses .
Great Britain and Spain also agreed that navigation on the Mississippi River was to be open to vessels of all nations .
Some were sent to colonize places as diverse as French Guiana and the Falkland Islands ; these latter efforts were unsuccessful .
The Louisiana population contributed to the founding of the modern Cajun population .
-LRB- The French word `` Acadien '' evolved to `` Cadien '' , then to `` Cajun '' . -RRB-
The proclamation also contained provisions that prevented civic participation by the Roman Catholic Canadians .
When accommodations were made in the Quebec Act in 1774 to address this and other issues , religious concerns were raised in the largely Protestant Thirteen Colonies over the advance of `` popery '' ; the Act maintained French Civil law , including the seigneurial system , a medieval code soon to be removed from France within a generation by the French Revolution .
The change of control in Florida also prompted most of its Spanish Catholic population to leave .
In part this was due to an incomplete understanding of the sometimes non-obvious force of friction , and a consequently inadequate view of the nature of natural motion .
Most of the previous misunderstandings about motion and force were eventually corrected by Galileo Galilei and Sir Isaac Newton .
This theory , based on the everyday experience of how objects move , such as the constant application of a force needed to keep a cart moving , had conceptual trouble accounting for the behavior of projectiles , such as the flight of arrows .
The place where the archer moves the projectile was at the start of the flight , and while the projectile sailed through the air , no discernible efficient cause acts on it .
Aristotle was aware of this problem and proposed that the air displaced through the projectile 's path carries the projectile to its target .
This explanation demands a continuum like air for change of place in general .
That is , the first law contradicts the intuitive Aristotelian belief that a net force is required to keep an object moving with constant velocity .
Specifically , in systems where objects are moving with different velocities , it is impossible to determine which object is `` in motion '' and which object is `` at rest '' .
A person can throw a ball straight up in the air and catch it as it falls down without worrying about applying a force in the direction the vehicle is moving .
It is the inertia of the ball associated with its constant velocity in the direction of the vehicle 's motion that ensures the ball continues to move forward even as it is thrown up and falls back down .
Since there is no experiment that can distinguish whether it is the vehicle that is at rest or the outside world that is at rest , the two situations are considered to be physically indistinguishable .
If an astronaut places an object with mass in mid-air next to himself , it will remain stationary with respect to the astronaut due to its inertia .
This is the same thing that would occur if the astronaut and the object were in intergalactic space with no net force of gravity acting on their shared reference frame .
However , while kinematics are well-described through reference frame analysis in advanced physics , there are still deep questions that remain as to what is the proper definition of mass .
Whenever a first body exerts a force F on a second body , the second body exerts a force − F on the first body .
This law is sometimes referred to as the action-reaction law , with F called the `` action '' and − F the `` reaction '' .
The action and the reaction are simultaneous :
That is , the action-reaction force shared between any two objects in a closed system will not cause the center of mass of the system to accelerate .
The constituent objects only accelerate with respect to each other , the system itself remains unaccelerated .
Forces act in a particular direction and have sizes dependent upon how strong the push or pull is .
For example , when determining what happens when two forces act on the same object , it is necessary to know both the magnitude and the direction of both forces to calculate the result .
For example , if you know that two people are pulling on the same rope with known magnitudes of force but you do not know which direction either person is pulling , it is impossible to determine what the acceleration of the rope will be .
The two people could be pulling against each other as in tug of war or the two people could be pulling in the same direction .
In this simple one-dimensional example , without knowing the direction of the forces it is impossible to decide whether the net force is the result of adding the two force magnitudes or subtracting one from the other .
The magnitude of the resultant varies from the difference of the magnitudes of the two forces to their sum , depending on the angle between their lines of action .
Resolving force vectors into components of a set of basis vectors is often a more mathematically clean way to describe forces than using magnitudes and directions .
Orthogonal components are independent of each other because forces acting at ninety degrees to each other have no effect on the magnitude or direction of the other .
Choosing a set of orthogonal basis vectors is often done by considering what set of basis vectors will make the mathematics most convenient .
Choosing a basis vector that is in the same direction as one of the forces is desirable , since that force would then have only one non-zero component .
Galileo realized that simple velocity addition demands that the concept of an `` absolute rest frame '' did not exist .
This was contrary to Aristotle 's notion of a `` natural state '' of rest that objects with mass naturally approached .
Simple experiments showed that Galileo 's understanding of the equivalence of constant velocity and rest were correct .
For example , if a mariner dropped a cannonball from the crow 's nest of a ship moving at a constant velocity , Aristotelian physics would have the cannonball fall straight down while the ship moved beneath it .
Since there is no forward horizontal force being applied on the cannonball as it falls , the only conclusion left is that the cannonball continues to move with the same velocity as the boat as it falls .
Thus , no force is required to keep the cannonball moving at the constant forward velocity .
This results in zero net force , but since the object started with a non-zero velocity , it continues to move with a non-zero velocity .
This is , of course , difficult to imagine in the context of `` forces '' .
Thus in the case of two fermions there is a strictly negative correlation between spatial and spin variables , whereas for two bosons -LRB- e.g. quanta of electromagnetic waves , photons -RRB- the correlation is strictly positive .
Thus the currently known fundamental forces are considered more accurately to be `` fundamental interactions '' .
:199 -- 128 When particle A emits -LRB- creates -RRB- or absorbs -LRB- annihilates -RRB- virtual particle B , a momentum conservation results in recoil of particle A making impression of repulsion or attraction between particles A A ' exchanging by B .
This description applies to all forces arising from fundamental interactions .
Matter and anti-matter particles are identical except for their direction of propagation through the Feynman diagram .
World lines of particles intersect at interaction vertices , and the Feynman diagram represents any force arising from an interaction as occurring at the vertex with an associated instantaneous change in the direction of the particle world lines .
Gauge bosons are emitted away from the vertex as wavy lines and , in the case of virtual particle exchange , are absorbed at an adjacent vertex .
All other forces in nature derive from these four fundamental interactions .
Similarly , the forces in springs , modeled by Hooke 's law , are the result of electromagnetic forces and the Exclusion Principle acting together to return an object to its equilibrium position .
Centrifugal forces are acceleration forces that arise simply from the acceleration of rotating frames of reference. :12 -11:359
The development of fundamental theories for forces proceeded along the lines of unification of disparate ideas .
Michael Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell demonstrated that electric and magnetic forces were unified through one consistent theory of electromagnetism .
This standard model of particle physics posits a similarity between the forces and led scientists to predict the unification of the weak and electromagnetic forces in electroweak theory subsequently confirmed by observation .
The complete formulation of the standard model predicts an as yet unobserved Higgs mechanism , but observations such as neutrino oscillations indicate that the standard model is incomplete .
A Grand Unified Theory allowing for the combination of the electroweak interaction with the strong force is held out as a possibility with candidate theories such as supersymmetry proposed to accommodate some of the outstanding unsolved problems in physics .
Einstein tried and failed at this endeavor , but currently the most popular approach to answering this question is string theory. :212 -- 219
Before Newton , the tendency for objects to fall towards the Earth was not understood to be related to the motions of celestial objects .
Thus an object that has a mass of will experience a force :
In this equation , a dimensional constant is used to describe the relative strength of gravity .
Succinctly stated , Newton 's Law of Gravitation states that the force on a spherical object of mass due to the gravitational pull of mass is
This was the first time that Newton 's Theory of Gravity had been shown to be less correct than an alternative .
In GR , gravitation is not viewed as a force , but rather , objects moving freely in gravitational fields travel under their own inertia in straight lines through curved space-time -- defined as the shortest space-time path between two space-time events .
From the perspective of the object , all motion occurs as if there were no gravitation whatsoever .
For example , a basketball thrown from the ground moves in a parabola , as it is in a uniform gravitational field .
Its space-time trajectory -LRB- when the extra ct dimension is added -RRB- is almost a straight line , slightly curved -LRB- with the radius of curvature of the order of few light-years -RRB- .
Fully stated , this is the law :
These `` Maxwell Equations '' fully described the sources of the fields as being stationary and moving charges , and the interactions of the fields themselves .
This insight united the nascent fields of electromagnetic theory with optics and led directly to a complete description of the electromagnetic spectrum .
In QED , photons are the fundamental exchange particle , which described all interactions relating to electromagnetism including the electromagnetic force .
-LSB- Note 4 -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Since electrons are fermions , they can not occupy the same quantum mechanical state as other electrons .
When the electrons in a material are densely packed together , there are not enough lower energy quantum mechanical states for them all , so some of them must be in higher energy states .
The failure of many searches for free quarks has shown that the elementary particles affected are not directly observable .
Still , it is stronger than gravity over short distances .
Such temperatures have been probed in modern particle accelerators and show the conditions of the universe in the early moments of the Big Bang .
An example of the normal force in action is the impact force on an object crashing into an immobile surface .
For every string that acts on a load , another factor of the tension force in the string acts on the load .
However , even though such machines allow for an increase in force , there is a corresponding increase in the length of string that must be displaced in order to move the load .
For situations where lattice holding together the atoms in an object is able to flow , contract , expand , or otherwise change shape , the theories of continuum mechanics describe the way forces affect the material .
where is the relevant cross-sectional area for the volume for which the stress-tensor is being calculated .
where is the mass of the object , is the velocity of the object and is the distance to the center of the circular path and is the unit vector pointing in the radial direction outwards from the center .
The unbalanced force that accelerates an object can be resolved into a component that is perpendicular to the path , and one that is tangential to the path .
This is often due to macrophysical considerations that yield forces as arising from a macroscopic statistical average of microstates .
However , for any sufficiently detailed description , all these forces are the results of conservative ones since each of these macroscopic forces are the net results of the gradients of microscopic potentials .
The kilogram-force is not a part of the modern SI system , and is generally deprecated ; however it still sees use for some purposes as expressing aircraft weight , jet thrust , bicycle spoke tension , torque wrench settings and engine output torque .
