Architecturally , the school has a Catholic character .
At the end of the main drive -LRB- and in a direct line that connects through 3 statues and the Gold Dome -RRB- , is a simple , modern stone statue of Mary .
As at most other universities , Notre Dame 's students run a number of news media outlets .
The Dome yearbook is published annually .
Unlike Scholastic and The Dome , The Observer is an independent publication and does not have a faculty advisor or any editorial oversight from the University .
Likewise , in 2003 , when other students believed that the paper showed a liberal bias , the conservative paper Irish Rover went into production .
Neither paper is published as often as The Observer ; however , all three are distributed to all students .
Finally , in Spring 2008 an undergraduate journal for political science research , Beyond Politics , made its debut .
The university through the Moreau Seminary has ties to theologian Frederick Buechner .
Additionally , the college offers five-year dual degree programs with the Colleges of Arts and Letters and of Business awarding additional B.A. and Master of Business Administration -LRB- MBA -RRB- degrees , respectively .
Each student is given an academic advisor from the program who helps them to choose classes that give them exposure to any major in which they are interested .
The program expanded to include Master of Laws -LRB- LL.M . -RRB-
and Master of Civil Engineering in its early stages of growth , before a formal graduate school education was developed with a thesis not required to receive the degrees .
Today each of the five colleges offer graduate education .
program also exists .
The School of Architecture offers a Master of Architecture , while each of the departments of the College of Engineering offer PhD programs .
The College of Business offers multiple professional programs including MBA and Master of Science in Accountancy programs .
It also operates facilities in Chicago and Cincinnati for its executive MBA program .
It offers PhD , Master 's , and undergraduate degrees in peace studies .
The institute has contributed to international policy discussions about peace building practices .
The library system of the university is divided between the main library and each of the colleges and schools .
The university practices a non-restrictive early action policy that allows admitted students to consider admission to Notre Dame as well as any other colleges to which they were accepted .
While all entering students begin in the College of the First Year of Studies , 25 % have indicated they plan to study in the liberal arts or social sciences , 24 % in engineering , 24 % in business , 24 % in science , and 3 % in architecture .
U.S. News & World Report also lists Notre Dame Law School as 22nd overall .
It ranks the MBA program as 20th overall .
The Philosophical Gourmet Report ranks Notre Dame 's graduate philosophy program as 15th nationally , while ARCHITECT Magazine ranked the undergraduate architecture program as 12th nationally .
According to payscale.com , undergraduate alumni of University of Notre Dame have a mid-career median salary $ 110,000 , making it the 24th highest among colleges and universities in the United States .
The median starting salary of $ 55,300 ranked 58th in the same peer group .
Carrier taught that scientific research and its promise for progress were not antagonistic to the ideals of intellectual and moral culture endorsed by the Church .
Zahm was active in the Catholic Summer School movement , which introduced Catholic laity to contemporary intellectual issues .
The intervention of Irish American Catholics in Rome prevented Zahm 's censure by the Vatican .
In 1913 , Zahm and former President Theodore Roosevelt embarked on a major expedition through the Amazon .
Study of nuclear physics at the university began with the building of a nuclear accelerator in 1936 , and continues now partly through a partnership in the Joint Institute for Nuclear Astrophysics .
This area of research originated in a question posed by Pasteur as to whether animal life was possible without bacteria .
Though others had taken up this idea , their research was short lived and inconclusive .
Lobund was the first research organization to answer definitively , that such life is possible and that it can be prolonged through generations .
But the objective was not merely to answer Pasteur 's question but also to produce the germ free animal as a new tool for biological and medical research .
This objective was reached and for years Lobund was a unique center for the study and production of germ free animals and for their use in biological and medical investigations .
Today the work has spread to other universities .
In the beginning it was under the Department of Biology and a program leading to the master 's degree accompanied the research program .
It quickly emerged as part of an international Catholic intellectual revival , offering an alternative vision to positivist philosophy .
Intellectual leaders included Gurian , Jacques Maritain , Frank O'Malley , Leo Richard Ward , F. A. Hermens , and John U. Nef .
It became a major forum for political ideas and modern political concerns , especially from a Catholic and scholastic tradition .
As of 2012 -LSB- update -RSB- research continued in many fields .
Recent research includes work on family conflict and child development , genome mapping , the increasing trade deficit of the United States with China , studies in fluid mechanics , computational science and engineering , and marketing trends on the Internet .
students .
As of March 2007 -LSB- update -RSB- The Princeton Review ranked the school as the fifth highest ` dream school ' for parents to send their children .
As of March 2015 -LSB- update -RSB- The Princeton Review ranked Notre Dame as the ninth highest .
The school has been previously criticized for its lack of diversity , and The Princeton Review ranks the university highly among schools at which `` Alternative Lifestyles -LSB- are -RSB- Not an Alternative . ''
It has also been commended by some diversity oriented publications ; Hispanic Magazine in 2004 ranked the university ninth on its list of the top -- 25 colleges for Latinos , and The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education recognized the university in 2006 for raising enrollment of African-American students .
With 6,000 participants , the university 's intramural sports program was named in 2004 by Sports Illustrated as the best program in the country , while in 2007 The Princeton Review named it as the top school where `` Everyone Plays Intramural Sports . ''
The university maintains a visiting policy -LRB- known as parietal hours -RRB- for those students who live in dormitories , specifying times when members of the opposite sex are allowed to visit other students ' dorm rooms ; however , all residence halls have 24-hour social spaces for students regardless of gender .
Many residence halls have at least one nun and/or priest as a resident .
There are no traditional social fraternities or sororities at the university , but a majority of students live in the same residence hall for all four years .
Some intramural sports are based on residence hall teams , where the university offers the only non-military academy program of full-contact intramural American football .
At the end of the intramural season , the championship game is played on the field in Notre Dame Stadium .
There are multitudes of religious statues and artwork around campus , most prominent of which are the statue of Mary on the Main Building , the Notre Dame Grotto , and the Word of Life mural on Hesburgh Library depicting Christ as a teacher .
Additionally , every classroom displays a crucifix .
There are many religious clubs -LRB- catholic and non-Catholic -RRB- at the school , including Council # 1477 of the Knights of Columbus -LRB- KOC -RRB- , Baptist Collegiate Ministry -LRB- BCM -RRB- , Jewish Club , Muslim Student Association , Orthodox Christian Fellowship , The Mormon Club , and many more .
The Notre Dame KofC are known for being the first collegiate council of KofC , operating a charitable concession stand during every home football game and owning their own building on campus which can be used as a cigar lounge .
The university founder , Fr .
The library collection was also rebuilt and stayed housed in the new Main Building for years afterwards .
Around the time of the fire , a music hall was opened .
The hall housed multiple classrooms and science labs needed for early research at the university .
By contrast , the Jesuit colleges , bastions of academic conservatism , were reluctant to move to a system of electives .
Notre Dame continued to grow over the years , adding more colleges , programs , and sports teams .
The university continued to expand and add new residence halls and buildings with each subsequent president .
One of the main driving forces in the growth of the University was its football team , the Notre Dame Fighting Irish .
Knute Rockne has the highest winning percentage -LRB- .881 -RRB- in NCAA Division I/FBS football history .
Rockne 's offenses employed the Notre Dame Box and his defenses ran a 7 -- 2 -- 2 scheme .
The last game Rockne coached was on December 14 , 1930 when he led a group of Notre Dame all-stars against the New York Giants in New York City .
The success of its football team made Notre Dame a household name .
The success of Note Dame reflected rising status of Irish Americans and Catholics in the 1920s .
Yet this role as high-profile flagship institution of Catholicism made it an easy target of anti-Catholicism .
Nativism and anti-Catholicism , especially when directed towards immigrants , were cornerstones of the KKK 's rhetoric , and Notre Dame was seen as a symbol of the threat posed by the Catholic Church .
Clashes with the student body started on March 17 , when students , aware of the anti-Catholic animosity , blocked the Klansmen from descending from their trains in the South Bend station and ripped the KKK clothes and regalia .
On May 19 thousands of students massed downtown protesting the Klavern , and only the arrival of college president Fr .
Matthew Walsh prevented any further clashes .
The next day , football coach Knute Rockne spoke at a campus rally and implored the students to obey the college president and refrain from further violence .
A few days later the Klavern broke up , but the hostility shown by the students was an omen and a contribution to the downfall of the KKK in Indiana .
O'Hara strongly believed that the Fighting Irish football team could be an effective means to `` acquaint the public with the ideals that dominate '' Notre Dame .
When St. Paul said : ` Whether you eat or drink , or whatsoever else you do , do all for the glory of God , ' he included football . ''
Cavanaugh also established a system of advisory councils at the university , which continue today and are vital to the university 's governance and development
After extensive debate , merging with St. Mary 's was rejected , primarily because of the differential in faculty qualifications and pay scales .
In this environment of diversity , the integration of the sexes is a normal and expected aspect , replacing separatism . ''
Two of the male residence halls were converted for the newly admitted female students that first year , while two others were converted for the next school year .
In 1972 the first woman to graduate was Angela Sienko , who earned a bachelor 's degree in marketing .
Notre Dame 's most recent -LSB- when ? -RSB-
capital campaign raised $ 1.1 billion , far exceeding its goal of $ 767 million , and is the largest in the history of Catholic higher education .
In his inaugural address , Jenkins described his goals of making the university a leader in research that recognizes ethics and building the connection between faith and studies .
Because of its Catholic identity , a number of religious buildings stand on campus .
Sorin 's original church , which became too small for the growing college .
Sorin to be artist in residence .
The Basilica also features a bell tower with a carillon .
Inside the church there are also sculptures by Ivan Mestrovic .
It is very popular among students and alumni as a place of prayer and meditation , and it is considered one of the most beloved spots on campus .
A Science Hall was built in 1883 under the direction of Fr .
Many businesses , services , and divisions of The Office of Student Affairs are found within .
The building also houses restaurants from national restaurant chains .
Since the construction of its oldest buildings , the university 's physical plant has grown substantially .
Since 2004 , several buildings have been added , including the DeBartolo Performing Arts Center , the Guglielmino Complex , and the Jordan Hall of Science .
Ryan Hall was completed and began housing undergraduate women in the fall of 2009 .
A new engineering building , Stinson-Remick Hall , a new combination Center for Social Concerns/Institute for Church Life building , Geddes Hall , and a law school addition have recently been completed as well .
Additionally the new hockey arena opened in the fall of 2011 .
The Stayer Center for Executive Education , which houses the Mendoza College of Business Executive Education Department opened in March 2013 just South of the Mendoza College of Business building .
Because of its long athletic tradition , the university features also many building dedicated to sport .
The most famous is Notre Dame Stadium , home of the Fighting Irish football team ; it has been renovated several times and today it can hold more than 80 thousand people .
Prominent venues include also the Edmund P. Joyce Center , with indoor basketball and volleyball courts , and the Compton Family Ice Arena , a two-rink facility dedicated to hockey .
Father Gustavo Gutierrez , the founder of Liberation Theology is a current faculty member .
The university owns several centers around the world used for international studies and research , conferences abroad , and alumni support .
The center enables the Colleges of Arts & Letters , Business Administration , Science , Engineering and the Law School to develop their own programs in London , as well as hosting conferences and symposia .
There are around 2,500 undergraduates and 750 graduates enrolled in the college .
According to university statistics , its science pre-professional program has one of the highest acceptance rates to medical school of any university in the United States .
The university is globally recognized for its Notre Dame School of Architecture , a faculty that teaches -LRB- pre-modernist -RRB- traditional and classical architecture and urban planning -LRB- e.g. following the principles of New Urbanism and New Classical Architecture -RRB- .
The library system also includes branch libraries for Architecture , Chemistry & Physics , Engineering , Law , and Mathematics as well as information centers in the Mendoza College of Business , the Kellogg Institute for International Studies , the Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies , and a slide library in O'Shaughnessy Hall .
Yves Simon -LRB- 1903 -- 61 -RRB- , brought to ND in the 1940s the insights of French studies in the Aristotelian-Thomistic tradition of philosophy ; his own teacher Jacques Maritain -LRB- 1882 -- 73 -RRB- was a frequent visitor to campus .
Other ND teams , chiefly in the Atlantic Coast Conference , have accumulated 16 national championships .
The Notre Dame Victory March is often regarded as the most famous and recognizable collegiate fight song .
Over 80 % of the university 's 8,000 undergraduates live on campus in one of 29 single-sex residence halls , each with its own traditions , legacies , events and intramural sports teams .
The university counts approximately 120,000 alumni , considered among the strongest alumni networks among U.S. colleges .
Fr .
He soon erected additional buildings , including Old College , the first church , and the first main building .
They immediately acquired two students and set about building additions to the campus .
The university was expanded with new buildings to accommodate more students and faculty .
With each new president , new academic programs were offered and new buildings built to accommodate them .
Another radio station , WVFI , began as a partner of WSND-FM .
Notre Dame teams are known as the Fighting Irish .
Men 's sports include baseball , basketball , crew , cross country , fencing , football , golf , ice hockey , lacrosse , soccer , swimming & diving , tennis and track & field ; while women 's sports include basketball , cross country , fencing , golf , lacrosse , rowing , soccer , softball , swimming & diving , tennis , track & field and volleyball .
The football team competes as an Football Bowl Subdivision -LRB- FBS -RRB- Independent since its inception in 1887 .
Notre Dame 's conference affiliations for all of its sports except football and fencing changed in July 2013 as a result of major conference realignment , and its fencing affiliation will change in July 2014 .
Notre Dame moved its hockey team to Hockey East .
After Notre Dame joined the ACC , the conference announced it would add fencing as a sponsored sport beginning in the 2014 -- 15 school year .
There are many theories behind the adoption of the athletics moniker but it is known that the Fighting Irish name was used in the early 1920s with respect to the football team and was popularized by alumnus Francis Wallace in his New York Daily News columns .
In addition , the color green is often worn because of the Fighting Irish nickname .
Created by Theodore W. Drake in 1964 , the leprechaun was first used on the football pocket schedule and later on the football program covers .
The leprechaun was featured on the cover of Time in November 1964 and gained national exposure .
The university marching band plays at home games for most of the sports .
According to College Fight Songs : An Annotated Anthology published in 1998 , the `` Notre Dame Victory March '' ranks as the greatest fight song of all time .
In the long history since then , 13 Fighting Irish teams have won consensus national championships -LRB- although the university only claims 11 -RRB- , along with another nine teams being named national champion by at least one source .
He played semiprofessional baseball and smoked , drank , and gambled when not playing sports .
He was also humble , generous to the needy , and a man of integrity .
The current head coach is Brian Kelly , hired from the University of Cincinnati on December 11 , 2009 .
Kelly 's record in midway through his sixth season at Notre Dame is 52 -- 21 .
In 2012 , Kelly 's Fighting Irish squad went undefeated and played in the BCS National Championship Game .
Kelly succeeded Charlie Weis , who was fired in November 2009 after five seasons .
Although Weis led his team to two Bowl Championship Series bowl games , his overall record was 35 -- 27 , mediocre by Notre Dame standards , and the 2007 team had the most losses in school history .
The football team generates enough revenue to operate independently while $ 22.1 million is retained from the team 's profits for academic use .
Forbes named the team as the most valuable in college football , worth a total of $ 101 million in 2007 .
Although the team has never won the NCAA Tournament , they were named by the Helms Athletic Foundation as national champions twice .
The team has orchestrated a number of upsets of number one ranked teams , the most notable of which was ending UCLA 's record 88-game winning streak in 1974 .
The team has beaten an additional eight number-one teams , and those nine wins rank second , to UCLA 's 10 , all-time in wins against the top team .
The team plays in newly renovated Purcell Pavilion -LRB- within the Edmund P. Joyce Center -RRB- , which reopened for the beginning of the 2009 -- 2010 season .
In 2009 they were invited to the NIT , where they advanced to the semifinals but were beaten by Penn State who went on and beat Baylor in the championship .
The 2010 -- 11 team concluded its regular season ranked number seven in the country , with a record of 25 -- 5 , Brey 's fifth straight 20-win season , and a second-place finish in the Big East .
During the 2014-15 season , the team went 32-6 and won the ACC conference tournament , later advancing to the Elite 8 , where the Fighting Irish lost on a missed buzzer-beater against then undefeated Kentucky .
Led by NBA draft picks Jerian Grant and Pat Connaughton , the Fighting Irish beat the eventual national champion Duke Blue Devils twice during the season .
The 32 wins were the most by the Fighting Irish team since 1908-09 .
The `` Notre Dame Victory March '' is the fight song for the University of Notre Dame .
It was written by two brothers who were Notre Dame graduates .
The chorus is , `` Cheer cheer for old Notre Dame , wake up the echos cheering her name .
Send a volley cheer on high , shake down the thunder from the sky !
What though the odds be great or small , old Notre Dame will win over all .
Notre Dame alumni work in various fields .
Additionally , many alumni are in the media , including talk show hosts Regis Philbin and Phil Donahue , and television and radio personalities such as Mike Golic and Hannah Storm .
Beyoncé took a hiatus from music in 2010 and took over management of her career ; her fourth album 4 -LRB- 2011 -RRB- was subsequently mellower in tone , exploring 1970s funk , 1980s pop , and 1990s soul .
Her critically acclaimed fifth studio album , Beyoncé -LRB- 2013 -RRB- , was distinguished from previous releases by its experimental production and exploration of darker themes .
On stage , her dynamic , highly choreographed performances have led to critics hailing her as one of the best entertainers in contemporary popular music .
In 2009 , Billboard named her the Top Radio Songs Artist of the Decade , the Top Female Artist of the 2000s and their Artist of the Millennium in 2011 .
She also attended the High School for the Performing and Visual Arts and later Alief Elsik High School .
Girl 's Tyme failed to win , and Beyoncé later said the song they performed was not good .
The move reduced Beyoncé 's family 's income by half , and her parents were forced to move into separated apartments .
Mathew cut the original line-up to four and the group continued performing as an opening act for other established R&B girl groups .
This put further strain on the family , and Beyoncé 's parents separated .
The album established the group as a viable act in the music industry , with moderate sales and winning the group three Soul Train Lady of Soul Awards for Best R&B / Soul Album of the Year , Best R&B / Soul or Rap New Artist , and Best R&B / Soul Single for `` No , No , No '' .
`` Say My Name '' won the Best R&B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals and the Best R&B Song at the 43rd Annual Grammy Awards .
The Writing 's on the Wall sold more than eight million copies worldwide .
Beyoncé stated that she struggled to speak about her depression because Destiny 's Child had just won their first Grammy Award and she feared no one would take her seriously .
Franklin was dismissed , leaving just Beyoncé , Rowland , and Williams .
The album spawned other number-one hits , `` Bootylicious '' and the title track , `` Survivor '' , the latter of which earned the group a Grammy Award for Best R&B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals .
After the release of Dangerously in Love , Beyoncé had planned to produce a follow-up album using several of the left-over tracks .
The second international single `` Irreplaceable '' was a commercial success worldwide , reaching number one in Australia , Hungary , Ireland , New Zealand and the United States .
-LSB- note 1 -RSB- Beyoncé conducted pre-concert food donation drives during six major stops in conjunction with her pastor at St. John 's and America 's Second Harvest .
The album formally introduces Beyoncé 's alter ego Sasha Fierce , conceived during the making of her 2003 single `` Crazy in Love '' , selling 482,000 copies in its first week , debuting atop the Billboard 200 , and giving Beyoncé her third consecutive number-one album in the US .
It also included the successful `` Sweet Dreams '' , and singles `` Diva '' , `` Ego '' , `` Broken-Hearted Girl '' and `` Video Phone '' .
The music video for `` Single Ladies '' has been parodied and imitated around the world , spawning the `` first major dance craze '' of the Internet age according to the Toronto Star .
The video has won several awards , including Best Video at the 2009 MTV Europe Music Awards , the 2009 Scottish MOBO Awards , and the 2009 BET Awards .
At the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards , the video was nominated for nine awards , ultimately winning three including Video of the Year .
Her performance in the film received praise from critics , and she garnered several nominations for her portrayal of James , including a Satellite Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress , and a NAACP Image Award nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actress .
`` Telephone '' received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals .
The album was preceded by two of its singles `` Run the World -LRB- Girls -RRB- '' and `` Best Thing I Never Had '' , which both attained moderate success .
4 also produced four other singles ; `` Party '' , `` Countdown '' , `` I Care '' and `` End of Time '' .
At the 55th Annual Grammy Awards , Beyoncé won for Best Traditional R&B Performance for `` Love on Top '' .
The film , which she directed and produced herself , featured footage from her childhood , her as a mother and businesswoman , recording , rehearsing for live performances , and her return to the spotlight following Blue Ivy 's birth .
Its DVD release in November 2013 was accompanied by footage from the Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live concerts and a new song , `` God Made You Beautiful '' .
It became the most successful tour of her career and one of the most-successful tours of all time .
The album debuted atop the Billboard 200 chart , giving Beyoncé her fifth consecutive number-one album in the US .
This made her the first woman in the chart 's history to have her first five studio albums debut at number one .
Musically an electro-R & B album , it concerns darker themes previously unexplored in her work , such as `` bulimia , postnatal depression -LSB- and -RSB- the fears and insecurities of marriage and motherhood '' .
It served as the couple 's first co-headlining stadium tour together .
On August 24 , 2014 , she received the Video Vanguard Award at the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards .
Knowles also took home three competitive awards : Best Video with a Social Message and Best Cinematography for `` Pretty Hurts '' , as well as best collaboration for `` Drunk in Love '' .
Beyoncé was reissued with new material in three forms : as an extended play , a box set , as well as a full platinum edition .
She headlined the 2015 Made in America festival in early September and also the Global Citizen Festival later that month .
On January 7 , 2016 , Pepsi announced Beyoncé would perform alongside Coldplay at Super Bowl 50 in February .
Knowles has previously performed at four Super Bowl shows throughout her career , serving as the main headliner of the 47th Super Bowl halftime show in 2013 .
Beyoncé appeared as Jay Z 's girlfriend in the music video for the song , which would further fuel speculation of their relationship .
The couple are known for their private relationship , although they have appeared to become more relaxed in recent years .
The song detailed the couple 's pregnancy struggles , including a miscarriage Beyoncé suffered before becoming pregnant with Blue Ivy .
At two days old , she became the youngest person ever to appear on a Billboard chart when `` Glory '' debuted on the Hot R&B / Hip-Hop Songs chart .
Beyoncé and husband Jay Z are friends with President Barack Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama .
She also performed the American national anthem at his second inauguration , singing along with a pre-recorded track .
I do believe in equality '' .
They placed her fourth on the Celebrity 100 list in 2009 and ninth on the `` Most Powerful Women in the World '' list in 2010 .
The following year , Forbes placed her eighth on the `` Best-Paid Celebrities Under 30 '' list , having earned $ 35 million in the past year for her clothing line and endorsement deals .
In 2012 , Forbes placed Beyoncé at number 16 on the Celebrity 100 list , twelve places lower than three years ago yet still having earned $ 40 million in the past year for her album 4 , clothing line and endorsement deals .
In the same year , Beyoncé and Jay Z placed at number one on the `` World 's Highest-Paid Celebrity Couples '' , for collectively earning $ 78 million .
That year , Beyoncé was published as the fourth most-powerful celebrity in the Forbes rankings .
This in turn was the first time she had topped the Celebrity 100 list as well as being her highest yearly earnings to date .
While another critic says she is a `` Vocal acrobat , being able to sing long and complex melismas and vocal runs effortlessly , and in key .
4 demonstrated Beyoncé 's exploration of 90s-style R&B , as well as further use of soul and hip hop than compared to previous releases .
She has received co-writing credits for most of the songs recorded with Destiny 's Child and her solo efforts .
-LRB- The latter wrote her 9/11-motivated song `` I Was Here '' for 4 . -RRB-
She was one of only three women on that list .
When she presented him with a tribute award at the World Music Awards in 2006 , Beyoncé said , `` if it was n't for Michael Jackson , I would never ever have performed . ''
Her other musical influences include Aaliyah , Prince , Lauryn Hill , Sade Adu , Donna Summer , Mary J. Blige , Janet Jackson , Anita Baker and Rachelle Ferrell .
Her fourth solo album , 4 , was inspired by Fela Kuti , 1990s R&B , Earth , Wind & Fire , DeBarge , Lionel Richie , Teena Marie with additional influences by The Jackson 5 , New Edition , Adele , Florence and the Machine , and Prince .
She commented : `` I think about Madonna and how she took all of the great things she achieved and started the label and developed other artists .
But there are not enough of those women . ''
.
The band have supported Beyoncé in most subsequent live performances , including her 2007 concert tour The Beyoncé Experience , 2009 -- 2010 I Am ... World Tour and 2013 -- 2014 The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour .
Jim Farber of the Daily News and Stephanie Classen of Star Phoenix both praised her strong voice and her stage presence .
According to Italian fashion designer Roberto Cavalli , Beyoncé uses different fashion styles to work with her music while performing .
The B'Day Anthology Video Album showed many instances of fashion-oriented footage , depicting classic to contemporary wardrobe styles .
A statement released from a spokesperson for the magazine said that Beyoncé 's look was `` far from the glamorous Sasha Fierce '' and that it was `` a return to her African roots '' .
the result , the logical end point , of a century-plus of pop . ''
-LSB- ... -RSB- Because she made not one but two of the decade 's greatest singles , with Crazy in Love and Single Ladies -LRB- Put a Ring on It -RRB- , not to mention her hits with Destiny 's Child ; and this was the decade when singles -- particularly R&B singles -- regained their status as pop 's favourite medium .
-LSB- ... -RSB- -LSB- She -RSB- and not any superannuated rock star was arguably the greatest live performer of the past 10 years . ''
Right now , she is the heir-apparent diva of the USA -- the reigning national voice . ''
The music video for `` Single Ladies -LRB- Put a Ring on It -RRB- '' , which achieved fame for its intricate choreography and its deployment of jazz hands , was credited by the Toronto Star as having started the `` first major dance craze of both the new millennium and the Internet '' , triggering a number of parodies of the dance choreography and a legion of amateur imitators on YouTube .
The black leotard from the `` Single Ladies '' video and her outfit from the Super Bowl half time performance are among several pieces housed at the museum .
Her songs `` Crazy in Love '' , `` Single Ladies -LRB- Put a Ring on It -RRB- '' , `` Halo '' , and `` Irreplaceable '' are some of the best-selling singles of all time worldwide .
In 2009 , The Observer named her the Artist of the Decade and Billboard named her the Top Female Artist and Top Radio Songs Artist of the Decade .
In 2010 , Billboard named her in their `` Top 50 R&B / Hip-Hop Artists of the Past 25 Years '' list at number 15 .
In 2012 VH1 ranked her third on their list of the `` 100 Greatest Women in Music '' .
Beyoncé was the first female artist to be honored with the International Artist Award at the American Music Awards .
Dangerously in Love , B'Day and I Am ... Sasha Fierce have all won Best Contemporary R&B Album .
The commercial , which featured the 1956 song `` Fever '' , was shown after the water shed in the United Kingdom as it begins with an image of Beyoncé appearing to lie naked in a room .
`` Creating a partnership with Beyoncé , one of the most hard-working and talented people in the world , who spends many hours of her life dancing , rehearsing and training is a unique opportunity to develop this category '' stated Sir Philip Green on the partnership .
The service specialises in lossless audio and high definition music videos .
Including Beyoncé and Jay-Z , sixteen artist stakeholders -LRB- such as Kanye West , Rihanna , Madonna , Chris Martin , Nicki Minaj and more -RRB- co-own Tidal , with the majority owning a 3 % equity stake .
`` The challenge is to get everyone to respect music again , to recognize its value '' , stated Jay-Z on the release of Tidal .
According to Tina , the overall style of the line best reflects her and Beyoncé 's taste and style .
The collection included sportswear , outerwear , handbags , footwear , eyewear , lingerie and jewelry .
The collection included tailored blazers with padded shoulders , little black dresses , embroidered tops and shirts and bandage dresses .
In April 2011 , Beyoncé joined forces with US First Lady Michelle Obama and the National Association of Broadcasters Education Foundation , to help boost the latter 's campaign against child obesity by reworking her single `` Get Me Bodied '' .
The campaign , which aired on February 28 , was set to her new music .
In advance of the concert , she appeared in a campaign video released on 15 May 2013 , where she , along with Cameron Diaz , John Legend and Kylie Minogue , described inspiration from their mothers , while a number of other artists celebrated personal inspiration from other women , leading to a call for submission of photos of women of viewers ' inspiration from which a selection was shown at the concert .
Montana i/m ɒnˈtænə / is a state in the Western region of the United States .
Montana has several nicknames , although none official , including `` Big Sky Country '' and `` The Treasure State '' , and slogans that include `` Land of the Shining Mountains '' and more recently `` The Last Best Place '' .
The western third of Montana contains numerous mountain ranges .
Smaller island ranges are found throughout the state .
Montana schoolchildren played a significant role in selecting several state symbols .
Schoolchildren also chose the western meadowlark as the state bird , in a 1930 vote , and the legislature acted to endorse this decision in 1931 .
A former member of the troupe who lived in Butte buttonholed Howard at an after-show party , asking him to compose a song about Montana and got another partygoer , the city editor for the Butte Miner newspaper , Charles C. Cohan , to help .
The two men worked up a basic melody and lyrics in about a half-hour for the entertainment of party guests , then finished the song later that evening , with an arrangement worked up the following day .
Upon arriving in Helena , Howard 's troupe performed 12 encores of the new song to an enthusiastic audience and the governor proclaimed it the state song on the spot , though formal legislative recognition did not occur until 1945 .
Montana is one of only three states to have a `` state ballad '' , `` Montana Melody '' , chosen by the legislature in 1983 .
Montana was the first state to also adopt a State Lullaby .
A state seal with a miner 's pick and shovel above the motto , surrounded by the mountains and the Great Falls of the Missouri River , was adopted during the first meeting of the territorial legislature in 1864 -- 65 .
The design was only slightly modified after Montana became a state and adopted it as the Great Seal of the State of Montana , enacted by the legislature in 1893 .
All other symbols were adopted throughout the 20th century , save for Montana 's newest symbol , the state butterfly , the mourning cloak , adopted in 2001 , and the state lullaby , `` Montana Lullaby '' , adopted in 2007 .
The state also has five Micropolitan Statistical Areas centered on Bozeman , Butte , Helena , Kalispell and Havre .
These communities , excluding Havre , are colloquially known as the `` big 7 '' Montana cities , as they are consistently the seven largest communities in Montana , with a significant population difference when these communities are compared to those that are 8th and lower on the list .
According to the 2010 U.S. Census , the population of Montana 's seven most populous cities , in rank order , are Billings , Missoula , Great Falls , Bozeman , Butte , Helena and Kalispell .
and the counties containing these communities hold 62 percent of the state 's population .
The geographic center of population of Montana is located in sparsely populated Meagher County , in the town of White Sulphur Springs .
Incorporated places consist of 52 cities , 75 towns , and two consolidated city-counties .
These three communities are considered the centers of Montana 's three Metropolitan Statistical Areas .
The name Montana was added to a bill by the United States House Committee on Territories , which was chaired at the time by Rep. James Ashley of Ohio , for the territory that would become Idaho Territory .
The name was successfully changed by Representatives Henry Wilson -LRB- Massachusetts -RRB- and Benjamin F. Harding -LRB- Oregon -RRB- , who complained that Montana had `` no meaning '' .
When Ashley presented a bill to establish a temporary government in 1864 for a new territory to be carved out of Idaho , he again chose Montana Territory .
This time Rep. Samuel Cox , also of Ohio , objected to the name .
Cox complained that the name was a misnomer given that most of the territory was not mountainous and that a Native American name would be more appropriate than a Spanish one .
Other names such as Shoshone were suggested , but it was eventually decided that the Committee on Territories could name it whatever they wanted , so the original name of Montana was adopted .
It is the fourth largest state in the United States after Alaska , Texas , and California ; the largest landlocked U.S. state ; and the 56th largest national state/province subdivision in the world .
To the north , Montana shares a 545-mile -LRB- 877 km -RRB- border with three Canadian provinces : British Columbia , Alberta , and Saskatchewan , the only state to do so .
The topography of the state is roughly defined by the Continental Divide , which splits much of the state into distinct eastern and western regions .
The Absaroka and Beartooth ranges in the south-central part of the state are technically part of the Central Rocky Mountains .
The Rocky Mountain Front is a significant feature in the north-central portion of the state , and there are a number of isolated island ranges that interrupt the prairie landscape common in the central and eastern parts of the state .
The northern section of the Divide , where the mountains give way rapidly to prairie , is part of the Rocky Mountain Front .
The front is most pronounced in the Lewis Range , located primarily in Glacier National Park .
Due to the configuration of mountain ranges in Glacier National Park , the Northern Divide -LRB- which begins in Alaska 's Seward Peninsula -RRB- crosses this region and turns east in Montana at Triple Divide Peak .
East of the divide , several roughly parallel ranges cover the southern part of the state , including the Gravelly Range , the Madison Range , Gallatin Range , Absaroka Mountains and the Beartooth Mountains .
North of these ranges are the Big Belt Mountains , Bridger Mountains , Tobacco Roots , and several island ranges , including the Crazy Mountains and Little Belt Mountains .
However , at the state level , the pattern of split ticket voting and divided government holds .
The Legislative branch had split party control between the house and senate most years between 2004 and 2010 , when the mid-term elections returned both branches to Republican control .
In the 2008 presidential election , Montana was considered a swing state and was ultimately won by Republican John McCain , albeit by a narrow margin of two percent .
Montana 's other major Airports include Billings Logan International Airport , Missoula International Airport , Great Falls International Airport , Glacier Park International Airport , Helena Regional Airport , Bert Mooney Airport and Yellowstone Airport .
Eight smaller communities have airports designated for commercial service under the Essential Air Service program .
Historically , the state was traversed by the main lines of three east-west transcontinental routes : the Milwaukee Road , the Great Northern , and the Northern Pacific .
Montana RailLink , a privately held Class II railroad , operates former Northern Pacific trackage in western Montana .
There are fall bow and general hunting seasons for elk , pronghorn antelope , whitetail deer and mule deer .
A random draw grants a limited number of permits for moose , mountain goats and bighorn sheep .
Trapping of assorted fur bearing animals is allowed in certain seasons and many opportunities exist for migratory waterfowl and upland bird hunting .
Fly fishing for several species of native and introduced trout in rivers and lakes is popular for both residents and tourists throughout the state .
Schools started forming in the area before it was officially a territory as families started settling into the area .
The first schools were subscription schools that typically held in the teacher 's home .
The students were Indian children and the children of Fort Owen employees .
The first school term started in early winter and only lasted until February 28 .
Classes were taught by Mr. Robinson .
Another early subscription school was started by Thomas Dimsdale in Virginia City in 1863 .
The Montana Territorial Legislative Assembly had its inaugural meeting in 1864 .
The first legislature authorized counties to levy taxes for schools , which set the foundations for public schooling .
The first school year was scheduled to begin in January 1866 , but severe weather postponed its opening until March .
The first school year ran through the summer and did n't end until August 17 .
One of the first teachers at the school was Sarah Raymond .
She was a 25-year-old woman who had traveled to Virginia City via wagon train in 1865 .
To become a certified teacher , Raymond took a test in her home and paid a $ 6 fee in gold dust to obtain a teaching certificate .
With the help of an assistant teacher , Mrs. Farley , Raymond was responsible for teaching 50 to 60 students each day out of the 81 students enrolled at the school .
Sarah Raymond was paid at a rate of $ 125 per month , and Mrs. Farley was paid $ 75 per month .
There were no textbooks used in the school .
In their place was an assortment of books brought in by various emigrants .
Sarah quit teaching the following year , but would later become the Madison County superintendent of schools .
Montana 's water resources provide for recreation , hydropower , crop and forage irrigation , mining , and water for human consumption .
Montana is one of few geographic areas in the world whose rivers form parts of three major watersheds -LRB- i.e. where two continental divides intersect -RRB- .
From this point , it then flows generally east through fairly flat agricultural land and the Missouri Breaks to Fort Peck reservoir .
The Missouri enters North Dakota near Fort Union , having drained more than half the land area of Montana -LRB- 82,000 square miles -LRB- 210,000 km2 -RRB- -RRB- .
Nearly one-third of the Missouri River in Montana lies behind 10 dams : Toston , Canyon Ferry , Hauser , Holter , Black Eagle , Rainbow , Cochrane , Ryan , Morony , and Fort Peck .
The Yellowstone River rises on the continental divide near Younts Peak in Wyoming 's Teton Wilderness .
It then flows northeasterly across the state through Billings , Miles City , Glendive , and Sidney .
It is the longest undammed , free-flowing river in the contiguous United States , and drains about a quarter of Montana -LRB- 36,000 square miles -LRB- 93,000 km2 -RRB- -RRB- .
Other major lakes include Whitefish Lake in the Flathead Valley and Lake McDonald and St. Mary Lake in Glacier National Park .
Other major reservoirs include Hungry Horse on the Flathead River ; Lake Koocanusa on the Kootenai River ; Lake Elwell on the Marias River ; Clark Canyon on the Beaverhead River ; Yellowtail on the Bighorn River , Canyon Ferry , Hauser , Holter , Rainbow ; and Black Eagle on the Missouri River .
Vegetation of the state includes lodgepole pine , ponderosa pine ; Douglas fir , larch , spruce ; aspen , birch , red cedar , hemlock , ash , alder ; rocky mountain maple and cottonwood trees .
Flowers native to Montana include asters , bitterroots , daisies , lupins , poppies , primroses , columbine , lilies , orchids , and dryads .
Several species of sagebrush and cactus and many species of grasses are common .
Many species of mushrooms and lichens are also found in the state .
Additionally , there are over 10,000 invertebrate species , including 180 mollusks and 30 crustaceans .
The mountain ranges block the moist Pacific air , holding moisture in the western valleys , and creating rain shadows to the east .
On the eastern -LRB- leeward -RRB- side of a mountain range , the valleys are much drier ; Lonepine averages 11.45 inches -LRB- 291 mm -RRB- , and Deer Lodge 11.00 inches -LRB- 279 mm -RRB- of precipitation .
An area southwest of Belfry averaged only 6.59 inches -LRB- 167 mm -RRB- over a sixteen-year period .
Most of the larger cities get 30 to 50 inches or 0.76 to 1.27 metres of snow each year .
Mountain ranges themselves can accumulate 300 inches or 7.62 metres of snow during a winter .
Heavy snowstorms may occur any time from September through May , though most snow falls from November to March .
In Montana , household goods are exempt from property taxes .
However , property taxes are assessed on livestock , farm machinery , heavy equipment , automobiles , trucks , and business equipment .
The amount of property tax owed is not determined solely by the property 's value .
The property 's value is multiplied by a tax rate , set by the Montana Legislature , to determine its taxable value .
The taxable value is then multiplied by the mill levy established by various taxing jurisdictions -- city and county government , school districts and others .
The Blackfeet nation is headquartered on the Blackfeet Indian Reservation -LRB- 1851 -RRB- in Browning , Crow on the Crow Indian Reservation -LRB- 1851 -RRB- in Crow Agency , Confederated Salish and Kootenai and Pend d'Oreille on the Flathead Indian Reservation -LRB- 1855 -RRB- in Pablo , Northern Cheyenne on the Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation -LRB- 1884 -RRB- at Lame Deer , Assiniboine and Gros Ventre on the Fort Belknap Indian Reservation -LRB- 1888 -RRB- in Fort Belknap Agency , Assiniboine and Sioux on the Fort Peck Indian Reservation -LRB- 1888 -RRB- at Poplar , and Chippewa-Cree on the Rocky Boy 's Indian Reservation -LRB- 1916 -RRB- near Box Elder .
The state also has a small Métis population , and 1990 census data indicated that people from as many as 275 different tribes lived in Montana .
Farmers of Irish , Scots , and English roots also settled in Montana .
The historically mining-oriented communities of western Montana such as Butte have a wider range of European-American ethnicity ; Finns , Eastern Europeans and especially Irish settlers left an indelible mark on the area , as well as people originally from British mining regions such as Cornwall , Devon and Wales .
Many of Montana 's historic logging communities originally attracted people of Scottish , Scandinavian , Slavic , English and Scots-Irish descent .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Montana has a larger Native American population numerically and percentage-wise than most U.S. states .
Although the state ranked 45th in population -LRB- according to the 2010 U.S. Census -RRB- , it ranked 19th in total native people population .
Other counties with large Native American populations include Blaine , Cascade , Hill , Missoula , and Yellowstone counties .
As of 2009 , almost two-thirds of Native Americans in the state live in urban areas .
Of Montana 's 20 largest cities , Polson -LRB- 15.7 percent -RRB- , Havre -LRB- 13.0 percent -RRB- , Great Falls -LRB- 5.0 percent -RRB- , Billings -LRB- 4.4 percent -RRB- , and Anaconda -LRB- 3.1 percent -RRB- had the greatest percentage of Native American residents in 2010 .
Billings -LRB- 4,619 -RRB- , Great Falls -LRB- 2,942 -RRB- , Missoula -LRB- 1,838 -RRB- , Havre -LRB- 1,210 -RRB- , and Polson -LRB- 706 -RRB- have the most Native Americans living there .
The state 's seven reservations include more than twelve distinct Native American ethnolinguistic groups .
The climate has become warmer in Montana and continues to do so .
The glaciers in Glacier National Park have receded and are predicted to melt away completely in a few decades .
Winters are warmer , too , and have fewer cold spells .
Previously these cold spells had killed off bark beetles which are now attacking the forests of western Montana .
According to a study done for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency by the Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Science , portions of Montana will experience a 200-percent increase in area burned by wildfires , and an 80-percent increase in related air pollution .
As white settlers began populating Montana from the 1850s through the 1870s , disputes with Native Americans ensued , primarily over land ownership and control .
The Salish remained in the Bitterroot Valley until 1891 .
More than a dozen additional military outposts were established in the state .
Pressure over land ownership and control increased due to discoveries of gold in various parts of Montana and surrounding states .
The last recorded conflict in Montana between the U.S. Army and Native Americans occurred in 1887 during the Battle of Crow Agency in the Big Horn country .
Indian survivors who had signed treaties were generally required to move onto reservations .
English is also the language of the majority .
There were also 15,438 -LRB- 1.7 percent of the state population -RRB- speakers of Indo-European languages other than English or Spanish , 10,154 -LRB- 1.1 percent -RRB- speakers of a Native American language , and 4,052 -LRB- 0.4 percent -RRB- speakers of an Asian or Pacific Islander language .
The United States Department of Education estimated in 2009 that 5,274 students in Montana spoke a language at home other than English .
These included a Native American language -LRB- 64 percent -RRB- , German -LRB- 4 percent -RRB- , Spanish -LRB- 3 percent -RRB- , Russian -LRB- 1 percent -RRB- , and Chinese -LRB- less than 0.5 percent -RRB- .
The largest European ancestry groups in Montana as of 2010 are : German -LRB- 27.0 percent -RRB- , Irish -LRB- 14.8 percent -RRB- , English -LRB- 12.6 percent -RRB- , Norwegian -LRB- 10.9 percent -RRB- , French -LRB- 4.7 percent -RRB- and Italian -LRB- 3.4 percent -RRB- .
The 2010 census put Montana 's population at 989,415 which is an increase of 43,534 people , or 4.40 percent , since 2010 .
This time she was the only vote against the war , and in the wake of public outcry over her vote , she required police protection for a time .
Other pacifists tended to be those from `` peace churches '' who generally opposed war .
Simultaneously with these conflicts , bison , a keystone species and the primary protein source that Native people had survived on for centuries were being destroyed .
However , the railroad played a major role in sparking tensions with Native American tribes in the 1870s .
These clashes , in part , contributed to the Panic of 1873 which delayed construction of the railroad into Montana .
For political reasons , Congress did not approve Montana statehood until 1889 .
In July 1889 , Montanans convened their third constitutional convention and produced a constitution acceptable by the people and the federal government .
On November 8 , 1889 President Benjamin Harrison proclaimed Montana the forty-first state in the union .
The first state governor was Joseph K. Toole .
In the 1880s , Helena -LRB- the current state capital -RRB- had more millionaires per capita than any other United States city .
Montana did not see a large influx of immigrants from this act because 160 acres was usually insufficient to support a family in the arid territory .
The first claim by a woman was made near Warm Springs Creek by Miss Gwenllian Evans , the daughter of Deer Lodge Montana Pioneer , Morgan Evans .
By 1880 , there were farms in the more verdant valleys of central and western Montana , but few on the eastern plains .
After three years , a fee of one dollar per acre would be paid and the land would be owned by the settler .
This act brought mostly cattle and sheep ranchers into Montana , many of whom grazed their herds on the Montana prairie for three years , did little to irrigate the land and then abandoned it without paying the final fees .
Some farmers came with the arrival of the Great Northern and Northern Pacific Railroads throughout the 1880s and 1890s , though in relatively small numbers .
Other railroads followed suit .
In 1916 , the Stock-Raising Homestead Act allowed homesteads of 640 acres in areas unsuitable for irrigation .
This combination of advertising and changes in the Homestead Act drew tens of thousands of homesteaders , lured by free land , with World War I bringing particularly high wheat prices .
In addition , Montana was going through a temporary period of higher-than-average precipitation .
Homesteaders arriving in this period were known as `` Honyockers '' , or `` scissorbills . ''
Though the word `` honyocker '' , possibly derived from the ethnic slur `` hunyak , '' was applied in a derisive manner at homesteaders as being `` greenhorns '' , `` new at his business '' or `` unprepared '' , the reality was that a majority of these new settlers had previous farming experience , though there were also many who did not .
In February 1918 , the Montana legislature had passed the Montana Sedition Act , which was a model for the federal version .
Over 40 spent time in prison .
In May 2006 , then-Governor Brian Schweitzer posthumously issued full pardons for all those convicted of violating the Montana Sedition Act .
When the U.S. entered World War II on December 8 , 1941 , many Montanans already had enlisted in the military to escape the poor national economy of the previous decade .
These numbers constituted about 10 percent of the state 's total population , and Montana again contributed one of the highest numbers of soldiers per capita of any state .
Many Native Americans were among those who served , including soldiers from the Crow Nation who became Code Talkers .
During the war , about 30 Japanese balloon bombs were documented to have landed in Montana , though no casualties nor major forest fires were attributed to them .
The Soviet views were also shared by a number of other States for whom it is difficult to establish any geographic or social common denominator : Lebanon , Sweden , Brazil , Peru , Venezuela , the Philippines , the Dominican Republic , Iran , Egypt , Belgium , and Uruguay .
The exclusion of political groups was in fact originally promoted by a non-governmental organization , the World Jewish Congress , and it corresponded to Raphael Lemkin 's vision of the nature of the crime of genocide . ''
During the 19th century humanitarian intervention was needed due to the fact of conflict and justification of some of the actions executed by the military .
Genocide has become an official term used in international relations .
If a specific part of the group is emblematic of the overall group , or is essential to its survival , that may support a finding that the part qualifies as substantial within the meaning of Article 4 -LSB- of the Tribunal 's Statute -RSB- . ''
Only in the 1990s did the international law on the crime of genocide begin to be enforced .
Jonassohn and Björnson are critical of some of these studies , arguing that they are too expansive , and conclude that the academic discipline of genocide studies is too young to have a canon of work on which to build an academic paradigm .
While there are various definitions of the term , Adam Jones states that the majority of genocide scholars consider that `` intent to destroy '' is a requirement for any act to be labelled genocide , and that there is growing agreement on the inclusion of the physical destruction criterion .
In politicides the victim groups are defined primarily in terms of their hierarchical position or political opposition to the regime and dominant groups .
If the violence persists for long enough , however , Harff argues , the distinction between condonation and complicity collapses . ''
According to R. J. Rummel , genocide has 3 different meanings .
A generalized meaning of genocide is similar to the ordinary meaning but also includes government killings of political opponents or otherwise intentional murder .
It is to avoid confusion regarding what meaning is intended that Rummel created the term democide for the third meaning .
A further eight men , former members of the Bosnian Serb security forces were found guilty of genocide by the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina -LRB- See List of Bosnian genocide prosecutions -RRB- .
Ratko Mladić was arrested on 26 May 2011 by Serbian special police in Lazarevo , Serbia .
Karadzic was convicted of ten of the eleven charges laid against him and sentenced to 40 years in prison on March 24 2016 .
Since that time however , no other permanent member of the UN Security Council followed suit .
International offences such as the crimes against humanity and war crimes that have been committed in Darfur may be no less serious and heinous than genocide . ''
They lead to scapegoating a group and ideologies that identified that group as an enemy .
Intense conflict between groups that is unresolved , becomes intractable and violent can also lead to genocide .
There is substantial research to indicate how this can be done , but information is only slowly transformed into action .
Under certain conditions , it may result in preferential growth of resistant bacteria , while growth of susceptible bacteria is inhibited by the drug .
The successful outcome of antimicrobial therapy with antibacterial compounds depends on several factors .
Further categorization is based on their target specificity .
`` Narrow-spectrum '' antibacterial antibiotics target specific types of bacteria , such as Gram-negative or Gram-positive bacteria , whereas broad-spectrum antibiotics affect a wide range of bacteria .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
However , some antibiotics have been associated with a range of adverse side effects .
Side effects may reflect the pharmacological or toxicological properties of the antibiotic or may involve hypersensitivity reactions or anaphylaxis .
Safety profiles of newer drugs are often not as well established as for those that have a long history of use .
Moreover , research have shown that mice given low-dose penicillin -LRB- 1 μg / g body weight -RRB- around birth and throughout the weaning process had an increased body mass and fat mass , accelerated growth , and increased hepatic expression of genes involved in adipogenesis , compared to controlled mice .
In addition , penicillin in combination with a high-fat diet increased fasting insulin levels in mice .
Studies have found a correlation between early exposure of antibiotics -LRB- < 6 months -RRB- and increased body mass -LRB- at 10 and 20 months -RRB- .
Another study found that the type of antibiotic exposure was also significant with the highest risk of being overweight in those given macrolides compared to penicillin and cephalosporin .
Therefore , there is correlation between antibiotic exposure in early life and obesity in humans , but whether or not there is a causal relationship remains unclear .
In cases where antibacterials have been suggested to affect the efficiency of birth control pills , such as for the broad-spectrum antibacterial rifampicin , these cases may be due to an increase in the activities of hepatic liver enzymes ' causing increased breakdown of the pill 's active ingredients .
Therefore , potential risks of side-effects and effectiveness depend on the type of antibiotic administered .
Several molecular mechanisms of antibacterial resistance exist .
Antibacterial-producing bacteria have evolved resistance mechanisms that have been shown to be similar to , and may have been transferred to , antibacterial-resistant strains .
Cross-resistance to several antibacterials may also occur when a resistance mechanism encoded by a single gene conveys resistance to more than one antibacterial compound .
For example , NDM-1 is a newly identified enzyme conveying bacterial resistance to a broad range of beta-lactam antibacterials .
The United Kingdom 's Health Protection Agency has stated that `` most isolates with NDM-1 enzyme are resistant to all standard intravenous antibiotics for treatment of severe infections . ''
Many antibiotics are frequently prescribed to treat symptoms or diseases that do not respond to antibiotics or that are likely to resolve without treatment .
Also , incorrect or suboptimal antibiotics are prescribed for certain bacterial infections .
Widespread usage of antibiotics in hospitals has also been associated with increases in bacterial strains and species that no longer respond to treatment with the most common antibiotics .
Multifactorial interventions aimed at both physicians and patients can reduce inappropriate prescription of antibiotics .
Several organizations concerned with antimicrobial resistance are lobbying to eliminate the unnecessary use of antibiotics .
An NGO campaign group is Keep Antibiotics Working .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- However , commonly there are delays in regulatory and legislative actions to limit the use of antibiotics , attributable partly to resistance against such regulation by industries using or selling antibiotics , and to the time required for research to test causal links between their use and resistance to them .
More recent observations made in the laboratory of antibiosis between microorganisms led to the discovery of natural antibacterials produced by microorganisms .
Louis Pasteur observed , `` if we could intervene in the antagonism observed between some bacteria , it would offer perhaps the greatest hopes for therapeutics '' .
Antibiosis was first described in 1877 in bacteria when Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch observed that an airborne bacillus could inhibit the growth of Bacillus anthracis .
These drugs were later renamed antibiotics by Selman Waksman , an American microbiologist , in 1942 .
Synthetic antibiotic chemotherapy as a science and development of antibacterials began in Germany with Paul Ehrlich in the late 1880s .
Ehrlich noted certain dyes would color human , animal , or bacterial cells , whereas others did not .
He then proposed the idea that it might be possible to create chemicals that would act as a selective drug that would bind to and kill bacteria without harming the human host .
After screening hundreds of dyes against various organisms , in 1907 , he discovered a medicinally useful drug , the synthetic antibacterial salvarsan now called arsphenamine .
He initially characterized some of its biological properties , and attempted to use a crude preparation to treat some infections , but he was unable to pursue its further development without the aid of trained chemists .
Prontosil had a relatively broad effect against Gram-positive cocci , but not against enterobacteria .
Research was stimulated apace by its success .
The discovery and development of this sulfonamide drug opened the era of antibacterials .
Gramicidin , however , could not be used systemically because of toxicity .
Tyrocidine also proved too toxic for systemic usage .
Research results obtained during that period were not shared between the Axis and the Allied powers during the war .
Purified penicillin displayed potent antibacterial activity against a wide range of bacteria and had low toxicity in humans .
Furthermore , its activity was not inhibited by biological constituents such as pus , unlike the synthetic sulfonamides .
The discovery of such a powerful antibiotic was unprecedented , and the development of penicillin led to renewed interest in the search for antibiotic compounds with similar efficacy and safety .
For their successful development of penicillin , which Fleming had accidentally discovered but could not develop himself , as a therapeutic drug , Ernst Chain and Howard Florey shared the 1945 Nobel Prize in Medicine with Fleming .
Florey credited Dubos with pioneering the approach of deliberately and systematically searching for antibacterial compounds , which had led to the discovery of gramicidin and had revived Florey 's research in penicillin .
Vaccination either excites or reinforces the immune competence of a host to ward off infection , leading to the activation of macrophages , the production of antibodies , inflammation , and other classic immune reactions .
Bacteriophages , also known simply as phages , are precisely bacterial viruses that infect bacteria by disrupting pathogenic bacterium lytic cycles .
By disrupting the lytic cycles of bacterium , phages destroy their metabolism , which eventually results in the cell 's death .
Phages will insert their DNA into the bacterium , allowing their DNA to be transcribed .
Once their DNA is transcribed the cell will proceed to make new phages and as soon as they are ready to be released , the cell will lyse .
However , studies have proven that phages are very specific when they target bacteria , which makes researchers confident that bacteriophage therapy is the definite route to defeating antibiotic resistant bacteria .
The number of new antibiotics approved for marketing per year declines continuously .
However , these drugs do not address the entire spectrum of resistance of GNB .
Some of these antibiotics are combination of existent treatments :
Under this Act , FDA can approve antibiotics and antifungals treating life-threatening infections based on smaller clinical trials .
The CDC will monitor the use of antibiotics and the emerging resistance , and publish the data .
The FDA antibiotics labeling process , ` Susceptibility Test Interpretive Criteria for Microbial Organisms ' or ` breakpoints ' , will provide accurate data to healthcare professionals .
He gained and has maintained renown worldwide as one of the leading musicians of his era , whose `` poetic genius was based on a professional technique that was without equal in his generation . ''
He supported himself by selling his compositions and teaching piano , for which he was in high demand .
Through most of his life , Chopin suffered from poor health .
His major piano works also include mazurkas , waltzes , nocturnes , polonaises , études , impromptus , scherzos , preludes and sonatas , some published only after his death .
His innovations in style , musical form , and harmony , and his association of music with nationalism , were influential throughout and after the late Romantic period .
Nicolas was devoted to his adopted homeland , and insisted on the use of the Polish language in the household .
It quickly became apparent that he was a child prodigy .
Fryderyk and his family moved to a building , which still survives , adjacent to the Kazimierz Palace .
-LSB- n 3 -RSB- Throughout this period he continued to compose and to give recitals in concerts and salons in Warsaw .
This was the first of his works to be commercially published and earned him his first mention in the foreign press , when the Leipzig Allgemeine Musikalische Zeitung praised his `` wealth of musical ideas '' .
During 1824 -- 28 Chopin spent his vacations away from Warsaw , at a number of locales .
-LSB- n 7 -RSB-
He was friendly with members of Warsaw 's young artistic and intellectual world , including Fontana , Józef Bohdan Zaleski and Stefan Witwicki .
It may have been this experience which encouraged him to commence writing his first Études , -LRB- 1829 -- 32 -RRB- , exploring the capacities of his own instrument .
In one of these concerts , he premiered his Variations on Là ci darem la mano , Op. 2 -LRB- variations on an aria from Mozart 's opera Don Giovanni -RRB- for piano and orchestra .
... You are there , and yet you do not take vengeance ! ''
Jachimecki ascribes to these events the composer 's maturing `` into an inspired national bard who intuited the past , present and future of his native Poland . ''
Fontana was to become , in the words of Michałowski and Samson , Chopin 's `` general factotum and copyist '' .
A genius . ''
By the end of 1832 Chopin had established himself among the Parisian musical elite , and had earned the respect of his peers such as Hiller , Liszt , and Berlioz .
This freed him from the strains of public concert-giving , which he disliked .
Chopin seldom performed publicly in Paris .
The musicologist Arthur Hedley has observed that `` As a pianist Chopin was unique in acquiring a reputation of the highest order on the basis of a minimum of public appearances -- few more than thirty in the course of his lifetime . ''
The list of musicians who took part in some of his concerts provides an indication of the richness of Parisian artistic life during this period .
On his way back to Paris , he met old friends from Warsaw , the Wodzińskis .
This meeting prompted him to stay for two weeks in Dresden , when he had previously intended to return to Paris via Leipzig .
The sixteen-year-old girl 's portrait of the composer is considered , along with Delacroix 's , as among Chopin 's best likenesses .
In October he finally reached Leipzig , where he met Schumann , Clara Wieck and Felix Mendelssohn , who organised for him a performance of his own oratorio St. Paul , and who considered him `` a perfect musician '' .
Chopin went on to Leipzig , where he presented Schumann with his G minor Ballade .
At the end of 1836 he sent Maria an album in which his sister Ludwika had inscribed seven of his songs , and his 1835 Nocturne in C-sharp minor , Op. 27 , No. 1 .
The anodyne thanks he received from Maria proved to be the last letter he was to have from her .
Later joint appearances included a benefit concert for the Benevolent Association of Polish Ladies in Paris .
Short -LRB- under five feet , or 152 cm -RRB- , dark , big-eyed and a cigar smoker , she initially repelled Chopin , who remarked , `` What an unattractive person la Sand is .
Is she really a woman ? ''
After discovering that the couple were not married , the deeply traditional Catholic people of Majorca became inhospitable , making accommodation difficult to find .
It finally arrived from Paris in December .
Chopin wrote to Pleyel in January 1839 : `` I am sending you my Preludes -LSB- -LRB- Op. 28 -RRB- -RSB- .
Chopin was also able to undertake work on his Ballade No. 2 , Op. 38 ; two Polonaises , Op. 40 ; and the Scherzo No. 3 , Op. 39 .
He frequently visited Sand in the evenings , but both retained some independence .
Chopin was reportedly unimpressed with the composition .
Chopin 's health continued to deteriorate , particularly from this time onwards .
The composer frequently took Solange 's side in quarrels with her mother ; he also faced jealousy from Sand 's son Maurice .
In letters to third parties , she vented her impatience , referring to him as a `` child , '' a `` little angel '' , a `` sufferer '' and a `` beloved little corpse . ''
In 1847 he did not visit Nohant , and he quietly ended their ten-year relationship following an angry correspondence which , in Sand 's words , made `` a strange conclusion to nine years of exclusive friendship . ''
The two would never meet again .
Chopin 's output as a composer throughout this period declined in quantity year by year .
All the music is derived from that of Chopin .
Chopin has figured extensively in Polish literature , both in serious critical studies of his life and music and in fictional treatments .
Numerous recordings of Chopin 's works are available .
The British Library site makes available a number of historic recordings , including some by Alfred Cortot , Ignaz Friedman , Vladimir Horowitz , Benno Moiseiwitsch , Paderewski , Arthur Rubinstein , Xaver Scharwenka and many others .
Chopin 's music remains very popular and is regularly performed , recorded and broadcast worldwide .
Stirling also made all the logistical arrangements and provided much of the necessary funding .
The Prince , who was himself a talented musician , moved close to the keyboard to view Chopin 's technique .
Broadwood also arranged concerts for him ; among those attending were Thackeray and the singer Jenny Lind .
She clearly had a notion of going beyond mere friendship , and Chopin was obliged to make it clear to her that this could not be so .
He wrote at this time to Grzymała `` My Scottish ladies are kind , but such bores '' , and responding to a rumour about his involvement , answered that he was `` closer to the grave than the nuptial bed . ''
He passed the winter in unremitting illness , but gave occasional lessons and was visited by friends , including Delacroix and Franchomme .
With his health further deteriorating , Chopin desired to have a family member with him .
Some of his friends provided music at his request ; among them , Potocka sang and Franchomme played the cello .
He also bequeathed his unfinished notes on a piano tuition method , Projet de méthode , to Alkan for completion .
On 17 October , after midnight , the physician leaned over him and asked whether he was suffering greatly .
He died a few minutes before two o'clock in the morning .
Those present at the deathbed appear to have included his sister Ludwika , Princess Marcelina Czartoryska , Sand 's daughter Solange , and his close friend Thomas Albrecht .
Chopin 's disease and the cause of his death have since been a matter of discussion .
However , the attribution of tuberculosis as principal cause of death has not been disproved .
Entrance was restricted to ticket holders as many people were expected to attend .
The pallbearers included Delacroix , Franchomme , and Camille Pleyel .
He was also influenced by Hummel 's development of virtuoso , yet Mozartian , piano technique .
Chopin 's early works are in the style of the `` brilliant '' keyboard pieces of his era as exemplified by the works of Ignaz Moscheles , Friedrich Kalkbrenner , and others .
Less direct in the earlier period are the influences of Polish folk music and of Italian opera .
Much of what became his typical style of ornamentation -LRB- for example , his fioriture -RRB- is taken from singing .
His melodic lines were increasingly reminiscent of the modes and features of the music of his native country , such as drones .
He essentially established a new genre with his own set of free-standing preludes -LRB- Op. 28 , published 1839 -RRB- .
There is no evidence to suggest that the Revolutionary Étude was written with the failed Polish uprising against Russia in mind ; it merely appeared at that time .
He expressed a deathbed wish that all his unpublished manuscripts be destroyed .
66 -- 73 -RRB- , published in 1855 .
The works for piano and orchestra , including the two concertos , are held by Temperley to be `` merely vehicles for brilliant piano playing ... formally longwinded and extremely conservative '' .
After the piano concertos -LRB- which are both early , dating from 1830 -RRB- , Chopin made no attempts at large-scale multi-movement forms , save for his late sonatas for piano and for cello ; `` instead he achieved near-perfection in pieces of simple general design but subtle and complex cell-structure . ''
He used them to teach his own technique of piano playing -- for instance playing double thirds -LRB- Op. 25 , No. 6 -RRB- , playing in octaves -LRB- Op. 25 , No. 10 -RRB- , and playing repeated notes -LRB- Op. 10 , No .
7 -RRB- .
In Op. 35 , Chopin was able to combine within a formal large musical structure many elements of his virtuosic piano technique -- `` a kind of dialogue between the public pianism of the brilliant style and the German sonata principle '' .
In truth , nothing equals the lightness , the sweetness with which the composer preludes on the piano ; moreover nothing may be compared to his works full of originality , distinction and grace . ''
Chopin refused to conform to a standard method of playing and believed that there was no set technique for playing well .
He further stated : `` One needs only to study a certain position of the hand in relation to the keys to obtain with ease the most beautiful quality of sound , to know how to play short notes and long notes , and -LSB- to attain -RSB- unlimited dexterity . ''
The consequences of this approach to technique in Chopin 's music include the frequent use of the entire range of the keyboard , passages in double octaves and other chord groupings , swiftly repeated notes , the use of grace notes , and the use of contrasting rhythms -LRB- four against three , for example -RRB- between the hands .
In the 20th century , composers who paid homage to -LRB- or in some cases parodied -RRB- the music of Chopin included George Crumb , Bohuslav Martinů , Darius Milhaud , Igor Stravinsky and Heitor Villa-Lobos .
There are differing opinions as to how much , and what type , of rubato is appropriate for his works .
He took infinite pains to teach his pupils this legato , cantabile style of playing .
His most severe criticism was ` He -- or she -- does not know how to join two notes together . '
He hated all lingering and dragging , misplaced rubatos , as well as exaggerated ritardandos ... and it is precisely in this respect that people make such terrible errors in playing his works . ''
Some modern commentators have argued against exaggerating Chopin 's primacy as a `` nationalist '' or `` patriotic '' composer .
Jones comments that `` Chopin 's unique position as a composer , despite the fact that virtually everything he wrote was for the piano , has rarely been questioned . ''
Other pianists and composers influenced by Chopin 's style include Louis Moreau Gottschalk , Édouard Wolff -LRB- 1816 -- 1880 -RRB- and Pierre Zimmermann .
The exact nature of relations between Tibet and the Ming dynasty of China -LRB- 1368 -- 1644 -RRB- is unclear .
Analysis of the relationship is further complicated by modern political conflicts and the application of Westphalian sovereignty to a time when the concept did not exist .
Scholars within China also argue that Tibet has been an integral part of China since the 13th century and that it was thus a part of the Ming Empire .
But most scholars outside China , such as Turrell V. Wylie , Melvin C. Goldstein , and Helmut Hoffman , say that the relationship was one of suzerainty , that Ming titles were only nominal , that Tibet remained an independent region outside Ming control , and that it simply paid tribute until the Jiajing Emperor -LRB- 1521 -- 1566 -RRB- , who ceased relations with Tibet .
Others argue that the significant religious nature of the relationship of the Ming court with Tibetan lamas is underrepresented in modern scholarship .
However , the Yongle Emperor 's attempts were unsuccessful .
The Ming initiated sporadic armed intervention in Tibet during the 14th century , but did not garrison permanent troops there .
In the same year , he established diplomatic relations with Tibet by sending envoys there .
The conquest of the Western Xia alarmed Tibetan rulers , who decided to pay tribute to the Mongols .
Michael C. van Walt van Praag writes that Godan granted Sakya Pandita temporal authority over a still politically fragmented Tibet , stating that `` this investiture had little real impact '' but it was significant in that it established the unique `` Priest-Patron '' relationship between the Mongols and the Sakya lamas .
Van Praag writes that this conquest `` marked the end of independent China , '' which was then incorporated into the Yuan dynasty that ruled China , Tibet , Mongolia , Korea , parts of Siberia and Upper Burma .
Morris Rossabi , a professor of Asian history at Queens College , City University of New York , writes that `` Khubilai wished to be perceived both as the legitimate Khan of Khans of the Mongols and as the Emperor of China .
Thus , with such limited acceptance of his position as Great Khan , Kublai Khan increasingly became identified with China and sought support as Emperor of China .
It is not clear how much the early Ming court understood the civil war going on in Tibet between rival religious sects , but the first emperor was anxious to avoid the same trouble that Tibet had caused for the Tang dynasty .
The Hongwu Emperor also entrusted his guru Zongluo , one of many Buddhist monks at court , to head a religious mission into Tibet in 1378 -- 1382 in order to obtain Buddhist texts .
There is little detailed evidence of Chinese -- especially lay Chinese -- studying Tibetan Buddhism until the Republican era -LRB- 1912 -- 1949 -RRB- .
According to Wang Jiawei and Nyima Gyaincain , leading officials of these organs were all appointed by the central government and were subject to the rule of law .
Other historians also assert that these Ming titles were nominal and did not actually confer the authority that the earlier Yuan titles had .
Van Praag writes that the `` numerous economically motivated Tibetan missions to the Ming Court are referred to as ` tributary missions ' in the Ming Shih . ''
Van Praag writes that these `` tributary missions '' were simply prompted by China 's need for horses from Tibet , since a viable horse market in Mongol lands was closed as a result of incessant conflict .
Historians disagree on what the relationship was between the Ming court and Tibet and whether or not Ming China had sovereignty over Tibet .
Van Praag writes that Chinese court historians viewed Tibet as an independent foreign tributary and had little interest in Tibet besides a lama-patron relationship .
Thus , they conclude , the Ming court won the power to rule Tibetan areas formerly under the rule of the Yuan dynasty .
Of later Mongol and Tibetan accounts interpreting the Mongol conquest of Tibet , Laird asserts that `` they , like all non-Chinese historical narratives , never portray the Mongol subjugation of Tibet as a Chinese one . ''
The Columbia Encyclopedia distinguishes between the Yuan dynasty and the other Mongol Empire khanates of Ilkhanate , Chagatai Khanate and the Golden Horde .
Founded by Kublai Khan , who adopted the Chinese dynastic name of Yüan in 1271 . ''
The Metropolitan Museum of Art also noted that in spite of the gradual assimilation of Yuan monarchs , the Mongol rulers largely ignored the literati and imposed harsh policies discriminating against southern Chinese .
Although Han Chinese who were recruited as advisers were often actually more influential than high officials , their status was not as well defined .
Rossabi writes that Kublai recognized that in order to rule China , `` he had to employ Chinese advisors and officials , yet he could not rely totally on Chinese advisers because he had to maintain a delicate balancing act between ruling the sedentary civilization of China and preserving the cultural identity and values of the Mongols . ''
And `` in governing China , he was concerned with the interests of his Chinese subjects , but also with exploiting the resources of the empire for his own aggrandizement .
His motivations and objectives alternated from one to the other throughout his reign , '' according to Rossabi .
Van Praag writes in The Status of Tibet that the Tibetans and Mongols , on the other hand , upheld a dual system of rule and an interdependent relationship that legitimated the succession of Mongol khans as universal Buddhist rulers , or chakravartin .
It also states that while the Ming abolished the policy council set up by the Mongol Yuan to manage local affairs in Tibet and the Mongol system of Imperial Tutors to govern religious affairs , the Ming adopted a policy of bestowing titles upon religious leaders who had submitted to the Ming dynasty .
Of the county -LRB- zong or dzong -RRB- leaders of Neiwo Zong and Renbam Zong , Chen states that when `` the Emperor learned the actual situation of the Phachu Kargyu , the Ming court then appointed the main Zong leaders to be senior officers of the Senior Command of Dbus and Gtsang . ''
Tribute missions from Tibetan monasteries to the Chinese court brought back not only titles , but large , commercially valuable gifts which could subsequently be sold .
If the emperor continues to care for us , please follow his edicts and the imperial envoy should be well received . ''
Georges Dreyfus , a professor of religion at Williams College , writes that it was Changchub Gyaltsen who adopted the old administrative system of Songtsän Gampo -LRB- c. 605 -- 649 -RRB- -- the first leader of the Tibetan Empire to establish Tibet as a strong power -- by reinstating its legal code of punishments and administrative units .
For example , instead of the 13 governorships established by the Mongol Sakya viceroy , Changchub Gyaltsen divided Central Tibet into districts -LRB- dzong -RRB- with district heads -LRB- dzong dpon -RRB- who had to conform to old rituals and wear clothing styles of old Imperial Tibet .
Wang and Nyima write that this was due to old age and physical weakness , and also because of efforts being made to build three major monasteries .
Chen Qingying states that Tsongkhapa wrote a letter to decline the Emperor 's invitation , and in this reply , Tsongkhapa wrote :
A. Tom Grunfeld says that Tsongkhapa claimed ill health in his refusal to appear at the Ming court , while Rossabi adds that Tsongkhapa cited the `` length and arduousness of the journey '' to China as another reason not to make an appearance .
1403 -- 1427 -RRB- , which was again refused by Tsongkhapa .
The Xuande Emperor -LRB- r. 1425 -- 1435 -RRB- even granted this disciple Chosrje Shākya Yeshes the title of a `` King '' -LRB- 王 -RRB- .
This title does not appear to have held any practical meaning , or to have given its holder any power , at Tsongkhapa 's Ganden Monastery .
Wylie notes that this -- like the Karma Kargyu -- can not be seen as a reappointment of Mongol Yuan offices , since the Gelug school was created after the fall of the Yuan dynasty .
Norbu writes that , although this would have been true for the eastern Tibetan regions of Amdo and Kham 's `` tribute-cum-trade '' relations with the Ming , it was untrue if applied to the western Tibetan regions of Ü-Tsang and Ngari .
After the Phagmodrupa Changchub Gyaltsen , these were ruled by `` three successive nationalistic regimes , '' which Norbu writes `` Communist historians prefer to ignore . ''
Yiu Yung-chin states that the furthest western extent of the Ming dynasty 's territory was Gansu , Sichuan , and Yunnan while `` the Ming did not possess Tibet . ''
However , Van Praag states that Tibetan rulers upheld their own separate relations with the kingdoms of Nepal and Kashmir , and at times `` engaged in armed confrontation with them . ''
On this , historian Li Tieh-tseng says of Tsongkhapa 's refusal of Ming invitations to visit the Yongle Emperor 's court :
Helmut Hoffman states that the Ming upheld the facade of rule over Tibet through periodic missions of `` tribute emissaries '' to the Ming court and by granting nominal titles to ruling lamas , but did not actually interfere in Tibetan governance .
He asserts that `` by conferring titles on Tibetans already in power , the Ming emperors merely recognized political reality . ''
A Tibetan translation in the 16th century preserves the letter of the Yongle Emperor , which the Association for Asian Studies notes is polite and complimentary towards the Karmapa .
The letter of invitation reads ,
According to Karma Thinley , the emperor gave the Karmapa the place of honor at his left , and on a higher throne than his own .
Throughout the following month , the Yongle Emperor and his court showered the Karmapa with presents .
Elliot Sperling asserts that the Yongle Emperor , in bestowing Deshin Shekpa with the title of `` King '' and praising his mystical abilities and miracles , was trying to build an alliance with the Karmapa as the Mongols had with the Sakya lamas , but Deshin Shekpa rejected the Yongle Emperor 's offer .
Tsai writes that Deshin Shekpa aided the legitimacy of the Yongle Emperor 's rule by providing him with portents and omens which demonstrated Heaven 's favor of the Yongle Emperor on the Ming throne .
He writes that the meetings of lamas with the Emperor of China were exchanges of tribute between `` the patron and the priest '' and were not merely instances of a political subordinate paying tribute to a superior .
Patricia Ann Berger writes that the Yongle Emperor 's courting and granting of titles to lamas was his attempt to `` resurrect the relationship between China and Tibet established earlier by the Yuan dynastic founder Khubilai Khan and his guru Phagpa . ''
She also writes that the later Qing emperors and their Mongol associates viewed the Yongle Emperor 's relationship with Tibet as `` part of a chain of reincarnation that saw this Han Chinese emperor as yet another emanation of Manjusri . ''
The Ming court had believed that the representatives of the Karma Kagyu who continued to visit the Ming capital were sent by the Karmapa .
Wang and Nyima assert that this `` tribute-related trade '' of the Ming exchanging Chinese tea for Tibetan horses -- while granting Tibetan envoys and Tibetan merchants explicit permission to trade with Han Chinese merchants -- `` furthered the rule of the Ming dynasty court over Tibet '' .
Rossabi and Sperling note that this trade in Tibetan horses for Chinese tea existed long before the Ming .
Peter C. Perdue says that Wang Anshi -LRB- 1021 -- 1086 -RRB- , realizing that China could not produce enough militarily capable steeds , had also aimed to obtain horses from Inner Asia in exchange for Chinese tea .
The Chinese needed horses not only for cavalry but also as draft animals for the army 's supply wagons .
The Tibetans required Chinese tea not only as a common beverage but also as a religious ceremonial supplement .
The Ming government imposed a monopoly on tea production and attempted to regulate this trade with state-supervised markets , but these collapsed in 1449 due to military failures and internal ecological and commercial pressures on the tea-producing regions .
Sperling writes that the Ming simultaneously bought horses in the Kham region while fighting Tibetan tribes in Amdo and receiving Tibetan embassies in Nanjing .
He also argues that the embassies of Tibetan lamas visiting the Ming court were for the most part efforts to promote commercial transactions between the lamas ' large , wealthy entourage and Ming Chinese merchants and officials .
Kolmaš writes that while the Ming maintained a laissez-faire policy towards Tibet and limited the numbers of the Tibetan retinues , the Tibetans sought to maintain a tributary relationship with the Ming because imperial patronage provided them with wealth and power .
Laird writes that Tibetans eagerly sought Ming court invitations since the gifts the Tibetans received for bringing tribute were much greater in value than the latter .
As for the Yongle Emperor 's gifts to his Tibetan and Nepalese vassals such as silver wares , Buddha relics , utensils for Buddhist temples and religious ceremonies , and gowns and robes for monks , Tsai writes `` in his effort to draw neighboring states to the Ming orbit so that he could bask in glory , the Yongle Emperor was quite willing to pay a small price '' .
The Information Office of the State Council of the PRC lists the Tibetan tribute items as oxen , horses , camels , sheep , fur products , medical herbs , Tibetan incenses , thangkas -LRB- painted scrolls -RRB- , and handicrafts ; while the Ming awarded Tibetan tribute-bearers an equal value of gold , silver , satin and brocade , bolts of cloth , grains , and tea leaves .
This provided the Chinese with a new supply of horses that the Mongols had in excess ; it was also a relief to the Ming , since they were unable to stop the Mongols from periodic raiding .
Laird says that despite the fact that later Mongols believed Altan forced the Ming to view him as an equal , Chinese historians argue that he was simply a loyal Chinese citizen .
By 1578 , Altan Khan formed a formidable Mongol-Tibetan alliance with the Gelug that the Ming viewed from afar without intervention .
Patricia Ebrey writes that Tibet , like Joseon Korea and other neighboring states to the Ming , settled for its tributary status while there were no troops or governors of Ming China stationed in its territory .
Laird writes that `` after the Mongol troops left Tibet , no Ming troops replaced them . ''
Wang and Nyima state that , despite the fact that the Ming refrained from sending troops to subdue Tibet and refrained from garrisoning Ming troops there , these measures were unnecessary so long as the Ming court upheld close ties with Tibetan vassals and their forces .
Norbu states that the Ming dynasty , preoccupied with the Mongol threat to the north , could not spare additional armed forces to enforce or back up their claim of sovereignty over Tibet ; instead , they relied on `` Confucian instruments of tribute relations '' of heaping unlimited number of titles and gifts on Tibetan lamas through acts of diplomacy .
Sperling states that the delicate relationship between the Ming and Tibet was `` the last time a united China had to deal with an independent Tibet , '' that there was a potential for armed conflict at their borders , and that the ultimate goal of Ming foreign policy with Tibet was not subjugation but `` avoidance of any kind of Tibetan threat . ''
Chan writes that this was perhaps the calculated strategy of the Yongle Emperor , as exclusive patronage to one Tibetan sect would have given it too much regional power .
Sperling finds no textual evidence in either Chinese or Tibetan sources to support this thesis of Petech and Hisashi .
Norbu asserts that their thesis is largely based on the list of Ming titles conferred on Tibetan lamas rather than `` comparative analysis of developments in China and Tibet . ''
Rossabi states that this theory `` attributes too much influence to the Chinese , '' pointing out that Tibet was already politically divided when the Ming dynasty began .
The Association for Asian Studies states that there is no known written evidence to suggest that later leaders of the Gelug -- Gendün Drup -LRB- 1391 -- 1474 -RRB- and Gendün Gyatso -LRB- 1475 -- 1571 -RRB- -- had any contacts with Ming China .
These two religious leaders were preoccupied with an overriding concern for dealing with the powerful secular Rinpungpa princes , who were patrons and protectors of the Karma Kargyu lamas .
While the task of New Years prayers in Lhasa was granted to the Karmapa and others , Gendün Gyatso traveled in exile looking for allies .
When the Drikung Kagyu abbot of Drigung Monastery threatened Lhasa in 1537 , Gendün Gyatso was forced to abandon the Drepung Monastery , although he eventually returned .
Zhengde 's top advisors made every attempt to dissuade him from inviting this lama to court , arguing that Tibetan Buddhism was wildly heterodox and unorthodox .
Despite protests by the Grand Secretary Liang Chu , in 1515 the Zhengde Emperor sent his eunuch official Liu Yun of the Palace Chancellery on a mission to invite this Karmapa to Beijing .
Liu commanded a fleet of hundreds of ships requisitioned along the Yangtze , consuming 2,835 g -LRB- 100 oz -RRB- of silver a day in food expenses while stationed for a year in Chengdu of Sichuan .
After procurring necessary gifts for the mission , he departed with a cavalry force of about 1,000 troops .
When the request was delivered , the Karmapa lama refused to leave Tibet despite the Ming force brought to coerce him .
The Karmapa launched a surprise ambush on Liu Yun 's camp , seizing all the goods and valuables while killing or wounding half of Liu Yun 's entire escort .
After this fiasco , Liu fled for his life , but only returned to Chengdu several years later to find that the Zhengde Emperor had died .
He also states that Chinese writers of the early 20th century described Tibet as a feudal dependency of China , not an integral part of it .
He writes that the Ming relationship with Tibet is problematic for China 's insistence of its unbroken sovereignty over Tibet since the 13th century .
As for the Tibetan view that Tibet was never subject to the rule of the Yuan or Qing emperors of China , Sperling also discounts this by stating that Tibet was `` subject to rules , laws and decisions made by the Yuan and Qing rulers '' and that even Tibetans described themselves as subjects of these emperors .
Yet he states that this was a radical change in regards to all previous eras of Sino-Tibetan relations .
China Daily states that the Ming handled Tibet 's civil administration , appointed all leading officials of these administrative organs , and punished Tibetans who broke the law .
The party-controlled People 's Daily , the state-controlled Xinhua News Agency , and the state-controlled national television network China Central Television posted the same article that China Daily had , the only difference being their headlines and some additional text .
The court eunuchs were in favor of expanding and building new commercial ties with foreign countries such as Portugal , which Zhengde deemed permissible since he had an affinity for foreign and exotic people .
Evelyn S. Rawski , a professor in the Department of History of the University of Pittsburgh , writes that the Ming 's unique relationship with Tibetan prelates essentially ended with Jiajing 's reign while Ming influence in the Amdo region was supplanted by the Mongols .
Klieger writes that Altan Khan 's presence in the west effectively reduced Ming influence and contact with Tibet .
The full title was `` Dalai Lama Vajradhara '' , `` Vajradhara '' meaning `` Holder of the Thunderbolt '' in Sanskrit .
Victoria Huckenpahler notes that Vajradhara is considered by Buddhists to be the primordial Buddha of limitless and all-pervasive beneficial qualities , a being that `` represents the ultimate aspect of enlightenment . ''
Goldstein writes that Sönam Gyatso also enhanced Altan Khan 's standing by granting him the title `` king of religion , majestic purity '' .
Rawski writes that the Dalai Lama officially recognized Altan Khan as the `` Protector of the Faith '' .
Kolmaš states that the spiritual and secular Mongol-Tibetan alliance of the 13th century was renewed by this alliance constructed by Altan Khan and Sönam Gyatso .
Van Praag writes that this restored the original Mongol patronage of a Tibetan lama and `` to this day , Mongolians are among the most devout followers of the Gelugpa and the Dalai Lama . ''
Angela F. Howard writes that this unique relationship not only provided the Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama with religious and political authority in Tibet , but that Altan Khan gained `` enormous power among the entire Mongol population . ''
Sometime in August or September of that year , Sonam Gyatso 's representative stationed with Altan Khan received a return letter and gift from the Wanli Emperor -LRB- r. 1572 -- 1620 -RRB- , who also conferred upon Sonam Gyatso a title ; this was the first official contact between a Dalai Lama and a government of China .
However , Laird states that when Wanli invited him to Beijing , the Dalai Lama declined the offer due to a prior commitment , even though he was only 400 km -LRB- 250 mi -RRB- from Beijing .
Laird adds that `` the power of the Ming emperor did not reach very far at the time . ''
, but China Daily does not mention who granted him the title .
This was noted in the Biography of the Fourth Dalai Lama , which stated that one Soinam Lozui delivered the seal of the Emperor to the Dalai Lama .
On the mass Mongol conversion to Tibetan Buddhism under Altan Khan , Laird writes that `` the Chinese watched these developments with interest , though few Chinese ever became devout Tibetan Buddhists . ''
Tensions rose between the nationalistic Ü-Tsang ruler and the Mongols who safeguarded their Mongol Dalai Lama in Lhasa .
Chen writes of the speculation over the fourth Dalai Lama 's mysterious death and the plot of the Ü-Tsang king to have him murdered for `` cursing '' him with illness , although Chen writes that the murder was most likely the result of a feudal power struggle .
In 1618 , only two years after Yonten Gyatso died , the Gelug and the Karma Kargyu went to war , the Karma Kargyu supported by the secular Ü-Tsang king .
The Ü-Tsang ruler had a large number of Gelugpa lamas killed , occupied their monasteries at Drepung and Sera , and outlawed any attempts to find another Dalai Lama .
In 1621 , the Ü-Tsang king died and was succeeded by his young son Karma Tenkyong , an event which stymied the war effort as the latter accepted the six-year-old Lozang Gyatso as the new Dalai Lama .
Despite the new Dalai Lama 's diplomatic efforts to maintain friendly relations with the new Ü-Tsang ruler , Sonam Rapten -LRB- 1595 -- 1657 -RRB- , the Dalai Lama 's chief steward and treasurer at Drepung , made efforts to overthrow the Ü-Tsang king , which led to another conflict .
In 1633 , the Gelugpas and several thousand Mongol adherents defeated the Ü-Tsang king 's troops near Lhasa before a peaceful negotiation was settled .
Goldstein writes that in this the `` Mongols were again playing a significant role in Tibetan affairs , this time as the military arm of the Dalai Lama . ''
Sonam Chöpel urged Güshi Khan to assault the Ü-Tsang king 's homebase of Shigatse , which Güshi Khan agreed upon , enlisting the aid of Gelug monks and supporters .
Güshi Khan then captured and summarily executed Karma Tenkyong , the ruler of Ü-Tsang , King of Tibet .
Although Güshi Khan had granted the Dalai Lama `` supreme authority '' as Goldstein writes , the title of ` King of Tibet ' was conferred upon Güshi Khan , spending his summers in pastures north of Lhasa and occupying Lhasa each winter .
Van Praag writes that at this point Güshi Khan maintained control over the armed forces , but accepted his inferior status towards the Dalai Lama .
Rawski writes that the Dalai Lama shared power with his regent and Güshi Khan during his early secular and religious reign .
However , Rawski states that he eventually `` expanded his own authority by presenting himself as Avalokiteśvara through the performance of rituals , '' by building the Potala Palace and other structures on traditional religious sites , and by emphasizing lineage reincarnation through written biographies .
Goldstein states that the government of Güshi Khan and the Dalai Lama persecuted the Karma Kagyu sect , confiscated their wealth and property , and even converted their monasteries into Gelug monasteries .
Rawski writes that this Mongol patronage allowed the Gelugpas to dominate the rival religious sects in Tibet .
China Daily states that when the following Qing dynasty replaced the Ming dynasty , it merely `` strengthened administration of Tibet . ''
Patterson writes that this was an effort of Shunzhi to secure an alliance with Tibet that would ultimately lead to the establishment of Manchu rule over Mongolia .
In this meeting with the Qing emperor , Goldstein asserts that the Dalai Lama was not someone to be trifled with due to his alliance with Mongol tribes , some of which were declared enemies of the Qing .
Van Praag states that Tibet and the Dalai Lama 's power was recognized by the `` Manchu Emperor , the Mongolian Khans and Princes , and the rulers of Ladakh , Nepal , India , Bhutan , and Sikkim . ''
As of 1751 , Albert Kolb writes that `` Chinese claims to suzerainty over Tibet date from this time . ''
While the iPhone and iPad have essentially the same media player capabilities as the iPod line , they are generally treated as separate products .
The core is over 5 times faster than previous models and is built to be roughly on par with the iPhone 5S .
It is available in 5 different colors : Space grey , pink , gold , silver and Product -LRB- red -RRB- .
The iPod line came from Apple 's `` digital hub '' category , when the company began creating software for the growing market of personal digital devices .
Digital cameras , camcorders and organizers had well-established mainstream markets , but the company found existing digital music players `` big and clunky or small and useless '' with user interfaces that were `` unbelievably awful , '' so Apple decided to develop its own .
The platform had rudimentary software running on a commercial microkernel embedded operating system .
PortalPlayer had previously been working on an IBM-branded MP3 player with Bluetooth headphones .
As development progressed , Apple continued to refine the software 's look and feel .
Later iPods switched fonts again to Podium Sans -- a font similar to Apple 's corporate font , Myriad .
iPods with color displays then adopted some Mac OS X themes like Aqua progress bars , and brushed metal meant to evoke a combination lock .
This iPod was only available with 30GB of storage capacity .
He was unable to secure funding to renew the US$ 120,000 worldwide patent , so it lapsed and Kramer never profited from his idea .
, which refers to the white EVA Pods of the Discovery One spaceship .
Chieco saw an analogy to the relationship between the spaceship and the smaller independent pods in the relationship between a personal computer and the music player .
Apple researched the trademark and found that it was already in use .
The first iPod kiosks had been demonstrated to the public in New Jersey in March 1998 , and commercial use began in January 2000 , but had apparently been discontinued by 2001 .
Similar capacitors were used in the fourth-generation iPods .
The first-generation iPod Shuffle uses a dual-transistor output stage , rather than a single capacitor-coupled output , and does not exhibit reduced bass response for any load .
However , users that have bought a new sixth-generation iPod in late 2013 have reported a new option that allowed them to disable the EU volume limit .
It has been said that these new iPods came with an updated software that allowed this change .
Older sixth-generation iPods , however , are unable to update to this software version .
This provided better compatibility with non-Apple machines , as most of them did not have FireWire ports at the time .
Eventually Apple began shipping iPods with USB cables instead of FireWire , although the latter was available separately .
Some peripherals use their own interface , while others use the iPod 's own screen .
Many accessories have been made for the iPod line .
Other notable accessories include external speakers , wireless remote controls , protective case , screen films , and wireless earphones .
Many car manufacturers have added audio input jacks as standard .
Fifth and sixth generation iPod Classics , as well as third generation iPod Nanos , can additionally play MPEG-4 -LRB- H. 264/MPEG -4 AVC -RRB- and QuickTime video formats , with restrictions on video dimensions , encoding techniques and data-rates .
MIDI files also can not be played , but can be converted to audio files using the `` Advanced '' menu in iTunes .
Alternative open-source audio formats , such as Ogg Vorbis and FLAC , are not supported without installing custom firmware onto an iPod -LRB- e.g. , Rockbox -RRB- .
Each time an iPod connects to its host computer , iTunes can synchronize entire music libraries or music playlists either automatically or manually .
A user can access , play , and add music on a second computer if an iPod is set to manual and not automatic sync , but anything added or edited will be reversed upon connecting and syncing with the main computer and its library .
If a user wishes to automatically sync music with another computer , an iPod 's library will be entirely wiped and replaced with the other computer 's library .
iPods with color displays use anti-aliased graphics and text , with sliding animations .
The buttons perform basic functions such as menu , play , pause , next track , and previous track .
Other operations , such as scrolling through menu items and controlling the volume , are performed by using the click wheel in a rotational manner .
Differences include a lack of a phone application .
Both devices use iOS .
Burning the files with iTunes as an audio CD , then re-importing would create music files without the DRM .
The DRM could also be removed using third-party software .
While individual songs were made available at a cost of US$ 1.29 , 30 cents more than the cost of a regular DRM song , entire albums were available for the same price , US$ 9.99 , as DRM encoded albums .
On October 17 , 2007 , Apple lowered the cost of individual iTunes Plus songs to US$ 0.99 per song , the same as DRM encoded tracks .
RealNetworks claims that Apple is creating problems for itself by using FairPlay to lock users into using the iTunes Store .
Steve Jobs stated that Apple makes little profit from song sales , although Apple uses the store to promote iPod sales .
However , iPods can also play music files from online stores that do not use DRM , such as eMusic or Amie Street .
Universal will now supply iTunes in an ` at will ' capacity .
Those games were : Bejeweled , Cubis 2 , Mahjong , Mini Golf , Pac-Man , Tetris , Texas Hold 'Em , Vortex , Asphalt 4 : Elite Racing and Zuma .
Additional games have since been added .
The games are in the form of .
ipg files , which are actually .
zip archives in disguise -LSB- citation needed -RSB- .
When unzipped , they reveal executable files along with common audio and image files , leading to the possibility of third party games .
Unlike many other MP3 players , simply copying audio or video files to the drive with a typical file management application will not allow an iPod to properly access them .
The user must use software that has been specifically designed to transfer media files to iPods , so that the files are playable and viewable .
Many third-party applications also allow easy copying of media files off of an iPod .
On May 15 , 2006 , Creative filed another suit against Apple with the United States District Court for the Northern District of California .
As part of the agreement , Apple will recoup part of its payment , if Creative is successful in licensing the patent .
Several industries are modifying their products to work better with both the iPod line and the AAC audio format .
iPods have also gained popularity for use in education .
Apple offers more information on educational uses for iPods on their website , including a collection of lesson plans .
There has also been academic research done in this area in nursing education and more general K-16 education .
Weird . ''
The lawsuits were settled by offering individuals either US$ 50 store credit or a free battery replacement .
Compounding the problem , Apple initially would not replace worn-out batteries .
One week later , Apple offered an extended iPod warranty for US$ 59 .
The first generation iPod Nano may overheat and pose a health and safety risk .
Affected iPod Nanos were sold between September 2005 and December 2006 .
Apple recommended that owners of affected iPod Nanos stop using them .
It concluded that some models were more durable than others .
A class action lawsuit was also filed .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Apple , HP , and others stated that they were investigating the situation .
Foxconn guards have been videotaped beating employees .
As of 2006 , the iPod was produced by about 14,000 workers in the U.S. and 27,000 overseas .
Further , the salaries attributed to this product were overwhelmingly distributed to highly skilled U.S. professionals , as opposed to lower skilled U.S. retail employees or overseas manufacturing labor .
All iPods except for the iPod Touch can function in `` disk mode '' as mass storage devices to store data files but this may not be the default behavior , and in the case of the iPod Touch , requires special software .
With the release of the Windows-compatible iPod , the default file system used on the iPod line switched from HFS + to FAT32 , although it can be reformatted to either file system -LRB- excluding the iPod Shuffle which is strictly FAT32 -RRB- .
Generally , if a new iPod -LRB- excluding the iPod Shuffle -RRB- is initially plugged into a computer running Windows , it will be formatted with FAT32 , and if initially plugged into a Mac running Mac OS it will be formatted with HFS + .
The Legend of Zelda : Twilight Princess -LRB- Japanese : ゼルダの伝説 トワイライトプリンセス , Hepburn : Zeruda no Densetsu : Towairaito Purinsesu ? -RRB-
It is the thirteenth installment in the The Legend of Zelda series .
-LSB- b -RSB-
com , Computer and Video Games , Electronic Gaming Monthly , Game Informer , GamesRadar , IGN , and The Washington Post .
Link can walk , run , and attack , and will automatically jump when running off of or reaching for a ledge .
-LSB- d -RSB- While L-targeting , projectile-based weapons can be fired at a target without the need for manual aiming .
-LSB- c -RSB-
-LSB- f -RSB-
The GameCube and Wii versions feature several minor differences in their controls .
The player controls Link 's sword by swinging the Wii Remote .
-LSB- g -RSB-
When Link enters the Twilight Realm , the void that corrupts parts of Hyrule , he transforms into a wolf .
-LSB- h -RSB- He is eventually able to transform between his Hylian and wolf forms at will .
-LSB- k -RSB-
There is very little voice acting in the game , as is the case in most Zelda titles to date .
Other characters have similar language-independent verbalizations , including laughter , surprised or fearful exclamations , and screams .
A Shadow Beast pulls him beyond the wall into the Realm of Twilight , where he is transformed into a wolf and imprisoned .
She guides him to Princess Zelda .
Zelda explains that Zant , the King of the Twilight , has stolen the light from three of the four Light Spirits and conquered Hyrule .
In order to save Hyrule , Link must first restore the Light Spirits by entering the Twilight-covered areas and , as a wolf , recover the Spirits ' lost light .
As he restores them , the Light Spirits return Link to his Hylian form .
After he relieves Midna of the Fused Shadow fragments , she ridicules him for abusing his tribe 's magic , but Zant reveals that his power comes from another source as he uses it to turn Link back into a wolf , and then leaves Midna in Hyrule to die from the world 's light .
Zelda sacrifices herself to heal Midna with her power before vanishing mysteriously .
Midna is moved by Zelda 's sacrifice , and begins to care more about Link and the fate of the light world .
However , they discover that the mirror is broken .
The Sages there explain that Zant tried to destroy it , but he was only able to shatter it into fragments ; only the true ruler of the Twili can completely destroy the Mirror of Twilight .
Assisted by an underground resistance group they meet in Castle Town , Link and Midna set out to retrieve the missing shards of the Mirror , defeating those they infected .
Once the portal has been restored , Midna is revealed to be the true ruler of the Twilight Realm , usurped by Zant when he cursed her into her current form .
Confronting Zant , Link and Midna learn that Zant 's coup was made possible when he forged a pact with Ganondorf , who asked for Zant 's assistance in conquering Hyrule .
After Link defeats Zant , Midna recovers the Fused Shadows , but destroys Zant after learning that only Ganondorf 's death can release her from her curse .
With Ganondorf dead , the Light Spirits not only bring Midna back to life , but restore her to her true form .
Concerned that the sequel would have the same problem , Aonuma expressed to producer Shigeru Miyamoto that he wanted to create a realistic Zelda game that would appeal to the North American market .
Miyamoto , hesitant about solely changing the game 's presentation , suggested the team 's focus should instead be on coming up with gameplay innovations .
-LSB- l -RSB-
Miyamoto explained in interviews that the graphical style was chosen to satisfy demand , and that it better fit the theme of an older incarnation of Link .
The game runs on a modified The Wind Waker engine .
Prior Zelda games have employed a theme of two separate , yet connected , worlds .
In A Link to the Past , Link travels between a `` Light World '' and a `` Dark World '' ; in Ocarina of Time , as well as in Oracle of Ages , Link travels between two different time periods .
The Zelda team sought to reuse this motif in the series ' latest installment .
Takano created the script for the story scenes , while Kyogoku and Takayuki Ikkaku handled the actual in-game script .
When he returned , he found the Twilight Princess team struggling .
Emphasis on the parallel worlds and the wolf transformation had made Link 's character unbelievable .
Aonuma also felt the gameplay lacked the caliber of innovation found in Phantom Hourglass , which was being developed with touch controls for the Nintendo DS .
-LSB- n -RSB-
Aonuma had anticipated creating a Zelda game for what would later be called the Wii , but had assumed that he would need to complete Twilight Princess first .
Aonuma felt confident this was the only way to proceed , but worried about consumers who had been anticipating a GameCube release .
Aonuma then started working on both versions in parallel .
-LSB- o -RSB-
They also announced that Zelda would appear on the Wii -LRB- then codenamed `` Revolution '' -RRB- , but it was not clear to the media if this meant Twilight Princess or a different game .
The team worked on a Wii control scheme , adapting camera control and the fighting mechanics to the new interface .
When the third-person view was restored , Aonuma thought it felt strange to swing the Wii Remote with the right hand to control the sword in Link 's left hand , so the entire Wii version map was mirrored .
Miyamoto confirmed the Revolution controller-functionality in an interview with Nintendo of Europe and Time reported this soon after .
Aonuma realized that his team had implemented Wii controls under the mindset of `` forcing '' users to adapt , instead of making the system intuitive and easy to use .
-LSB- q -RSB- The camera movement was reworked and item controls were changed to avoid accidental button presses .
The team did not have enough time before release to rework Link 's character model , so they instead flipped the entire game -- everything was made a mirror image .
-LSB- s -RSB- Link was now right-handed , and references to `` east '' and `` west '' were switched around .
The GameCube version , however , was left with the original orientation .
The Twilight Princess player 's guide focuses on the Wii version , but has a section in the back with mirror-image maps for GameCube users .
-LSB- t -RSB-
Minegishi took charge of composition and sound design in Twilight Princess , providing all field and dungeon music under the supervision of Kondo .
For the trailers , three pieces were written by different composers , two of which were created by Mahito Yokota and Kondo .
Kondo 's piece was later chosen as music for the E3 2005 trailer and for the demo movie after the game 's title screen .
Kondo later cited the lack of interactivity that comes with orchestral music as one of the main reasons for the decision .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
com , Computer and Video Games , Electronic Gaming Monthly , Game Informer , GamesRadar , and GameSpy .
On release , Twilight Princess was considered to be the greatest Zelda game ever made by many critics including writers for 1UP .
com , Computer and Video Games , Electronic Gaming Monthly , Game Informer , GamesRadar , IGN and The Washington Post .
Game Informer called it `` so creative that it rivals the best that Hollywood has to offer '' .
GamesRadar praised Twilight Princess as `` a game that deserves nothing but the absolute highest recommendation '' .
Cubed3 hailed Twilight Princess as `` the single greatest videogame experience '' .
Twilight Princess 's graphics were praised for the art style and animation , although the game was designed for the GameCube , which is technically lacking compared to the next generation consoles .
Despite these complaints , Computer and Video Games felt the game 's atmosphere was superior to that of any previous Zelda game , and regarded Twilight Princess 's Hyrule as the best version ever created .
PALGN praised the game 's cinematics , noting that `` the cutscenes are the best ever in Zelda games '' .
com said the remote-swinging sword attacks were `` the most impressive in the entire series '' .
However , he criticised it for `` no voice acting , no orchestral score and slightly outdated graphics '' .
Twilight Princess received Game of the Year awards from GameTrailers , 1UP .
com , Electronic Gaming Monthly , Game Informer , Games Radar , GameSpy , Spacey Awards , X-Play and Nintendo Power .
It was also given awards for Best Adventure Game from the Game Critics Awards , X-Play , IGN , GameTrailers , 1UP .
com , and Nintendo Power .
During its first week , the game was sold with three of every four Wii purchases .
While the manga adaptation began almost ten years after the initial release of the game on which it is based , it launched only a month before the release of the high-definition remake .
As of 20 February 2016 -LSB- update -RSB- , Spectre has grossed over $ 879 million worldwide .
Bond asks her to investigate Oberhauser , who was presumed dead years earlier .
Bond rescues her and the two meet Q , who discovers that Sciarra 's ring links Oberhauser to Bond 's previous missions , identifying Le Chiffre , Dominic Greene and Raoul Silva as Spectre agents .
The two travel to the hotel and discover White 's secret room where they find co-ordinates pointing to Oberhauser 's operations base in the desert .
After arriving at the station , Bond and Swann are escorted to Oberhauser 's base .
There , he reveals that Spectre has been staging terrorist attacks around the world , creating a need for the Nine Eyes programme .
In return Spectre will be given unlimited access to intelligence gathered by Nine Eyes .
Bond and Swann escape , destroying the base in the process , leaving Blofeld to apparently die during the explosion .
Swann leaves Bond , telling him she can not be part of a life involving espionage , and is subsequently kidnapped .
On the way , the group is ambushed and Bond is kidnapped , but the rest still proceed with the plan .
After Q succeeds in preventing the Nine Eyes from going online , a brief struggle between M and C ends with the latter falling to his death .
Bond finds Swann and the two escape by boat as the building collapses .
As Blofeld crawls away from the wreckage , Bond confronts him but ultimately leaves him to be arrested by M. Bond leaves the bridge with Swann .
The dispute began after Fleming incorporated elements of an undeveloped film script written by McClory and screenwriter Jack Whittingham -- including characters and plot points -- into Thunderball , which McClory contested in court , claiming ownership over elements of the novel .
Under the terms of the 1963 settlement , the literary rights stayed with Fleming , allowing the Spectre organisation and associated characters to continue appearing in print .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Dave Bautista was cast as Mr. Hinx after producers sought an actor with a background in contact sports .
Christensen 's character was reportedly killed off in a scene intended to be used as an epilogue to Quantum of Solace , before it was removed from the final cut of the film , enabling his return in Spectre .
In March 2013 Mendes said he would not return to direct the next film in the series , then known as Bond 24 ; he later recanted and announced that he would return , as he found the script and the plans for the long-term future of the franchise appealing .
-LSB- N 4 -RSB- The writer Jez Butterworth also worked on the script , alongside Mendes and Craig .
In July 2015 Mendes noted that the combined crew of Spectre numbered over one thousand , making it a larger production than Skyfall .
Craig is listed as co-producer .
Early filming took place at Pinewood Studios , and around London , with scenes variously featuring Craig and Harris at Bond 's flat , and Craig and Kinnear travelling down the River Thames .
Filming included an action scene featuring a Land Rover Defender Bigfoot and a Range Rover Sport .
The production faced opposition from a variety of special interest groups and city authorities , who were concerned about the potential for damage to historical sites around the city , and problems with graffiti and rubbish appearing in the film .
The version used for filming was converted to use a conventional internal combustion engine , to minimise the potential for disruption from mechanical problems with the complex hybrid system .
A brief shoot at London 's City Hall was filmed on 18 April 2015 , while Mendes was on location .
The crew returned to the river less than a week later to film scenes solely set on Westminster Bridge .
Craig , Seydoux , and Waltz , as well as Harris and Fiennes , were seen being filmed .
Filming then took place in Trafalgar Square .
In early June , the crew , as well as Craig , Seydoux , and Waltz , returned to the Thames for a final time to continue filming scenes previously shot on the river .
Principal photography concluded on 5 July 2015 .
A wrap-up party for Spectre was held in commemoration before entering post-production .
Mendes revealed that the final film would have more than one hundred minutes of music .
Satisfied with the quality , the demo was used in the final release .
It became the first Bond theme to reach number one in the UK Singles Chart .
The DB10 was designed in collaboration between Aston Martin and the filmmakers , with only 10 being produced especially for Spectre as a celebration of the 50th anniversary of the company 's association with the franchise .
In the sketch , they film a behind-the-scenes mockumentary on the filming of Spectre .
In the UK it received a wider release than Skyfall , with a minimum of 647 cinemas including 40 IMAX screens , compared to Skyfall 's 587 locations and 21 IMAX screens .
In the United Kingdom , the film grossed # 4.1 million -LRB- $ 6.4 million -RRB- from its Monday preview screenings .
Its Friday -- Saturday gross was # 20.4 million -LRB- $ 31.2 million -RRB- compared to Skyfall 's # 20.1 million -LRB- $ 31 million -RRB- .
It has grossed a total of $ 136.3 million there .
In Mexico , where part of the film was shot , it debuted with more than double that of Skyfall with $ 4.5 million .
It also bested its predecessor 's opening in various Nordic regions where MGM is distributing , such as in Finland -LRB- $ 2.66 million -RRB- and Norway -LRB- $ 2.91 million -RRB- , and in other markets like Denmark -LRB- $ 4.2 million -RRB- , the Netherlands -LRB- $ 3.38 million -RRB- , and Sweden -LRB- $ 3.1 million -RRB- .
The top earning markets are Germany -LRB- $ 70.3 million -RRB- and France -LRB- $ 38.8 million -RRB- .
In the United States and Canada , the film opened on 6 November 2015 , and in its opening weekend , was originally projected to gross $ 70 -- 75 million from 3,927 screens , the widest release for a Bond film .
Cinemark XD generated $ 1.85 million in 112 XD locations .
IMAX contributed $ 4.6 million on 246 screens , also a new record for a three-day opening for a November release -LRB- breaking Interstellar 's record -RRB- .
Albeit a strong opening it failed to attain the $ 100 million mark as projected .
Spectre has received mixed reviews , with many reviewers either giving the film highly positive or highly negative feedback .
Many critics praised the film 's opening scene , action sequences , stuntwork , cinematography and performances from the cast .
In some early reviews , the film received favourable comparisons with its predecessor , Skyfall .
Prior to its UK release , Spectre mostly received positive reviews .
Writing in the same publication , Peter Bradshaw gave the film a full five stars , calling it `` inventive , intelligent and complex '' , and singling out Craig 's performance as the film 's highlight .
Critical appraisal of the film was mixed in the United States .
In a lukewarm review for RogerEbert.com , Matt Zoller Seitz gave the film 2.5 stars out of 4 , describing Spectre as inconsistent and unable to capitalise on its potential .
Kenneth Turan , reviewing the film for Los Angeles Times , concluded that Spectre `` comes off as exhausted and uninspired '' .
Manohla Dargis of The New York Times panned the film as having `` nothing surprising '' and sacrificing its originality for the sake of box office returns .
Darren Franich of Entertainment Weekly viewed Spectre as `` an overreaction to our current blockbuster moment '' , aspiring `` to be a serialized sequel '' and proving `` itself as a Saga '' .
While noting that '' -LSB- n -RSB- othing that happens in Spectre holds up to even minor logical scrutiny '' , he had `` come not to bury Spectre , but to weirdly praise it .
Because the final act of the movie is so strange , so willfully obtuse , that it deserves extra attention . ''
In a positive review Rolling Stone , Peter Travers gave the film 3.5 stars out of 4 , describing `` The 24th movie about the British MI6 agent with a license to kill is party time for Bond fans , a fierce , funny , gorgeously produced valentine to the longest-running franchise in movies '' .
Stephen Whitty from the New York Daily News , gave it an 80 grade , saying : `` Craig is cruelly efficient .
Dave Bautista makes a good , Oddjob-like assassin .
And while Lea Seydoux does n't leave a huge impression as this film 's `` Bond girl , '' perhaps it 's because we 've already met -- far too briefly -- the hypnotic Monica Bellucci , as the first real `` Bond woman '' since Diana Rigg . ''
He stated : `` This is the 24th Bond film and it ranks solidly in the middle of the all-time rankings , which means it 's still a slick , beautifully photographed , action-packed , international thriller with a number of wonderfully , ludicrously entertaining set pieces , a sprinkling of dry wit , myriad gorgeous women and a classic psycho-villain who is clearly out of his mind but seems to like it that way . ''
Michael Phillips over at the Chicago Tribune , gave it a 75 grade .
He stated : `` For all its workmanlike devotion to out-of-control helicopters , `` Spectre '' works best when everyone 's on the ground , doing his or her job , driving expensive fast cars heedlessly , detonating the occasional wisecrack , enjoying themselves and their beautiful clothes . ''
They also muted all profanity .
Sam Mendes has stated he will not return to direct the next 007 film .
It was the deadliest earthquake to hit China since the 1976 Tangshan earthquake , which killed at least 240,000 people , and the strongest in the country since the 1950 Chayu earthquake , which registered at 8.5 on the Richter magnitude scale .
It is the 21st deadliest earthquake of all time .
Starting from Wenchuan , the rupture propagated at an average speed of 3.1 kilometers per second 49 ° toward north east , rupturing a total of about 300 km .
Geng , while acknowledging that earthquake prediction was broadly considered problematic by the scientific community , believed that `` the bigger the earthquake , the easier it is to predict . ''
The same Yazhou Zhoukan article pointed out the inherent difficulties associated with predicting earthquakes .
In response , an official with the Seismological Bureau stated that `` earthquake prediction is widely acknowledged around the world to be difficult from a scientific standpoint . ''
According to reports from Chengdu , the capital of Sichuan province , the earthquake tremors lasted for `` about two or three minutes '' .
The Yingxiu liedu-XI zone is about 66 km long and 20 km wide along Wenchuan -- Dujiangyan -- Pengzhou ; the Beichuan liedu-XI zone is about 82 km long and 15 km wide along An County -- Beichuan -- Pingwu .
The area with liedu X -LRB- comparable to X on EMS , `` destructive '' and X on MM , `` disastrous '' -RRB- spans 3,144 km2 .
The area affected by earthquakes exceeding liedu VI totals 440,442 km2 , occupying an oval 936 km long and 596 km wide , spanning three provinces and one autonomous region .
This earthquake ruptured at least two imbricate structures in Longmen Shan Fault System , i.e. the Beichuan Fault and the Guanxian -- Anxian Fault .
One SilkAir flight was diverted and landed in Kunming as a result .
The Juyuan Middle School , where many teenagers were buried , was excavated by civilians and cranes .
Dujiangyan is home of the Dujiangyan Irrigation System , an ancient water diversion project which is still in use and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site .
The project 's famous Fish Mouth was cracked but not severely damaged otherwise .
Nonetheless , the well-being of an even greater number of pandas in the neighbouring panda reserves remained unknown .
Five security guards at the reserve were killed by the earthquake .
By May 20 , two pandas at the reserve were found to be injured , while the search continued for another two adult pandas that went missing after the quake .
By May 28 , 2008 , one panda was still missing .
The missing panda was later found dead under the rubble of an enclosure .
Panda keepers and other workers placed her remains in a small wooden crate and buried her outside the breeding centre .
The old county seat of Beichuan was abandoned and preserved as part of the Beichuan Earthquake Museum .
A 56-year-old was killed in Dujiangyan during a rescue attempt on the Lingyanshan Ropeway , where due to the earthquake 11 tourists from Taiwan had been trapped inside cable cars since May 13 .
A 4-year-old boy named Zhu Shaowei -LRB- traditional Chinese : 朱紹維 ; simplified Chinese : 朱绍维 ; pinyin : Zhū Shàowéi -RRB- was also killed in Mianzhu City when a house collapsed on him and another was reported missing .
Another 700 students were buried in a school in Hanwang .
Up to 1,300 children and teachers died at Beichuan Middle School .
Catastrophe modeling firm AIR Worldwide reported official estimates of insurers ' losses at US$ 1 billion from the earthquake ; estimated total damages exceed US$ 20 billion .
It values Chengdu , at the time having an urban population of 4.5 million people , at around US$ 115 billion , with only a small portion covered by insurance .
DesRoches said : `` If the buildings were older and built prior to that 1976 earthquake , chances are they were n't built for adequate earthquake forces . ''
Strong aftershocks continued to strike even months after the main quake .
The same area suffered two more aftershocks of 5.6 and 6.0 Ms -LRB- 5.8 and 5.5 Mw , respectively , according to USGS -RRB- on July 23 , resulting in 1 death , 6 serious injuries , collapse of hundreds of homes and damaging kilometers of highways .
Pingwu County and Beichuan County , Sichuan , also northeast of Wenchuan and close to the epicenter of a 7.2 Ms earthquake in 1976 , suffered a 6.1 Ms aftershock -LRB- 5.7 Mw according to USGS -RRB- on August 1 ; it caused 2 deaths , 345 injuries , collapse of 707 homes , damages to over 1,000 homes , and blocked 25 kilometres -LRB- 16 mi -RRB- of country roads .
The government spent $ 441 billion on relief and reconstruction efforts .
General Secretary and President Hu Jintao announced that the disaster response would be rapid .
Using data from the Intermagnet Lanzhou geomagnetic observatory , geologists Lazo Pekevski from the Ss .
The same study , however , acknowledges the limitation of earthquake prediction models , and does not mention that the location of the quake could be accurately predicted .
He based his study on statistical correlation .
That Sichuan is a seismically active area has been discussed for years prior to the quake , though few studies point to a specific date and time .
The 1,300 rescuers reached the epicenter , and 300 pioneer troops reached the seat of Wenchuan at about 23:30 CST .
By 12:17 CST , May 14 , 2008 , communication in the seat of Wenchuan was partly revived .
On the afternoon of May 14 , 15 Special Operations Troops , along with relief supplies and communications gear , parachuted into inaccessible Mao County , northeast of Wenchuan .
Tzu Chi was the first force from outside the People 's Republic of China to join the rescue effort .
No-one survived .
Due to the one-child policy , many families lost their only child when schools in the region collapsed during the earthquake .
Consequently , Sichuan provincial and local officials have lifted the restriction for families whose only child was either killed or severely injured in the disaster .
Reimbursement would not , however , be offered for fines that were already levied .
It was attended by a wide range of entertainment , literary , business and political figures from mainland China , Hong Kong , Singapore and Taiwan .
Of the donations , CCTV gave the biggest corporate contribution at ¥ 50 million .
Almost at the same time in Taiwan , a similarly themed programme was on air hosted by the sitting president Ma Ying-jeou .
The Artistes 512 Fund Raising Campaign , an 8-hour fundraising marathon , was held on June 1 in Hong Kong ; it was attended by some 200 Sinosphere musicians and celebrities .
In Singapore , MediaCorp Channel 8 hosted a ` live ' programme 让爱川流不息 to raise funds for the victims .
Five tons of fuel to operate the machinery was airlifted to the site , where a sluice was constructed to allow the safe discharge of the bottlenecked water .
At 14:28 CST on May 19 , 2008 , a week after the earthquake , the Chinese public held a moment of silence .
People stood silent for three minutes while air defense , police and fire sirens , and the horns of vehicles , vessels and trains sounded .
People spontaneously burst into cheering `` Zhongguo jiayou ! ''
-LRB- Let 's go , China ! -RRB-
and `` Sichuan jiayou '' -LRB- Let 's go , Sichuan ! -RRB-
afterwards .
Chinese video sharing websites Youku and Tudou displayed a black background and placed multiple videos showing earthquake footage and news reports .
The Chinese version of MSN , cn.msn.com , also displayed banner ads about the earthquake and the relief efforts .
In an acknowledgment of the weakness of building codes in the countryside , the National Development and Reform Commission said on May 27 that it had drafted an amendment to improve construction standards for primary and middle schools in rural areas .
Experts are reviewing the draft , the commission said . ''
The payment amounts varied from school to school but were approximately the same .
In Hanwang , parents were offered a package valued at 8,800 USD in cash and a per-parent pension of nearly 5,600 USD .
According to the organization Human Rights in China , Liu has been released to serve his RTL sentence outside of the labor camp .
Other multinational firms located in China have also announced large amounts of donations .
But he added the scale of the disaster was such that `` we ca n't expect that the government can do everything and handle every aspect of the needs '' .
On May 29 , 2008 , government officials began inspecting the ruins of thousands of schools that collapsed , searching for clues about why they crumbled .
Local officials urged them not to protest but the parents demonstrated and demanded an investigation .
Parents and volunteers who have questioned authorities have been detained and threatened . ''
A global power city , New York exerts a significant impact upon commerce , finance , media , art , fashion , research , technology , education , and entertainment , its fast pace defining the term New York minute .
Home to the headquarters of the United Nations , New York is an important center for international diplomacy and has been described as the cultural and financial capital of the world .
In 2013 , the MSA produced a gross metropolitan product -LRB- GMP -RRB- of nearly US$ 1.39 trillion , while in 2012 , the CSA generated a GMP of over US$ 1.55 trillion , both ranking first nationally by a wide margin and behind the GDP of only twelve and eleven countries , respectively .
It has been the country 's largest city since 1790 .
The Statue of Liberty greeted millions of immigrants as they came to the Americas by ship in the late 19th and early 20th centuries and is a globally recognized symbol of the United States and its democracy .
Several sources have ranked New York the most photographed city in the world .
Times Square , iconic as the world 's `` heart '' and its `` Crossroads '' , is the brightly illuminated hub of the Broadway Theater District , one of the world 's busiest pedestrian intersections , and a major center of the world 's entertainment industry .
The names of many of the city 's bridges , skyscrapers , and parks are known around the world .
Manhattan 's real estate market is among the most expensive in the world .
Manhattan 's Chinatown incorporates the highest concentration of Chinese people in the Western Hemisphere , with multiple signature Chinatowns developing across the city .
The ice sheet scraped away large amounts of soil , leaving the bedrock that serves as the geologic foundation for much of New York City today .
Heavy ice kept him from further exploration , and he returned to Spain in August .
When the river narrowed and was no longer saline , he realized it was not a maritime passage and sailed back downriver .
The colony of New Amsterdam was centered at the site which would eventually become Lower Manhattan .
Several intertribal wars among the Native Americans and some epidemics brought on by contact with the Europeans caused sizable population losses for the Lenape between the years 1660 and 1670 .
New York grew in importance as a trading port while under British rule in the early 1700s .
Most slaveholders held a few or several domestic slaves , but others hired them out to work at labor .
Slavery became integrally tied to New York 's economy through the labor of slaves throughout the port , and the banks and shipping tied to the South .
After the battle , in which the Americans were defeated , leaving subsequent smaller armed engagements following in its wake , the city became the British military and political base of operations in North America .
The city was a haven for Loyalist refugees , as well as escaped slaves who joined the British lines for freedom newly promised by the Crown for all fighters .
They resettled other freedmen in England and the Caribbean .
New York was the last capital of the U.S. under the Articles of Confederation and the first capital under the Constitution of the United States .
New York interracial abolitionist activism continued ; among its leaders were graduates of the African Free School .
In the 19th century , the city was transformed by development relating to its status as a trading center , as well as by European immigration .
Several prominent American literary figures lived in New York during the 1830s and 1840s , including William Cullen Bryant , Washington Irving , Herman Melville , Rufus Wilmot Griswold , John Keese , Nathaniel Parker Willis , and Edgar Allan Poe .
Democratic Party candidates were consistently elected to local office , increasing the city 's ties to the South and its dominant party .
The situation deteriorated into attacks on New York 's elite , followed by attacks on black New Yorkers and their property after fierce competition for a decade between Irish immigrants and blacks for work .
The white working class had established dominance .
Violence by longshoremen against black men was especially fierce in the docks area .
It was one of the worst incidents of civil unrest in American history .
Throughout the first half of the 20th century , the city became a world center for industry , commerce , and communication .
New York City was a prime destination in the early twentieth century for African Americans during the Great Migration from the American South , and by 1916 , New York City was home to the largest urban African diaspora in North America .
The larger economic boom generated construction of skyscrapers competing in height and creating an identifiable skyline .
Returning World War II veterans created a post-war economic boom and the development of large housing tracts in eastern Queens .
New York emerged from the war unscathed as the leading city of the world , with Wall Street leading America 's place as the world 's dominant economic power .
They are widely considered to constitute the single most important event leading to the gay liberation movement and the modern fight for LGBT rights in the United States .
By the mid 1990s , crime rates started to drop dramatically due to revised police strategies , improving economic opportunities , gentrification , and new residents , both American transplants and new immigrants from Asia and Latin America .
The rebuilding of the area , has created a new One World Trade Center , and a 9/11 memorial and museum along with other new buildings and infrastructure .
A temporary station was built and opened on November 23 , 2003 .
A permanent station , the World Trade Center Transportation Hub , is currently under construction .
How easily we forget , but for weeks after the terror attacks , New York was America . ''
The East River -- a tidal strait -- flows from Long Island Sound and separates the Bronx and Manhattan from Long Island .
Some of the natural relief in topography has been evened out , especially in Manhattan .
The summit of the ridge is mostly covered in woodlands as part of the Staten Island Greenbelt .
Manhattan 's skyline , with its many skyscrapers , is universally recognized , and the city has been home to several of the tallest buildings in the world .
The 1916 Zoning Resolution required setbacks in new buildings , and restricted towers to a percentage of the lot size , to allow sunlight to reach the streets below .
In contrast , New York City also has neighborhoods that are less densely populated and feature free-standing dwellings .
Scientists estimated this lessened risk based upon a lower likelihood than previously thought of slow shaking near the city , which would be more likely to cause damage to taller structures from an earthquake in the vicinity of the city .
Spring and autumn are unpredictable and can range from chilly to warm , although they are usually mild with low humidity .
In the warmer months , the dew point , a measure of atmospheric moisture , ranges from 57.3 °F -LRB- 14.1 °C -RRB- in June to 62.0 °F -LRB- 16.7 °C -RRB- in August .
Hurricanes and tropical storms are rare in the New York area , but are not unheard of and always have the potential to strike the area .
The storm and its profound impacts have prompted the discussion of constructing seawalls and other coastal barriers around the shorelines of the city and the metropolitan area to minimize the risk of destructive consequences from another such event in the future .
ParkScore ranks urban park systems by a formula that analyzes median park size , park acres as percent of city area , the percent of city residents within a half-mile of a park , spending of park services per resident , and the number of playgrounds per 10,000 residents .
In Staten Island , the park includes Fort Wadsworth , with historic pre-Civil War era Battery Weed and Fort Tompkins , and Great Kills Park , with beaches , trails , and a marina .
They are joined in the harbor by Governors Island National Monument , in New York .
Parks in New York City include Central Park , Prospect Park , Flushing Meadows -- Corona Park , Forest Park , and Washington Square Park .
In New York , no single country or region of origin dominates .
Asian Americans in New York City , according to the 2010 Census , number more than one million , greater than the combined totals of San Francisco and Los Angeles .
New York contains the highest total Asian population of any U.S. city proper .
A community numbering 20,000 Korean-Chinese -LRB- Chaoxianzu -LRB- Chinese : 朝鲜族 -RRB- or Joseonjok -LRB- Hangul : 조선족 -RRB- -RRB- is centered in Flushing , Queens , while New York City is also home to the largest Tibetan population outside China , India , and Nepal , also centered in Queens .
Filipinos were the largest Southeast Asian ethnic group at 0.8 % , followed by Vietnamese , who made up 0.2 % of New York City 's population in 2010 .
Indians are the largest South Asian group , comprising 2.4 % of the city 's population , with Bangladeshis and Pakistanis at 0.7 % and 0.5 % , respectively .
Queens is the preferred borough of settlement for Asian Indians , Koreans , and Filipinos , as well as Malaysians and other Southeast Asians ; while Brooklyn is receiving large numbers of both West Indian as well as Asian Indian immigrants .
New York City has the largest European and non-Hispanic white population of any American city .
The European diaspora residing in the city is very diverse .
Additionally , Greek and French Americans numbered 65,000 each , with those of Hungarian descent estimated at 60,000 people .
Ukrainian and Scottish Americans numbered 55,000 and 35,000 , respectively .
People identifying ancestry from Spain numbered 30,838 total in 2010 .
People of Norwegian and Swedish descent both stood at about 20,000 each , while people of Czech , Lithuanian , Portuguese , Scotch-Irish , and Welsh descent all numbered between 12,000 -- 14,000 people .
Arab Americans number over 160,000 in New York City , with the highest concentration in Brooklyn .
Central Asians , primarily Uzbek Americans , are a rapidly growing segment of the city 's non-Hispanic white population , enumerating over 30,000 , and including over half of all Central Asian immigrants to the United States , most settling in Queens or Brooklyn .
The New York region continues to be by far the leading metropolitan gateway for legal immigrants admitted into the United States , substantially exceeding the combined totals of Los Angeles and Miami , the next most popular gateway regions .
The disparity is driven by wage growth in high-income brackets , while wages have stagnated for middle and lower-income brackets .
Lower Manhattan has been experiencing a baby boom , with the area south of Canal Street witnessing 1,086 births in 2010 , 12 % greater than 2009 and over twice the number born in 2001 .
New York is a global hub of international business and commerce .
Many Fortune 500 corporations are headquartered in New York City , as are a large number of foreign corporations .
New York City has been ranked first among cities across the globe in attracting capital , business , and tourists .
New York City is home to some of the nation 's -- and the world 's -- most valuable real estate .
Other important sectors include medical research and technology , non-profit institutions , and universities .
New York City 's most important economic sector lies in its role as the headquarters for the U.S.financial industry , metonymously known as Wall Street .
Many large financial companies are headquartered in New York City , and the city is also home to a burgeoning number of financial startup companies .
New York also leads in hedge fund management ; private equity ; and the monetary volume of mergers and acquisitions .
Several investment banks and investment mangers headquartered in Manhattan are important participants in other global financial centers. :34 -- 35 New York is also the principal commercial banking center of the United States .
Many of the world 's largest media conglomerates are also based in the city .
In the first half of 2015 , Silicon Alley generated over US$ 3.7 billion in venture capital investment across a broad spectrum of high technology enterprises , most based in Manhattan , with others in Brooklyn , Queens , and elsewhere in the region .
High technology startup companies and employment are growing in New York City and the region , bolstered by the city 's position in North America as the leading Internet hub and telecommunications center , including its vicinity to several transatlantic fiber optic trunk lines , New York 's intellectual capital , and its extensive outdoor wireless connectivity .
The biotechnology sector is also growing in New York City , based upon the city 's strength in academic scientific research and public and commercial financial support .
The New York City Economic Development Corporation 's Early Stage Life Sciences Funding Initiative and venture capital partners , including Celgene , General Electric Ventures , and Eli Lilly , committed a minimum of US$ 100 million to help launch 15 to 20 ventures in life sciences and biotechnology .
The song is the state song of New York .
The New York Wheel , a 630-foot ferris wheel , was under construction at the northern shore of Staten Island in 2015 , overlooking the Statue of Liberty , New York Harbor , and the Lower Manhattan skyline .
New York is a prominent location for the American entertainment industry , with many films , television series , books , and other media being set there .
The Association of Independent Commercial Producers is also based in New York .
Some of the city 's media conglomerates and institutions include Time Warner , the Thomson Reuters Corporation , the Associated Press , Bloomberg L.P. , the News Corporation , The New York Times Company , NBCUniversal , the Hearst Corporation , AOL , and Viacom .
Universal Music Group also has offices in New York .
New media enterprises are contributing an increasingly important component to the city 's central role in the media sphere .
The city also has a comprehensive ethnic press , with 270 newspapers and magazines published in more than 40 languages .
El Diario La Prensa is New York 's largest Spanish-language daily and the oldest in the nation .
The New York Amsterdam News , published in Harlem , is a prominent African American newspaper .
The Village Voice is the largest alternative newspaper .
The television industry developed in New York and is a significant employer in the city 's economy .
New York is also a major center for non-commercial educational media .
New York City is home to such notable private universities as Barnard College , Columbia University , Cooper Union , Fordham University , New York University , New York Institute of Technology , Pace University , and Yeshiva University .
The public State University of New York -LRB- SUNY -RRB- system also serves New York City , as well as the rest of the state .
The city also has other smaller private colleges and universities , including many religious and special-purpose institutions , such as St. John 's University , The Juilliard School , Manhattan College , The College of Mount Saint Vincent , The New School , Pratt Institute , The School of Visual Arts , The King 's College , and Wagner College .
It is similar to a municipal agency but has a Board of Directors .
HHC 's MetroPlus Health Plan is one of the New York area 's largest providers of government-sponsored health insurance and is the plan of choice for nearly half million New Yorkers .
Bellevue is the designated hospital for treatment of the President of the United States and other world leaders if they become sick or injured while in New York City .
In 2012 , New York City had the lowest overall crime rate and the second lowest murder rate among the largest U.S. cities , having become significantly safer after a spike in crime in the 1970s through 1990s .
The Mafia presence has declined in the city in the 21st century .
The New York City Fire Department faces highly multifaceted firefighting challenges in many ways unique to New York .
There are three Bureau of Fire Communications alarm offices which receive and dispatch alarms to appropriate units .
The Bronx and Queens offices are in separate buildings .
The city 's punk and hardcore scenes were influential in the 1970s and 1980s .
New York has long had a flourishing scene for Jewish American literature .
The city is also widely celebrated in popular lore , frequently the setting for books , movies -LRB- see List of films set in New York City -RRB- , and television programs .
The city government funds the arts with a larger annual budget than the National Endowment for the Arts .
Wealthy business magnates in the 19th century built a network of major cultural institutions , such as the famed Carnegie Hall and The Metropolitan Museum of Art , that would become internationally established .
New York City 's food culture includes a variety of international cuisines influenced by the city 's immigrant history .
Central European and Italian immigrants originally made the city famous for bagels , cheesecake , and New York-style pizza , while Chinese and other Asian restaurants , sandwich joints , trattorias , diners , and coffeehouses have become ubiquitous .
No other metropolitan area has had this happen more than once -LRB- Chicago in 1906 , St. Louis in 1944 , and the San Francisco Bay Area in 1989 -RRB- .
The city 's two current Major League Baseball teams are the New York Mets , who play at Citi Field in Queens , and the New York Yankees , who play at Yankee Stadium in the Bronx .
who compete in six games of interleague play every regular season that has also come to be called the Subway Series .
The Yankees have won a record 27 championships , while the Mets have won the World Series twice .
The city also was once home to the Brooklyn Dodgers -LRB- now the Los Angeles Dodgers -RRB- , who won the World Series once , and the New York Giants -LRB- now the San Francisco Giants -RRB- , who won the World Series five times .
Both teams moved to California in 1958 .
There are also two Minor League Baseball teams in the city , the Brooklyn Cyclones and Staten Island Yankees .
The city is well known for its links to basketball , which is played in nearly every park in the city by local youth , many of whom have gone on to play for major college programs and in the NBA .
Many sports are associated with New York 's immigrant communities .
New York 's subway is notable for nearly the entire system remaining open 24 hours a day , in contrast to the overnight shutdown common to systems in most cities , including Hong Kong , London , Paris , Seoul , and Tokyo .
Public transport is essential in New York City .
Due to their high usage of mass transit , New Yorkers spend less of their household income on transportation than the national average , saving $ 19 billion annually on transportation compared to other urban Americans .
New York 's airspace is the busiest in the United States and one of the world 's busiest air transportation corridors .
JFK and Newark Liberty were the busiest and fourth busiest U.S. gateways for international air passengers , respectively , in 2012 ; as of 2011 , JFK was the busiest airport for international passengers in North America .
Plans were announced in July 2015 to entirely rebuild LaGuardia Airport in a multibillion-dollar project to replace its aging facilities .
Other ferry systems shuttle commuters between Manhattan and other locales within the city and the metropolitan area .
The tunnel was built instead of a bridge to allow unfettered passage of large passenger and cargo ships that sailed through New York Harbor and up the Hudson River to Manhattan 's piers .
The Hugh L. Carey Tunnel runs underneath Battery Park and connects the Financial District at the southern tip of Manhattan to Red Hook in Brooklyn .
New York City 's numerical `` in-season cycling indicator '' of bicycling in the city hit an all-time high in 2013 .
As a result of the watershed 's integrity and undisturbed natural water filtration system , New York is one of only four major cities in the United States the majority of whose drinking water is pure enough not to require purification by water treatment plants .
The ongoing expansion of New York City Water Tunnel No. 3 , an integral part of the New York City water supply system , is the largest capital construction project in the city 's history .
Party platforms center on affordable housing , education , and economic development , and labor politics are of importance in the city .
Much of the scientific research in the city is done in medicine and the life sciences .
Sociologists and criminologists have not reached consensus on the explanation for the dramatic decrease in the city 's crime rate .
Some attribute the phenomenon to new tactics used by the NYPD , including its use of CompStat and the broken windows theory .
A strong correlation was found demonstrating that violent crime rates in New York and other big cities began to fall after lead was removed from American gasoline in the 1970s .
Another theory cited to explain New York City 's falling homicide rate is the inverse correlation between the number of murders and the increasingly wetter climate in the city .
New York City is home to hundreds of cultural institutions and historic sites , many of which are internationally known .
The Mile , which contains one of the densest displays of culture in the world , is actually three blocks longer than one mile -LRB- 1.6 km -RRB- .
Ten museums occupy the length of this section of Fifth Avenue .
In addition to other programming , the museums collaborate for the annual Museum Mile Festival , held each year in June , to promote the museums and increase visitation .
Many of the world 's most lucrative art auctions are held in New York City .
It has generally been considered one of the most recognizable accents within American English .
The classic version of this dialect is centered on middle and working-class people of European descent .
However , the influx of non-European immigrants in recent decades has led to changes in this distinctive dialect , and the traditional form of this speech pattern is no longer as prevalent among general New Yorkers as in the past .
There is no -LSB- ɹ -RSB- in words like park -LSB- pɑək -RSB- or -LSB- pɒək -RSB- -LRB- with vowel backed and diphthongized due to the low-back chain shift -RRB- , butter -LSB- bʌɾə -RSB- , or here -LSB- hiə -RSB- .
In another feature called the low back chain shift , the -LSB- ɔ -RSB- vowel sound of words like talk , law , cross , chocolate , and coffee and the often homophonous -LSB- ɔr -RSB- in core and more are tensed and usually raised more than in General American .
In the most old-fashioned and extreme versions of the New York dialect , the vowel sounds of words like `` girl '' and of words like `` oil '' became a diphthong -LSB- ɜɪ -RSB- .
This would often be misperceived by speakers of other accents as a reversal of the er and oy sounds , so that girl is pronounced `` goil '' and oil is pronounced `` erl '' ; this leads to the caricature of New Yorkers saying things like `` Joizey '' -LRB- Jersey -RRB- , `` Toidy-Toid Street '' -LRB- 33rd St. -RRB- and `` terlet '' -LRB- toilet -RRB- .
A new version of the New York Cosmos was formed in 2010 , and began play in the second division North American Soccer League in 2013 .
New York City 's commuter rail network is the largest in North America .
The rail network , connecting New York City to its suburbs , consists of the Long Island Rail Road , Metro-North Railroad , and New Jersey Transit .
The Staten Island Railway rapid transit system solely serves Staten Island , operating 24 hours a day .
Despite New York 's heavy reliance on its vast public transit system , streets are a defining feature of the city .
Manhattan 's street grid plan greatly influenced the city 's physical development .
This situation of boroughs separated by water led to the development of an extensive infrastructure of bridges and tunnels .
Nearly all of the city 's major bridges and tunnels are notable , and several have broken or set records .
New York City has focused on reducing its environmental impact and carbon footprint .
Mass transit use in New York City is the highest in the United States .
The government of New York is more centralized than that of most other U.S. cities .
In New York City , the city government is responsible for public education , correctional institutions , public safety , recreational facilities , sanitation , water supply , and welfare services .
Each borough is coextensive with a judicial district of the state Unified Court System , of which the Criminal Court and the Civil Court are the local courts , while the New York Supreme Court conducts major trials and appeals .
The US Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit and US Court of International Trade are also based in New York , also on Foley Square in Manhattan .
The city has a strong imbalance of payments with the national and state governments .
New York City has expanded its international outreach via this program to a network of cities worldwide , promoting the exchange of ideas and innovation between their citizenry and policymakers , according to the city 's website .
New York 's historic sister cities are denoted below by the year they joined New York City 's partnership network .
Reaction to the novel varied widely upon publication .
Literary analysis of it is sparse , considering the number of copies sold and its widespread use in education .
While attending college , she wrote for campus literary magazines : Huntress at Huntingdon and the humor magazine Rammer Jammer at the University of Alabama .
At both colleges , she wrote short stories and other works about racial injustice , a rarely mentioned topic on such campuses at the time .
Hoping to be published , Lee presented her writing in 1957 to a literary agent recommended by Capote .
Donations from friends allowed her to write uninterrupted for a year .
Hohoff was impressed .
`` -LSB- T -RSB- he spark of the true writer flashed in every line , '' she would later recount in a corporate history of Lippincott .
But as Hohoff saw it , the manuscript was by no means fit for publication .
It was , as she described it , `` more a series of anecdotes than a fully conceived novel . ''
During the next couple of years , she led Lee from one draft to the next until the book finally achieved its finished form and was retitled To Kill a Mockingbird .
After rejecting the `` Watchman '' title , it was initially re-titled Atticus , but Lee renamed it `` To Kill a Mockingbird '' to reflect that the story went beyond just a character portrait .
The editorial team at Lippincott warned Lee that she would probably sell only several thousand copies .
In 1964 , Lee recalled her hopes for the book when she said , `` I never expected any sort of success with ` Mockingbird . '
... I was hoping for a quick and merciful death at the hands of the reviewers but , at the same time , I sort of hoped someone would like it enough to give me encouragement .
Public encouragement .
I hoped for a little , as I said , but I got rather a whole lot , and in some ways this was just about as frightening as the quick , merciful death I 'd expected . ''
Since the original publication , the book has never been out of print .
The three children are terrified of , and fascinated by , their neighbor , the reclusive Arthur `` Boo '' Radley .
The adults of Maycomb are hesitant to talk about Boo , and , for many years few have seen him .
The children feed one another 's imagination with rumors about his appearance and reasons for remaining hidden , and they fantasize about how to get him out of his house .
Several times the mysterious Boo makes gestures of affection to the children , but , to their disappointment , he never appears in person .
Although many of Maycomb 's citizens disapprove , Atticus agrees to defend Tom to the best of his ability .
Other children taunt Jem and Scout for Atticus 's actions , calling him a `` nigger-lover '' .
Scout is tempted to stand up for her father 's honor by fighting , even though he has told her not to .
Atticus faces a group of men intent on lynching Tom .
Atticus establishes that the accusers -- Mayella and her father , Bob Ewell , the town drunk -- are lying .
It also becomes clear that the friendless Mayella made sexual advances toward Tom , and that her father caught her and beat her .
Despite significant evidence of Tom 's innocence , the jury convicts him .
Ewell vows revenge , spitting in Atticus ' face , trying to break into the judge 's house , and menacing Tom Robinson 's widow .
One of Jem 's arms is broken in the struggle , but amid the confusion someone comes to the children 's rescue .
The sheriff argues with Atticus about the prudence and ethics of charging Jem -LRB- whom Atticus believes to be responsible -RRB- or Boo -LRB- whom Tate believes to be responsible -RRB- .
Boo asks Scout to walk him home , and after she says goodbye to him at his front door he disappears again .
While standing on the Radley porch , Scout imagines life from Boo 's perspective , and regrets that they had never repaid him for the gifts he had given them .
Nevertheless , several people and events from Lee 's childhood parallel those of the fictional Scout .
After they were convicted , hanged and mutilated , he never tried another criminal case .
Although more of a proponent of racial segregation than Atticus , he gradually became more liberal in his later years .
Lee 's mother was prone to a nervous condition that rendered her mentally and emotionally absent .
Lee had a brother named Edwin , who -- like the fictional Jem -- was four years older than his sister .
As in the novel , a black housekeeper came daily to care for the Lee house and family .
Like Dill , Capote had an impressive imagination and a gift for fascinating stories .
Both Lee and Capote were atypical children : both loved to read .
Lee was a scrappy tomboy who was quick to fight , but Capote was ridiculed for his advanced vocabulary and lisp .
The origin of Tom Robinson is less clear , although many have speculated that his character was inspired by several models .
The story and the trial were covered by her father 's newspaper which reported that Lett was convicted and sentenced to death .
After a series of letters appeared claiming Lett had been falsely accused , his sentence was commuted to life in prison .
He died there of tuberculosis in 1937 .
Scholars believe that Robinson 's difficulties reflect the notorious case of the Scottsboro Boys , in which nine black men were convicted of raping two white women on negligible evidence .
Writing about Lee 's style and use of humor in a tragic story , scholar Jacqueline Tavernier-Courbin states : `` Laughter ... -LSB- exposes -RSB- the gangrene under the beautiful surface but also by demeaning it ; one can hardly ... be controlled by what one is able to laugh at . ''
Scout 's precocious observations about her neighbors and behavior inspire National Endowment of the Arts director David Kipen to call her `` hysterically funny '' .
After Dill promises to marry her , then spends too much time with Jem , Scout reasons the best way to get him to pay attention to her is to beat him up , which she does several times .
Scout 's first day in school is a satirical treatment of education ; her teacher says she must undo the damage Atticus has wrought in teaching her to read and write , and forbids Atticus from teaching her further .
Lee treats the most unfunny situations with irony , however , as Jem and Scout try to understand how Maycomb embraces racism and still tries sincerely to remain a decent society .
Critics also note the entertaining methods used to drive the plot .
Scout falls asleep during the Halloween pageant and makes a tardy entrance onstage , causing the audience to laugh uproariously .
The grotesque and near-supernatural qualities of Boo Radley and his house , and the element of racial injustice involving Tom Robinson contribute to the aura of the Gothic in the novel .
Lee used the term `` Gothic '' to describe the architecture of Maycomb 's courthouse and in regard to Dill 's exaggeratedly morbid performances as Boo Radley .
Outsiders are also an important element of Southern Gothic texts and Scout and Jem 's questions about the hierarchy in the town cause scholars to compare the novel to Catcher in the Rye and Adventures of Huckleberry Finn .
However , scholars debate about the Southern Gothic classification , noting that Boo Radley is in fact human , protective , and benevolent .
Furthermore , in addressing themes such as alcoholism , incest , rape , and racial violence , Lee wrote about her small town realistically rather than melodramatically .
She portrays the problems of individual characters as universal underlying issues in every society .
As children coming of age , Scout and Jem face hard realities and learn from them .
Lee seems to examine Jem 's sense of loss about how his neighbors have disappointed him more than Scout 's .
Just as the novel is an illustration of the changes Jem faces , it is also an exploration of the realities Scout must face as an atypical girl on the verge of womanhood .
As one scholar writes , `` To Kill a Mockingbird can be read as a feminist Bildungsroman , for Scout emerges from her childhood experiences with a clear sense of her place in her community and an awareness of her potential power as the woman she will one day be . ''
The second part of the novel deals with what book reviewer Harding LeMay termed `` the spirit-corroding shame of the civilized white Southerner in the treatment of the Negro '' .
In writing about the historical context of the novel 's construction , two other literary scholars remark : `` To Kill a Mockingbird was written and published amidst the most significant and conflict-ridden social change in the South since the Civil War and Reconstruction .
Inevitably , despite its mid-1930s setting , the story told from the perspective of the 1950s voices the conflicts , tensions , and fears induced by this transition . ''
Scholar Patrick Chura , who suggests Emmett Till was a model for Tom Robinson , enumerates the injustices endured by the fictional Tom that Till also faced .
Chura notes the icon of the black rapist causing harm to the representation of the `` mythologized vulnerable and sacred Southern womanhood '' .
Furthermore , the victim of racial injustice in To Kill a Mockingbird was physically impaired , which made him unable to commit the act he was accused of , but also crippled him in other ways .
Roslyn Siegel includes Tom Robinson as an example of the recurring motif among white Southern writers of the black man as `` stupid , pathetic , defenseless , and dependent upon the fair dealing of the whites , rather than his own intelligence to save him '' .
The theme of racial injustice appears symbolically in the novel as well .
He is also alone when he faces a group intending to lynch Tom Robinson and once more in the courthouse during Tom 's trial .
Lee even uses dreamlike imagery from the mad dog incident to describe some of the courtroom scenes .
Jones writes , '' -LSB- t -RSB- he real mad dog in Maycomb is the racism that denies the humanity of Tom Robinson ... .
When Atticus makes his summation to the jury , he literally bares himself to the jury 's and the town 's anger . ''
One writer notes that Scout , `` in Austenian fashion '' , satirizes women with whom she does not wish to identify .
Literary critic Jean Blackall lists the priorities shared by the two authors : `` affirmation of order in society , obedience , courtesy , and respect for the individual without regard for status '' .
Lee 's use of the middle-class narrative voice is a literary device that allows an intimacy with the reader , regardless of class or cultural background , and fosters a sense of nostalgia .
Sharing Scout and Jem 's perspective , the reader is allowed to engage in relationships with the conservative antebellum Mrs. Dubose ; the lower-class Ewells , and the Cunninghams who are equally poor but behave in vastly different ways ; the wealthy but ostracized Mr. Dolphus Raymond ; and Calpurnia and other members of the black community .
Atticus is the moral center of the novel , however , and he teaches Jem one of the most significant lessons of courage .
Atticus ' lesson to Scout that `` you never really understand a person until you consider things from his point of view -- until you climb around in his skin and walk around in it '' exemplifies his compassion .
When Mayella reacts with confusion to Atticus ' question if she has any friends , Scout offers that she must be lonelier than Boo Radley .
Having walked Boo home after he saves their lives , Scout stands on the Radley porch and considers the events of the previous three years from Boo 's perspective .
One writer remarks , '' ... -LSB- w -RSB- hile the novel concerns tragedy and injustice , heartache and loss , it also carries with it a strong sense -LSB- of -RSB- courage , compassion , and an awareness of history to be better human beings . ''
Just as Lee explores Jem 's development in coming to grips with a racist and unjust society , Scout realizes what being female means , and several female characters influence her development .
Scout 's primary identification with her father and older brother allows her to describe the variety and depth of female characters in the novel both as one of them and as an outsider .
Scout 's primary female models are Calpurnia and her neighbor Miss Maudie , both of whom are strong willed , independent , and protective .
Mayella Ewell also has an influence ; Scout watches her destroy an innocent man in order to hide her desire for him .
The female characters who comment the most on Scout 's lack of willingness to adhere to a more feminine role are also those who promote the most racist and classist points of view .
Absent mothers and abusive fathers are another theme in the novel .
Scout and Jem 's mother died before Scout could remember her , Mayella 's mother is dead , and Mrs. Radley is silent about Boo 's confinement to the house .
Bob Ewell and Mr. Radley represent a form of masculinity that Atticus does not , and the novel suggests that such men as well as the traditionally feminine hypocrites at the Missionary Society can lead society astray .
Atticus stands apart as a unique model of masculinity ; as one scholar explains : `` It is the job of real men who embody the traditional masculine qualities of heroic individualism , bravery , and an unshrinking knowledge of and dedication to social justice and morality , to set the society straight . ''
Allusions to legal issues in To Kill a Mockingbird , particularly in scenes outside of the courtroom , has drawn the attention from legal scholars .
Claudia Durst Johnson writes that `` a greater volume of critical readings has been amassed by two legal scholars in law journals than by all the literary scholars in literary journals '' .
Johnson notes that even in Scout and Jem 's childhood world , compromises and treaties are struck with each other by spitting on one 's palm and laws are discussed by Atticus and his children : is it right that Bob Ewell hunts and traps out of season ?
Scout repeatedly breaks codes and laws and reacts to her punishment for them .
Johnson states , '' -LSB- t -RSB- he novel is a study of how Jem and Scout begin to perceive the complexity of social codes and how the configuration of relationships dictated by or set off by those codes fails or nurtures the inhabitants of -LRB- their -RRB- small worlds . ''
Atticus warns them that , although they can `` shoot all the bluejays they want '' , they must remember that `` it 's a sin to kill a mockingbird '' .
Confused , Scout approaches her neighbor Miss Maudie , who explains that mockingbirds never harm other living creatures .
She points out that mockingbirds simply provide pleasure with their songs , saying , `` They do n't do one thing but sing their hearts out for us . ''
Scholars have noted that Lee often returns to the mockingbird theme when trying to make a moral point .
Despite her editors ' warnings that the book might not sell well , it quickly became a sensation , bringing acclaim to Lee in literary circles , in her hometown of Monroeville , and throughout Alabama .
The novel has never been out of print in hardcover or paperback , and has become part of the standard literature curriculum .
A 2008 survey of secondary books read by students between grades 9 -- 12 in the U.S. indicates the novel is the most widely read book in these grades .
A 1991 survey by the Book of the Month Club and the Library of Congress Center for the Book found that To Kill a Mockingbird was rated behind only the Bible in books that are `` most often cited as making a difference '' .
-LSB- note 1 -RSB- It is considered by some to be the Great American Novel .
Many writers compare their perceptions of To Kill a Mockingbird as adults with when they first read it as children .
As scholar Alice Petry explains , `` Atticus has become something of a folk hero in legal circles and is treated almost as if he were an actual person . ''
One law professor at the University of Notre Dame stated that the most influential textbook he taught from was To Kill a Mockingbird , and an article in the Michigan Law Review claims , `` No real-life lawyer has done more for the self-image or public perception of the legal profession , '' before questioning whether , `` Atticus Finch is a paragon of honor or an especially slick hired gun '' .
In 1992 , an Alabama editorial called for the death of Atticus , saying that as liberal as Atticus was , he still worked within a system of institutionalized racism and sexism and should not be revered .
The editorial sparked a flurry of responses from attorneys who entered the profession because of him and esteemed him as a hero .
Critics of Atticus maintain he is morally ambiguous and does not use his legal skills to challenge the racist status quo in Maycomb .
The book 's racial slurs , profanity , and frank discussion of rape have led people to challenge its appropriateness in libraries and classrooms across the United States .
Upon learning the school administrators were holding hearings to decide the book 's appropriateness for the classroom , Harper Lee sent $ 10 to The Richmond News Leader suggesting it to be used toward the enrollment of `` the Hanover County School Board in any first grade of its choice '' .
Its publication is so closely associated with the Civil Rights Movement that many studies of the book and biographies of Harper Lee include descriptions of important moments in the movement , despite the fact that she had no direct involvement in any of them .
Civil Rights leader Andrew Young comments that part of the book 's effectiveness is that it `` inspires hope in the midst of chaos and confusion '' and by using racial epithets portrays the reality of the times in which it was set .
Young views the novel as `` an act of humanity '' in showing the possibility of people rising above their prejudices .
Childress states the novel `` gives white Southerners a way to understand the racism that they 've been brought up with and to find another way .
And most white people in the South were good people .
Most white people in the South were not throwing bombs and causing havoc ... I think the book really helped them come to understand what was wrong with the system in the way that any number of treatises could never do , because it was popular art , because it was told from a child 's point of view . ''
A touching book ; and so funny , so likeable . ''
This comment has been construed to suggest that Capote wrote the book or edited it heavily .
In 2006 , a Capote letter was donated to Monroeville 's literary heritage museum ; in a letter to a neighbor in Monroeville in 1959 , Capote mentioned that Lee was writing a book that was to be published soon .
During the years immediately following the novel 's publication , Harper Lee enjoyed the attention its popularity garnered her , granting interviews , visiting schools , and attending events honoring the book .
Since the , she declined talking with reporters about the book .
She also steadfastly refused to provide an introduction , writing in 1995 : `` Introductions inhibit pleasure , they kill the joy of anticipation , they frustrate curiosity .
The only good thing about Introductions is that in some cases they delay the dose to come .
Mockingbird still says what it has to say ; it has managed to survive the years without preamble . ''
Lee declared that `` there is no greater honor the novel could receive '' .
David Kipen of the National Endowment of the Arts , who supervised The Big Read , states `` people just seem to connect with it .
It dredges up things in their own lives , their interactions across racial lines , legal encounters , and childhood .
It 's just this skeleton key to so many different parts of people 's lives , and they cherish it . ''
During the ceremony , the students and audience gave Lee a standing ovation , and the entire graduating class held up copies of To Kill a Mockingbird to honor her .
In his remarks , Bush stated , `` One reason To Kill a Mockingbird succeeded is the wise and kind heart of the author , which comes through on every page ... To Kill a Mockingbird has influenced the character of our country for the better .
It 's been a gift to the entire world .
As a model of good writing and humane sensibility , this book will be read and studied forever . ''
The film 's producer , Alan J. Pakula , remembered Universal Pictures executives questioning him about a potential script : `` They said , ` What story do you plan to tell for the film ? '
I said , ` Have you read the book ? '
They said , ` Yes . '
I said , ` That 's the story . ' ''
The movie was a hit at the box office , quickly grossing more than $ 20 million from a $ 2-million budget .
It won three Oscars : Best Actor for Gregory Peck , Best Art Direction-Set Decoration , Black-and-White , and Best Writing , Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium for Horton Foote .
It was nominated for five more Oscars including Best Actress in a Supporting Role for Mary Badham , the actress who played Scout .
Harper Lee was pleased with the movie , saying : `` In that film the man and the part met ... I 've had many , many offers to turn it into musicals , into TV or stage plays , but I 've always refused .
That film was a work of art . ''
Peck met Lee 's father , the model for Atticus , before the filming .
Years later , he was reluctant to tell Lee that the watch was stolen out of his luggage in London Heathrow Airport .
When Peck eventually did tell Lee , he said she responded , '' ` Well , it 's only a watch . '
Harper -- she feels deeply , but she 's not a sentimental person about things . ''
Lee and Peck shared a friendship long after the movie was made .
She 's someone who has made a difference ... with this book .
The book is still as strong as it ever was , and so is the film .
All the kids in the United States read this book and see the film in the seventh and eighth grades and write papers and essays .
My husband used to get thousands and thousands of letters from teachers who would send them to him . ''
White male audience members are chosen at the intermission to make up the jury .
Author Albert Murray said of the relationship of the town to the novel -LRB- and the annual performance -RRB- : `` It becomes part of the town ritual , like the religious underpinning of Mardi Gras .
With the whole town crowded around the actual courthouse , it 's part of a central , civic education -- what Monroeville aspires to be . ''
The production is returning to the venue to close the 2014 season , prior to a UK Tour .
This earlier version of the story follows an adult Scout Finch who travels from New York to visit her father , Atticus Finch , in Maycomb , Alabama , where she is confronted by the intolerance in her community .
Watchman contains early versions of many of the characters from To Kill a Mockingbird .
According to Lee 's agent Andrew Nurnberg , Mockingbird was originally intended to be the first book of a trilogy : `` They discussed publishing Mockingbird first , Watchman last , and a shorter connecting novel between the two . ''
This assertion has been discredited however by the rare books expert James S. Jaffe , who reviewed the pages at the request of Lee 's attorney and found them to be only another draft of `` To Kill a Mockingbird '' .
The statement was also contrary to Jonathan Mahler 's description of how `` Watchman '' was seen as just the first draft of `` Mockingbird '' .
Instances where many passages overlap between the two books , in some case word for word , also refutes this assertion .
One critic explains the novel 's impact by writing , `` In the twentieth century , To Kill a Mockingbird is probably the most widely read book dealing with race in America , and its protagonist , Atticus Finch , the most enduring fictional image of racial heroism . ''
Writing a decade later , another scholar noted , `` Harper Lee has a remarkable gift of story-telling .
Her art is visual , and with cinematographic fluidity and subtlety we see a scene melting into another scene without jolts of transition . ''
This narrative method allows Lee to tell a `` delightfully deceptive '' story that mixes the simplicity of childhood observation with adult situations complicated by hidden motivations and unquestioned tradition .
However , at times the blending causes reviewers to question Scout 's preternatural vocabulary and depth of understanding .
Both Harding LeMay and the novelist and literary critic Granville Hicks expressed doubt that children as sheltered as Scout and Jem could understand the complexities and horrors involved in the trial for Tom Robinson 's life .
Harper Lee has remained famously detached from interpreting the novel since the mid-1960s .
When the book was released , reviewers noted that it was divided into two parts , and opinion was mixed about Lee 's ability to connect them .
Reviewers were generally charmed by Scout and Jem 's observations of their quirky neighbors .
This sentimentalism can be seen in Lee 's representation of the Southern caste system to explain almost every character 's behavior in the novel .
Scout 's Aunt Alexandra attributes Maycomb 's inhabitants ' faults and advantages to genealogy -LRB- families that have gambling streaks and drinking streaks -RRB- , and the narrator sets the action and characters amid a finely detailed background of the Finch family history and the history of Maycomb .
In exploring how each character deals with his or her own personal defeat , Lee builds a framework to judge whether the characters are heroes or fools .
She guides the reader in such judgments , alternating between unabashed adoration and biting irony .
Scout 's experience with the Missionary Society is an ironic juxtaposition of women who mock her , gossip , and `` reflect a smug , colonialist attitude toward other races '' while giving the `` appearance of gentility , piety , and morality '' .
Conversely , when Atticus loses Tom 's case , he is last to leave the courtroom , except for his children and the black spectators in the colored balcony , who rise silently as he walks underneath them , to honor his efforts .
Initial reactions to the novel were varied .
The New Yorker declared it `` skilled , unpretentious , and totally ingenious '' , and The Atlantic Monthly 's reviewer rated it as `` pleasant , undemanding reading '' , but found the narrative voice -- `` a six-year-old girl with the prose style of a well-educated adult '' -- to be implausible .
Time magazine 's 1960 review of the book states that it `` teaches the reader an astonishing number of useful truths about little girls and about Southern life '' and calls Scout Finch `` the most appealing child since Carson McCullers ' Frankie got left behind at the wedding '' .
It underlines no cause ... To Kill a Mockingbird is a novel of strong contemporary national significance . ''
Not all reviewers were enthusiastic .
It 's interesting that all the folks that are buying it do n't know they 're reading a child 's book .
Somebody ought to say what it is . ''
Carson McCullers apparently agreed with the Time magazine review , writing to a cousin : `` Well , honey , one thing we know is that she 's been poaching on my literary preserves . ''
The 50th anniversary of the novel 's release was met with celebrations and reflections on its impact .
Eric Zorn of the Chicago Tribune praises Lee 's `` rich use of language '' but writes that the central lesson is that `` courage is n't always flashy , is n't always enough , but is always in style '' .
Jane Sullivan in the Sydney Morning Herald agrees , stating that the book `` still rouses fresh and horrified indignation '' as it examines morality , a topic that has recently become unfashionable .
Barra writes , `` It 's time to stop pretending that To Kill a Mockingbird is some kind of timeless classic that ranks with the great works of American literature .
Its bloodless liberal humanism is sadly dated '' .
Thomas Mallon in The New Yorker criticizes Atticus ' stiff and self-righteous demeanor , and calls Scout `` a kind of highly constructed doll '' whose speech and actions are improbable .
Although acknowledging that the novel works , Mallon blasts Lee 's `` wildly unstable '' narrative voice for developing a story about a content neighborhood until it begins to impart morals in the courtroom drama , following with his observation that `` the book has begun to cherish its own goodness '' by the time the case is over .
Ajayi states that the book forces readers to question issues about race , class , and society , but that it was not written to resolve them .
Furthermore , despite the novel 's thematic focus on racial injustice , its black characters are not fully examined .
One writer asserts that the use of Scout 's narration serves as a convenient mechanism for readers to be innocent and detached from the racial conflict .
Scout 's voice `` functions as the not-me which allows the rest of us -- black and white , male and female -- to find our relative position in society '' .
A teaching guide for the novel published by The English Journal cautions , `` what seems wonderful or powerful to one group of students may seem degrading to another '' .
This feeling causes them to question the beliefs with which they have been raised , which for many children is what the novel does .
-LSB- note 4 -RSB- Author James McBride calls Lee brilliant but stops short of calling her brave : `` I think by calling Harper Lee brave you kind of absolve yourself of your own racism ... She certainly set the standards in terms of how these issues need to be discussed , but in many ways I feel ... the moral bar 's been lowered .
And that 's really distressing .
We need a thousand Atticus Finches . ''
McBride , however , defends the book 's sentimentality , and the way Lee approaches the story with `` honesty and integrity '' .
To underscore this sentiment , Lee demanded that a book of recipes named Calpurnia 's Cookbook not be published and sold out of the Monroe County Heritage Museum .
David Lister in The Independent states that Lee 's refusal to speak to reporters made them desire to interview her all the more , and her silence `` makes Bob Dylan look like a media tart '' .
Despite her discouragement , a rising number of tourists made to Monroeville a destination , hoping to see Lee 's inspiration for the book , or Lee herself .
The spectrum of solar light at the Earth 's surface is mostly spread across the visible and near-infrared ranges with a small part in the near-ultraviolet .
He , along with his technical advisor A.S.E. Ackermann and British physicist Sir Charles Vernon Boys , developed an improved system using mirrors to reflect solar energy upon collector boxes , increasing heating capacity to the extent that water could now be used instead of ether .
In 1916 Shuman was quoted in the media advocating solar energy 's utilization , saying :
However , they can be used in cold temperate areas to maintain warmth as well .
The size and placement of thermal mass depend on several factors such as climate , daylighting and shading conditions .
As the chimney warms , the air inside is heated causing an updraft that pulls air through the building .
A basic box cooker consists of an insulated container with a transparent lid .
Panel cookers use a reflective panel to direct sunlight onto an insulated container and reach temperatures comparable to box cookers .
Reflector cookers use various concentrating geometries -LRB- dish , trough , Fresnel mirrors -RRB- to focus light on a cooking container .
This grid-connected cogeneration system provided 400 kW of electricity plus thermal energy in the form of 401 kW steam and 468 kW chilled water , and had a one-hour peak load thermal storage .
Evaporation ponds are shallow pools that concentrate dissolved solids through evaporation .
Modern uses include concentrating brine solutions used in leach mining and removing dissolved solids from waste streams .
In some states of the United States legislation protects the `` right to dry '' clothes .
UTCs can raise the incoming air temperature up to 22 °C -LRB- 40 °F -RRB- and deliver outlet temperatures of 45 -- 60 °C -LRB- 113 -- 140 °F -RRB- .
As of 2003 , over 80 systems with a combined collector area of 35,000 square metres -LRB- 380,000 sq ft -RRB- had been installed worldwide , including an 860 m2 -LRB- 9,300 sq ft -RRB- collector in Costa Rica used for drying coffee beans and a 1,300 m2 -LRB- 14,000 sq ft -RRB- collector in Coimbatore , India , used for drying marigolds .
These stills can operate in passive , active , or hybrid modes .
Double-slope stills are the most economical for decentralized domestic purposes , while active multiple effect units are more suitable for large-scale applications .
Solar water disinfection -LRB- SODIS -RRB- involves exposing water-filled plastic polyethylene terephthalate -LRB- PET -RRB- bottles to sunlight for several hours .
Commercial CSP plants were first developed in the 1980s .
Other large CSP plants include the 150 MW Solnova Solar Power Station and the 100 MW Andasol solar power station , both in Spain .
Solar projects exceeding 1 GW are being developed , but most of the deployed photovoltaics are in small rooftop arrays of less than 5 kW , which are grid connected using net metering and/or a feed-in tariff .
Although the prototype selenium cells converted less than 1 % of incident light into electricity , both Ernst Werner von Siemens and James Clerk Maxwell recognized the importance of this discovery .
These early solar cells cost 286 USD/watt and reached efficiencies of 4.5 -- 6 % .
By 2012 available efficiencies exceed 20 % and the maximum efficiency of research photovoltaics is over 40 % .
Various techniques are used to track the Sun and focus light .
The most recent approaches to solar design use computer modeling tying together solar lighting , heating and ventilation systems in an integrated solar design package .
While sunlight is generally considered a plentiful resource , the exceptions highlight the importance of solar energy to agriculture .
Early fruit walls were built perpendicular to the ground and facing south , but over time , sloping walls were developed to make better use of sunlight .
In 1699 , Nicolas Fatio de Duillier even suggested using a tracking mechanism which could pivot to follow the Sun .
Applications of solar energy in agriculture aside from growing crops include pumping water , drying crops , brooding chicks and drying chicken manure .
Greenhouses remain an important part of horticulture today , and plastic transparent materials have also been used to similar effect in polytunnels and row covers .
Development of a solar-powered car has been an engineering goal since the 1980s .
By 1995 , passenger boats incorporating PV panels began appearing and are now used extensively .
There were plans to circumnavigate the globe in 2010 .
In 1980 , the Gossamer Penguin made the first piloted flights powered solely by photovoltaics .
Developments then turned back to unmanned aerial vehicles -LRB- UAV -RRB- with the Pathfinder -LRB- 1997 -RRB- and subsequent designs , culminating in the Helios which set the altitude record for a non-rocket-propelled aircraft at 29,524 metres -LRB- 96,864 ft -RRB- in 2001 .
The Zephyr , developed by BAE Systems , is the latest in a line of record-breaking solar aircraft , making a 54-hour flight in 2007 , and month-long flights were envisioned by 2010 .
It is a single-seat plane powered by solar cells and capable of taking off under its own power .
These processes offset energy that would otherwise come from a fossil fuel source and can also convert solar energy into storable and transportable fuels .
Solar induced chemical reactions can be divided into thermochemical or photochemical .
Some have envisaged working solar fuel plants in coastal metropolitan areas by 2050 -- the splitting of sea water providing hydrogen to be run through adjacent fuel-cell electric power plants and the pure water by-product going directly into the municipal water system .
Another vision involves all human structures covering the earth 's surface -LRB- i.e. , roads , vehicles and buildings -RRB- doing photosynthesis more efficiently than plants .
Aside from electrolysis driven by photovoltaic or photochemical cells , several thermochemical processes have also been explored .
Another approach uses the heat from solar concentrators to drive the steam reformation of natural gas thereby increasing the overall hydrogen yield compared to conventional reforming methods .
Thermochemical cycles characterized by the decomposition and regeneration of reactants present another avenue for hydrogen production .
Solar energy can also be stored at high temperatures using molten salts .
With grid-tied systems , excess electricity can be sent to the transmission grid , while standard grid electricity can be used to meet shortfalls .
If the net electricity use is below zero , the utility then rolls over the kilowatt hour credit to the next month .
Other approaches involve the use of two meters , to measure electricity consumed vs. electricity produced .
This is less common due to the increased installation cost of the second meter .
The International Organization for Standardization has established a number of standards relating to solar energy equipment .
In 2011 , the International Energy Agency said that `` the development of affordable , inexhaustible and clean solar energy technologies will have huge longer-term benefits .
These advantages are global .
This limits the amount of energy that solar panels can absorb in one day .
Other areas that are suitable for solar cells are lands that are unowned by businesses where solar plants can be established .
Beginning with the surge in coal use which accompanied the Industrial Revolution , energy consumption has steadily transitioned from wood and biomass to fossil fuels .
`` The strength of solar is the incredible variety and flexibility of applications , from small scale to big scale '' .
Since the end of the war , newly established political stability and foreign aid have allowed the country 's economy to grow .
Following the war and Stalin 's reign attempts were made to further expand the agriculture and industry of Tajikistan .
In the 1980s , Tajikistan had the lowest household saving rate in the USSR , the lowest percentage of households in the two top per capita income groups , and the lowest rate of university graduates per 1000 people .
By the late 1980s Tajik nationalists were calling for increased rights .
Real disturbances did not occur within the republic until 1990 .
The following year , the Soviet Union collapsed , and Tajikistan declared its independence .
The elections took place shortly after the end of the war , and Tajikistan was in a state of complete devastation .
The estimated dead numbered over 100,000 .
Around 1.2 million people were refugees inside and outside of the country .
In 1997 , a ceasefire was reached between Rahmon and opposition parties under the guidance of Gerd D. Merrem , Special Representative to the Secretary General , a result widely praised as a successful United Nations peace keeping initiative .
Elections were held in 1999 , though they were criticized by opposition parties and foreign observers as unfair and Rahmon was re-elected with 98 % of the vote .
Elections in 2006 were again won by Rahmon -LRB- with 79 % of the vote -RRB- and he began his third term in office .
Several opposition parties boycotted the 2006 election and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe -LRB- OSCE -RRB- criticized it , although observers from the Commonwealth of Independent States claimed the elections were legal and transparent .
Rahmon 's administration came under further criticism from the OSCE in October 2010 for its censorship and repression of the media .
The OSCE claimed that the Tajik Government censored Tajik and foreign websites and instituted tax inspections on independent printing houses that led to the cessation of printing activities for a number of independent newspapers .
It is now the main base of the Tajikistan air force .
There have been talks with Russia concerning use of the Ayni facility , and Russia continues to maintain a large base on the outskirts of Dushanbe .
However , fighting erupted again in July 2012 .
Their arrival in Transoxania signaled a definitive shift from Iranian to Turkic predominance in Central Asia , but gradually the Kara-khanids became assimilated into the Perso-Arab Muslim culture of the region .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
As a consequence of the conflict and Soviet agriculture policies , Central Asia , Tajikistan included , suffered a famine that claimed many lives .
Consequently , some peasants fought collectivization and revived the Basmachi movement .
Some small scale industrial development also occurred during this time along with the expansion of irrigation infrastructure .
Bobojon Ghafurov , Tajikistan 's First Secretary of the Communist Party of Tajikistan from 1946 -- 1956 was the only Tajikistani politician of significance outside of the country during the Soviet Era .
He was followed in office by Tursun Uljabayev -LRB- 1956 -- 61 -RRB- , Jabbor Rasulov -LRB- 1961 -- 1982 -RRB- , and Rahmon Nabiyev -LRB- 1982 -- 1985 , 1991 -- 1992 -RRB- .
Traditional homelands of Tajik people included present-day Tajikistan , Afghanistan and Uzbekistan .
Some authors have also suggested that in the 7th and 6th century BCE parts of modern Tajikistan , including territories in the Zeravshan valley , formed part of Kambojas before it became part of the Achaemenid Empire .
Northern Tajikistan -LRB- the cities of Khujand and Panjakent -RRB- was part of Sogdia , a collection of city-states which was overrun by Scythians and Yuezhi nomadic tribes around 150 BCE .
The Silk Road passed through the region and following the expedition of Chinese explorer Zhang Qian during the reign of Wudi -LRB- 141 -- 87 BCE -RRB- commercial relations between Han China and Sogdiana flourished .
Sogdians played a major role in facilitating trade and also worked in other capacities , as farmers , carpetweavers , glassmakers , and woodcarvers .
Central Asia continued in its role as a commercial crossroads , linking China , the steppes to the north , and the Islamic heartland .
Tajikistan 's economy grew substantially after the war .
This improved Tajikistan 's position among other Central Asian countries -LRB- namely Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan -RRB- , which seem to have degraded economically ever since .
Lately , Russia 's RAO UES energy giant has been working on the Sangtuda-1 hydroelectric power station -LRB- 670 MW capacity -RRB- commenced operations on 18 January 2008 .
Other projects at the development stage include Sangtuda-2 by Iran , Zerafshan by the Chinese company SinoHydro , and the Rogun power plant that , at a projected height of 335 metres -LRB- 1,099 ft -RRB- , would supersede the Nurek Dam as highest in the world if it is brought to completion .
The total length of transmission line is 750 km while the project is planned to be on Public-Private Partnership basis with the support of WB , IFC , ADB and IDB .
The project cost is estimated to be around US$ 865 million .
Other energy resources include sizable coal deposits and smaller reserves of natural gas and petroleum .
Migration from Tajikistan and the consequent remittances have been unprecedented in their magnitude and economic impact .
Drug money corrupts the country 's government ; according to some experts the well-known personalities that fought on both sides of the civil war and have held the positions in the government after the armistice was signed are now involved in the drug trade .
UNODC is working with Tajikistan to strengthen border crossings , provide training , and set up joint interdiction teams .
It also helped to establish Tajikistani Drug Control Agency .
The proposed route would go through the Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Province in the eastern part of the country .
There are also international flights , mainly to Russia , from Khujand Airport in the northern part of the country as well as limited international services from Kulob Airport , and Qurghonteppa International Airport .
The Pamiris of Badakhshan , a small population of Yaghnobi people , and a sizeable minority of Ismailis are all considered to belong to the larger group of Tajiks .
In contrast to the mostly Sunni Muslim residents of the rest of Tajikistan , the Pamiris overwhelmingly follow the Ismaili sect of Islam , and speak a number of Eastern Iranian languages , including Shughni , Rushani , Khufi and Wakhi .
Approximately 87 % -- 95 % of them are Sunni and roughly 3 % are Shia and roughly 7 % are non-denominational Muslims .
The remaining 2 % of the population are followers of Russian Orthodoxy , Protestantism , Zoroastrianism and Buddhism .
A great majority of Muslims fast during Ramadan , although only about one third in the countryside and 10 % in the cities observe daily prayer and dietary restrictions .
Relationships between religious groups are generally amicable , although there is some concern among mainstream Muslim leaders -LSB- who ? -RSB-
The Islamic Renaissance Party -LRB- IRP -RRB- , a major combatant in the 1992 -- 1997 Civil War and then-proponent of the creation of an Islamic state in Tajikistan , constitutes no more than 30 % of the government by statute .
Numbers of large mosques appropriate for Friday prayers are limited and some -LSB- who ? -RSB-
feel this is discriminatory .
There are reports that registration on the local level is sometimes difficult to obtain .
People under the age of 18 are also barred from public religious practice .
This group of people suffers most from poverty in Tajikistan .
Most , but not all , universities were established during the Soviet Era .
Many Tajiks left the education system due to low demand in the labor market for people with extensive educational training or professional skills .
The majority of these were evolutionist .
They supported the gradual osmosis of anthropology curricula into the major institutions of higher learning .
None of the 75 faculty members were under a department named anthropology .
Ethnography is one of its primary research designs as well as the text that is generated from anthropological fieldwork .
Cultural anthropology is more related to philosophy , literature and the arts -LRB- how one 's culture affects experience for self and group , contributing to more complete understanding of the people 's knowledge , customs , and institutions -RRB- , while social anthropology is more related to sociology and history .
This project is often accommodated in the field of ethnography .
As methodology , ethnography is based upon long-term fieldwork within a community or other research site .
Ethnology involves the systematic comparison of different cultures .
Various short-lived organizations of anthropologists had already been formed .
Its members were primarily anti-slavery activists .
When slavery was abolished in France in 1848 the Société was abandoned .
His definition now became `` the study of the human group , considered as a whole , in its details , and in relation to the rest of nature '' .
He wanted to localize the difference between man and the other animals , which appeared to reside in speech .
The title was soon translated as `` The Anthropology of Primitive Peoples '' .
The last two volumes were published posthumously .
It is to be presumed fundamentally that the species , man , is a unity , and that `` the same laws of thought are applicable to all men '' .
It was the 2nd society dedicated to general anthropology in existence .
-LSB- n 5 -RSB- Among the first associates were the young Edward Burnett Tylor , inventor of cultural anthropology , and his brother Alfred Tylor , a geologist .
Previously Edward had referred to himself as an ethnologist ; subsequently , an anthropologist .
Organization has reached global level .
The school of thought derived from Marx and known as Political Economy focuses on production , in contrast .
Economic Anthropologists have abandoned the primitivist niche they were relegated to by economists , and have now turned to examine corporations , banks , and the global financial system from an anthropological perspective .
Three main areas of interest rapidly developed .
The first of these areas was concerned with the `` pre-capitalist '' societies that were subject to evolutionary `` tribal '' stereotypes .
The third area was on colonialism , imperialism , and the creation of the capitalist world-system .
It is closely related to Development anthropology -LRB- distinct from the more critical Anthropology of development -RRB- .
Why are those working in development so willing to disregard history and the lessons it might offer ?
Why is development so externally driven rather than having an internal basis ?
Anthropology engages often with feminists from non-Western traditions , whose perspectives and experiences can differ from those of white European and American feminists .
Historically , such ` peripheral ' perspectives have sometimes been marginalized and regarded as less valid or important than knowledge from the western world .
The turn towards complex societies meant that political themes were taken up at two main levels .
First of all , anthropologists continued to study political organization and political phenomena that lay outside the state-regulated sphere -LRB- as in patron-client relations or tribal political organization -RRB- .
Second of all , anthropologists slowly started to develop a disciplinary concern with states and their institutions -LRB- and of course on the relationship between formal and informal political institutions -RRB- .
An anthropology of the state developed , and it is a most thriving field today .
Often , the observer has become an active part of the struggle either directly -LRB- organizing , participation -RRB- or indirectly -LRB- articles , documentaries , books , ethnographies -RRB- .
Various social processes in the Western World as well as in the `` Third World '' -LRB- the latter being the habitual focus of attention of anthropologists -RRB- brought the attention of `` specialists in ` other cultures ' '' closer to their homes .
These two methods are overlapping and dependent of each other .
By defining different types of cities , one would use social factors as well as economic and political factors to categorize the cities .
-LSB- n 7 -RSB-
In 2009 , the American Anthropological Association 's Commission on the Engagement of Anthropology with the US Security and Intelligence Communities released its final report concluding , in part , that , `` When ethnographic investigation is determined by military missions , not subject to external review , where data collection occurs in the context of war , integrated into the goals of counterinsurgency , and in a potentially coercive environment -- all characteristic factors of the HTS concept and its application -- it can no longer be considered a legitimate professional exercise of anthropology .
Following the earthquake , Joseph I gave his Prime Minister even more power , and Sebastião de Melo became a powerful , progressive dictator .
As his power grew , his enemies increased in number , and bitter disputes with the high nobility became frequent .
This was the final stroke that broke the power of the aristocracy .
Portuguese Africa 's cities and towns like Nova Lisboa , Sá da Bandeira , Silva Porto , Malanje , Tete , Vila Junqueiro , Vila Pery and Vila Cabral were founded or redeveloped inland during this period and beyond .
These conditions would lead to the failed Monarchy of the North , 28 May 1926 coup d'état , and the creation of the National Dictatorship -LRB- Ditadura Nacional -RRB- .
From the 1940s to the 1960s , Portugal was a founding member of NATO , OECD and the European Free Trade Association -LRB- EFTA -RRB- .
These actions were used to affirm Portugal 's status as a transcontinental nation and not as a colonial empire .
However , drugs are still illegal in Portugal .
With the forced abdication of Alfonso III `` the Great '' of Asturias by his sons in 910 , the Kingdom of Asturias split into three separate kingdoms of León , Galicia and Asturias .
The three kingdoms were eventually reunited in 924 -LRB- León and Galicia in 914 , Asturias later -RRB- under the crown of León .
During the century of internecine struggles for dominance among the Northern Christians kingdoms , the County of Portugal , formed the southern portion of the Kingdom of Galicia .
At times the Kingdom of Galicia existed independently for short periods , but usually formed an important part of the Kingdom of Leon .
John V died the following year and his son , Joseph I of Portugal , was crowned .
In contrast to his father , Joseph I was fond of de Melo , and with the Queen Mother 's approval , he appointed Melo as Minister of Foreign Affairs .
The land within the borders of current Portugal has been continuously settled and fought over since prehistoric times .
These Muslim peoples were eventually expelled during the Christian Reconquista of the peninsula .
Democracy was restored after the Portuguese Colonial War and the Carnation Revolution in 1974 .
The early history of Portugal is shared with the rest of the Iberian Peninsula located in South Western Europe .
The former , beyond being one of the largest Roman settlements in Portugal , is also classified as a National Monument .
The site also has a museum that displays objects found by archaeologists during their excavations .
The Muslims were expelled from Portugal 300 years earlier than in neighbouring Spain , which is reflected both in Portuguese culture and the language , which is mostly Celtiberian and Vulgar Latin .
A year before Alfonso III `` the Great '' of Asturias death , three of Alfonso 's sons rose in rebellion and forced him to abdicate , partitioning the kingdom among them .
His former realm would be reunited when first García died childless and León passed to Ordoño .
He in turn died when his children were too young to ascend ; Fruela became king of a reunited crown .
His death the next year initiated a series of internecine struggles that led to unstable succession for over a century .
This was done to avoid dynastic feuds and to maintain the Christian Kingdoms strong enough to prevent complete Muslim take over of the Iberian Peninsula and to further the Reconquista of Iberia by Christian armies .
Over time this went way beyond geo-political and military cooperation -LRB- protecting both nations ' interests in Africa , the Americas and Asia against French , Spanish and Dutch rivals -RRB- and maintained strong trade and cultural ties between the two old European allies .
He abolished slavery in Portugal and in the Portuguese colonies in India ; reorganized the army and the navy ; restructured the University of Coimbra , and ended discrimination against different Christian sects in Portugal .
The retreat from the overseas territories and the acceptance of its independence terms by Portuguese head representatives for overseas negotiations , which would create independent states in 1975 , prompted a mass exodus of Portuguese citizens from Portugal 's African territories -LRB- mostly from Portuguese Angola and Mozambique -RRB- .
In this capacity Soares tried to resume the economic growth and development record that had been achieved before the Carnation Revolution , during the last decade of the previous regime .
He initiated the process of accession to the European Economic Community -LRB- EEC -RRB- by starting accession negotiations as early as 1977 .
Until the constitutional revisions of 1982 and 1989 , the constitution was a highly charged ideological document with numerous references to socialism , the rights of workers , and the desirability of a socialist economy .
Portugal 's economic situation after its transition to democracy , obliged the government to pursue International Monetary Fund -LRB- IMF -RRB- - monitored stabilization programs in 1977 -- 78 and 1983 -- 85 .
The Madeira and Azorean archipelagos have a narrower temperature range , with annual average temperatures exceeding 20 °C -LRB- 68 °F -RRB- along the coast -LRB- according to the Portuguese Meteorological Institute -RRB- .
Some islands in Azores do have drier months in the summer .
Despite the fact that humans have occupied the territory of Portugal for thousands of years , something still remains of the original vegetation .
Boar , Iberian red deer , roe deer , Iberian wild goat , for example , are reported to be expanding greatly , during the last decades .
Up-welling along the west coast of Portugal makes the sea extremely rich in nutrients and diverse species of marine fish ; the Portuguese marine waters are one of the richest in the world .
Marine fish species are more common , and include thousands of species , such as the sardine -LRB- Sardina pilchardus -RRB- , tuna and Atlantic mackerel .
The Government is headed by the Prime Minister -LRB- currently António Costa -RRB- and includes Ministers and Secretaries of State .
The Courts are organized into several levels , among the judicial , administrative and fiscal branches .
The Supreme Courts are institutions of last resort/appeal .
He or she has also supervision and reserve powers .
These powers are often compared -LSB- by whom ? -RSB-
with the `` moderator power '' that was held by the King in the Portuguese Constitutional Monarchy .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Presidential powers include the appointment of the Prime Minister and the other members of the Government -LRB- where the President takes into account the results of legislative elections -RRB- ; dismissing the Prime Minister ; dissolving the Assembly of the Republic -LRB- to call early elections -RRB- ; vetoing legislation -LRB- which may be overridden by the Assembly with a supermajority -RRB- ; and declaring a state of war or siege .
The President is also the ex officio Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces .
Portugal has arguably the most liberal laws concerning possession of illicit drugs in the Western world .
Drug use among 16 - to 18-year-olds also declined , however the use of marijuana rose only slightly among that age group .
Operationally , the municipality and civil parish , along with the national government , are the only legally identifiable local administrative units identified by the government of Portugal -LRB- for example , cities , towns or villages have no standing in law , although may be used as catchment for the defining services -RRB- .
For statistical purposes the Portuguese government also identifies NUTS , inter-municipal communities and informally , the district system , used until European integration -LRB- and being phased-out by the national government -RRB- .
-LSB- original research ? -RSB-
Military conscription was abolished in 2004 .
The minimum age for voluntary recruitment is 18 years .
The Air Force -LRB- 7,500 personnel -RRB- has the Lockheed F-16 Fighting Falcon and the Dassault/Dornier Alpha Jet as the main combat aircraft .
The Portuguese government also agreed to eliminate its golden share in Portugal Telecom which gave it veto power over vital decisions .
This allowed considerable slippage in state-managed public works and inflated top management and head officer bonuses and wages .
Persistent and lasting recruitment policies boosted the number of redundant public servants .
Risky credit , public debt creation , and European structural and cohesion funds were mismanaged across almost four decades .
In the grounds of avoiding a potentially serious financial crisis in the Portuguese economy , the Portuguese government decided to give them a bailout , eventually at a future loss to taxpayers and to the Portuguese people in general .
The main landing sites in Portugal -LRB- including Azores and Madeira -RRB- , according to total landings in weight by year , are the harbours of Matosinhos , Peniche , Olhão , Sesimbra , Figueira da Foz , Sines , Portimão and Madeira .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The Panasqueira and Neves-Corvo mines are among the most recognised Portuguese mines that are still in operation .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Modern non-traditional technology-based industries , such as aerospace , biotechnology and information technology , have been developed in several locations across the country .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The entire Portuguese public service has been known for its mismanagement , useless redundancies , waste , excess of bureaucracy and a general lack of productivity in certain sectors , particularly in justice .
He has , however , cut meaningfully the politicians salaries .
Several individualities belonging to the parties that support the government have also raised their voices against the policies that have been taken in order to try to solve the financial crisis .
However , it is high still high compared with what was the normal average Portuguese unemployment rate in the past .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The first quarter of 2013 signified a new unemployment rate record for Portugal , as it reached 17.7 % -- up from 17 % in the previous quarter -- and the Government has predicted an 18.5 % unemployment rate in 2014 .
However , in the third quarter of the same year , it has surprisingly declined to a rate of 15.6 % .
From then on , the unemployment downtrend continued , declining to 13.9 % in the second semester of 2014 and to 11.9 % in the second quarter of 2015 .
The Sanctuary of Fátima is one of the largest Roman Catholic shrines in the world .
Lisbon in recent years surpassed the Algarve as the leading tourist region in Portugal .
Porto and Northern Portugal , especially the urban areas north of Douro River valley , was the tourist destination which grew most -LRB- 11.9 % -RRB- in 2006 , surpassing Madeira -LRB- in 2010 -RRB- , as the third most visited destination .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
But , although a few other tracts were created -LRB- around 1960 and 1970 -RRB- , it was only after the beginning of the 1980s that large-scale motorway construction was implemented .
In 1972 , Brisa , the highway concessionaire , was founded to handle the management of many of the regions motorways .
On many highways , toll needs to be paid , see Via Verde .
Vasco da Gama bridge is the longest bridge in Europe .
The government decided to build a new airport outside Lisbon , in Alcochete , to replace Lisbon Portela Airport , though this plan has been stalled due to the austerity .
Currently , the most important airports are in Lisbon , Porto , Faro , Funchal -LRB- Madeira -RRB- , and Ponta Delgada -LRB- Azores -RRB- , managed by the national airport authority group ANA -- Aeroportos de Portugal .
The railway network is managed by the REFER while the transport of passengers and goods are the responsibility of Comboios de Portugal -LRB- CP -RRB- , both public companies .
In 2006 the CP carried 133 million passengers and 9,750,000 t -LRB- 9,600,000 long tons ; 10,700,000 short tons -RRB- of goods .
In Porto , a tram network , of which only a tourist line on the shores of the Douro remain , began construction on 12 September 1895 -LRB- a first for the Iberian Peninsula -RRB- .
All major cities and towns have their own local urban transport network , as well as taxi services .
The largest R&D units of the public universities by volume of research grants and peer-reviewed publications , include biosciences research institutions like the Instituto de Medicina Molecular , the Centre for Neuroscience and Cell Biology , the IPATIMUP , the Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular and the Abel Salazar Biomedical Sciences Institute .
A number of both national and multinational high-tech and industrial companies , are also responsible for research and development projects .
Since the turn of the 21st century , there has been a trend towards the development of a renewable resource industry and reduction of both consumption and use of fossil fuel resources .
Portugal 's distribution system is also now a two-way street .
Instead of just delivering electricity , it draws electricity from even the smallest generators , like rooftop solar panels .
After 1772 the distinction between Old and New Christians was abolished by decree .
Some famous Portuguese New Christians were the mathematician Pedro Nunes and the physician and naturalist Garcia de Orta .
Genetic studies show Portuguese populations not to be significantly different from other European populations .
Consequently , it has both influenced and been influenced by cultures from former colonies or dependencies , resulting in immigration from these former territories for both economic and/or personal reasons .
An estimated 800,000 Portuguese returned to Portugal as the country 's African possessions gained independence in 1975 .
Influences from African Traditional Religion and Chinese Traditional Religion are also felt among many people , particularly in fields related with Traditional Chinese Medicine and African Witch Doctors .
Although relations between the Portuguese state and the Roman Catholic Church were generally amiable and stable since the earliest years of the Portuguese nation , their relative power fluctuated .
The growth of the Portuguese overseas empire made its missionaries important agents of colonization , with important roles in the education and evangelization of people from all the inhabited continents .
Within the white inescutcheon , the five quinas -LRB- small blue shields -RRB- with their five white bezants representing the five wounds of Christ -LRB- Portuguese : Cinco Chagas -RRB- when crucified and are popularly associated with the `` Miracle of Ourique '' .
He foretold Afonso 's victory and assured him that God was watching over him and his peers .
The messenger advised him to walk away from his camp , alone , if he heard a nearby chapel bell tolling , in the following night .
In doing so , he witnessed an apparition of Jesus on the cross .
Particularly in the North of Portugal , there are still many similarities between the Galician culture and the Portuguese culture .
Galicia is a consultative observer of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries .
According to the Ethnologue of Languages , Portuguese and Spanish have a lexical similarity of 89 % - educated speakers of each language can communicate easily with one another .
According to the OECD 's Programme for International Student Assessment -LRB- PISA -RRB- 2009 , the average Portuguese 15-year-old student , when rated in terms of reading literacy , mathematics and science knowledge , is placed at the same level as those students from the United States , Sweden , Germany , Ireland , France , Denmark , United Kingdom , Hungary and Taipei , with 489 points -LRB- 493 is the average -RRB- .
In addition to being a destination for international students , Portugal is also among the top places of origin for international students .
All higher education students , both domestic and international , totaled 380,937 in 2005 .
The largest university in Portugal is the University of Lisbon .
Higher education in state-run educational establishments is provided on a competitive basis , a system of numerus clausus is enforced through a national database on student admissions .
However , with the increasing tuition fees a student has to pay to attend a Portuguese state-run higher education institution and the attraction of new types of students -LRB- many as part-time students or in evening classes -RRB- like employees , businessmen , parents , and pensioners , many departments make a substantial profit from every additional student enrolled in courses , with benefits for the college or university 's gross tuition revenue and without loss of educational quality -LRB- teacher per student , computer per student , classroom size per student , etc. -RRB- .
Decentralization efforts have aimed at shifting financial and management responsibility to the regional level .
In practice , however , the autonomy of regional health administrations over budget setting and spending has been limited to primary care .
Although lung cancer -LRB- slowly increasing among women -RRB- and breast cancer -LRB- decreasing rapidly -RRB- are scarcer , cancer of the cervix and the prostate are more frequent .
Portugal has the highest mortality rate for diabetes in the Eur-A , with a sharp increase since the 1980s .
People are usually well informed about their health status , the positive and negative effects of their behaviour on their health and their use of health care services .
Yet their perceptions of their health can differ from what administrative and examination-based data show about levels of illness within populations .
This is the lowest of the Eur-A countries reporting and reflects the relatively adverse situation of the country in terms of mortality and selected morbidity .
Portugal has developed a specific culture while being influenced by various civilizations that have crossed the Mediterranean and the European continent , or were introduced when it played an active role during the Age of Discovery .
Particularly popular and distinguished is José Saramago , recipient of the 1998 Nobel Prize in Literature .
Portuguese cuisine is diverse .
There are more than enough bacalhau dishes for each day of the year .
Portuguese cuisine is very diverse , with different regions having their own traditional dishes .
The Portuguese have a culture of good food , and throughout the country there are myriads of good restaurants and typical small tasquinhas .
Today , the country is known by wine lovers and its wines have won several international prizes .
, Sumol Summer Fest in Ericeira , Rock in Rio Lisboa and Super Bock Super Rock in Greater Lisbon .
There is also the student festivals of Queima das Fitas are major events in a number of cities across Portugal .
Another great modernist painters/writers were Carlos Botelho and Almada Negreiros , friend to the poet Fernando Pessoa , who painted his -LRB- Pessoa 's -RRB- portrait .
He was deeply influenced by both Cubist and Futurist trends .
There are several football competitions ranging from local amateur to world-class professional level .
He is among the most acclaimed musicians of the 21st century , attracting both praise and controversy for his work and his outspoken public persona .
In 2010 , he released his critically acclaimed fifth album , the maximalist My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy , and the following year he collaborated with Jay-Z on the joint LP Watch the Throne -LRB- 2011 -RRB- .
West released his abrasive sixth album , Yeezus , to further critical praise in 2013 .
Following a series of recording delays and work on non-musical projects , West 's seventh album , The Life of Pablo , was released in 2016 .
He has also been included in a number of Forbes annual lists .
His parents divorced when he was three and he and his mother moved to Chicago , Illinois .
His father , Ray West , is a former Black Panther and was one of the first black photojournalists at The Atlanta Journal-Constitution .
And I 'm not even frontin ' . ''
His mother recalled that she first took notice of West 's passion for drawing and music when he was in the third grade .
Growing up in the city , -LSB- which ? -RSB-
West became deeply involved in its hip hop scene .
He started rapping in the third grade and began making musical compositions in the seventh grade , eventually selling them to other artists .
It was a small , crude basement studio where a microphone hung from the ceiling by a wire clothes hanger .
Although this was n't what West 's mother wanted , she nonetheless supported him .
No I.D. soon became West 's mentor , and it was from him that West learned how to sample and program beats after he received his first sampler at age 15 .
This action greatly displeased his mother , who was also a professor at the university .
She later commented , `` It was drummed into my head that college is the ticket to a good life ... but some career goals do n't require college .
His first official production credits came at the age of nineteen when he produced eight tracks on Down to Earth , the 1996 debut album of a Chicago rapper named Grav .
The album featured other Chicago-based rappers such as Rhymefest , Mikkey Halsted , Miss Criss , and Shayla G. Meanwhile , the production was handled by West , Arrowstar , Boogz , and Brian `` All Day '' Miller .
West spent much of the late-1990s producing records for a number of well-known artists and music groups .
Her second effort subsequently became the very first hip-hop album by a female rapper to debut at the top of the U.S. Billboard 200 chart in its first week of release .
West produced three of the tracks on Harlem World 's first and only album The Movement alongside Jermaine Dupri and the production duo Trackmasters .
His songs featured rappers Nas , Drag-On , and R&B singer Carl Thomas .
The ninth track from World Party , the last Goodie Mob album to feature the rap group 's four founding members prior to their break-up , was co-produced by West with his manager Deric `` D-Dot '' Angelettie .
The Blueprint is consistently ranked among the greatest hip-hop albums , and the critical and financial success of the album generated substantial interest in West as a producer .
Serving as an in-house producer for Roc-A-Fella Records , West produced records for other artists from the label , including Beanie Sigel , Freeway , and Cam ` ron .
He also crafted hit songs for Ludacris , Alicia Keys , and Janet Jackson .
Though he had developed his rapping long before he began producing , it was often a challenge for West to be accepted as a rapper , and he struggled to attain a record deal .
The crash left him with a shattered jaw , which had to be wired shut in reconstructive surgery .
The accident inspired West ; two weeks after being admitted to the hospital , he recorded a song at the Record Plant Studios with his jaw still wired shut .
West added that `` the album was my medicine '' , as working on the record distracted him from the pain .
Do n't let society tell you , ` This is what you have to do . ' ''
Carrying a Louis Vuitton backpack filled with old disks and demos to the studio and back , West crafted much of his production for his debut album in less than fifteen minutes at a time .
However , West decided to use the opportunity to review the album , and The College Dropout was significantly remixed , remastered , and revised before being released .
As a result , certain tracks originally destined for the album were subsequently retracted , among them `` Keep the Receipt '' with Ol' Dirty Bastard and `` The Good , the Bad , and the Ugly '' with Consequence .
West meticulously refined the production , adding string arrangements , gospel choirs , improved drum programming and new verses .
The College Dropout received near-universal critical acclaim from contemporary music critics , was voted the top album of the year by two major music publications , and has consistently been ranked among the great hip-hop works and debut albums by artists .
The song nevertheless reached the top 20 of the Billboard pop charts , despite industry executives ' predictions that a song containing such blatant declarations of faith would never make it to radio .
The College Dropout would eventually be certified triple platinum in the US , and garnered West 10 Grammy nominations , including Album of the Year , and Best Rap Album -LRB- which it received -RRB- .
At the time , the focal point of West 's production style was the use of sped-up vocal samples from soul records .
However , partly because of the acclaim of The College Dropout , such sampling had been much copied by others ; with that overuse , and also because West felt he had become too dependent on the technique , he decided to find a new sound .
Beginning his second effort that fall , West would invest two million dollars and take over a year to craft his second album .
Early in his career , the live album had inspired him to incorporate string arrangements into his hip-hop production .
Although Brion had no prior experience in creating hip-hop records , he and West found that they could productively work together after their first afternoon in the studio where they discovered that neither confined his musical knowledge and vision to one specific genre .
Myers spoke next and continued to read the script .
Once it was West 's turn to speak again , he said , `` George Bush does n't care about black people . ''
West 's comment reached much of the United States , leading to mixed reactions ; President Bush would later call it one of the most `` disgusting moments '' of his presidency .
Graduation once again continued the string of critical and commercial successes by West , and the album 's lead single , `` Stronger '' , garnered the rapper his third number-one hit .
Ben Detrick of XXL cited the outcome of the sales competition between 50 Cent 's Curtis and West 's Graduation as being responsible for altering the direction of hip-hop and paving the way for new rappers who did n't follow the hardcore-gangster mold , writing , `` If there was ever a watershed moment to indicate hip-hop 's changing direction , it may have come when 50 Cent competed with Kanye in 2007 to see whose album would claim superior sales . ''
West had previously experimented with the technology on his debut album The College Dropout for the background vocals of `` Jesus Walks '' and `` Never Let Me Down . ''
Music audiences were taken aback by the uncharacteristic production style and the presence of Auto-Tune , which typified the pre-release response to the record .
Reviews were positive , though slightly more mixed than his previous efforts .
Despite this , the record 's singles demonstrated outstanding chart performances .
While it was criticized prior to release , 808s & Heartbreak had a significant effect on hip-hop music , encouraging other rappers to take more creative risks with their productions .
He was subsequently withdrawn from the remainder of the show for his actions .
Importing his favorite producers and artists to work on and inspire his recording , West kept engineers behind the boards 24 hours a day and slept only in increments .
Noah Callahan-Bever , a writer for Complex , was present during the sessions and described the `` communal '' atmosphere as thus : `` With the right songs and the right album , he can overcome any and all controversy , and we are here to contribute , challenge , and inspire . ''
A variety of artists contributed to the project , including close friends Jay-Z , Kid Cudi and Pusha T , as well as off-the-wall collaborations , such as with Justin Vernon of Bon Iver .
In stark contrast to his previous effort , which featured a minimalist sound , Dark Fantasy adopts a maximalist philosophy and deals with themes of celebrity and excess .
This promotion ran from August 20 - December 17 , 2010 .
By employing a sales strategy that released the album digitally weeks before its physical counterpart , Watch the Throne became one of the few major label albums in the Internet age to avoid a leak .
Cruel Summer produced four singles , two of which charted within the top twenty of the Hot 100 : `` Mercy '' and `` Clique '' .
Determined to `` undermine the commercial '' , he once again brought together close collaborators and attempted to incorporate Chicago drill , dancehall , acid house , and industrial music .
Initial promotion of his sixth album included worldwide video projections of the album 's music and live television performances .
It became the rapper 's sixth consecutive number one debut , but also marked his lowest solo opening week sales .
Def Jam issued `` Black Skinhead '' to radio in July 2013 as the album 's lead single .
In October 2013 , the couple announced their engagement to widespread media attention .
November 2013 , West stated that he was beginning work on his next studio album , hoping to release it by mid-2014 , with production by Rick Rubin and Q-Tip .
`` FourFiveSeconds '' , a single jointly produced with Rihanna and McCartney , was released in January 2015 .
West also appeared on the Saturday Night Live 40th Anniversary Special , where he premiered a new song entitled `` Wolves '' , featuring Sia Furler and fellow Chicago rapper , Vic Mensa .
This would include West 's Yeezy Boost sneakers .
In March 2015 , West released the single `` All Day '' featuring Theophilus London , Allan Kingdom and Paul McCartney .
He would premiere the second iteration of his clothing line , Yeezy Season 2 , in September 2015 at New York Fashion Week .
At one point , he told the audience : `` You are now watching the greatest living rock star on the planet . ''
Media outlets , including social media sites such as Twitter , were sharply divided on his performance .
NME stated , `` The decision to book West for the slot has proved controversial since its announcement , and the show itself appeared to polarise both Glastonbury goers and those who tuned in to watch on their TVs . ''
The publication added that `` he 's letting his music speak for and prove itself . ''
The Guardian said that `` his set has a potent ferocity -- but there are gaps and stutters , and he cuts a strangely lone figure in front of the vast crowd . ''
This also revived the GOOD Fridays initiative in which Kanye releases new singles every Friday .
The feud involved allegations by Rose concerning her sexual relationship with West , and received significant media attention .
As of February 2 , 2016 , West and Khalifa had reconciled .
On February 11 , West premiered the album at Madison Square Garden as part of the presentation of his Yeezy Season 3 clothing line .
Following the preview , West announced that he would be modifying the track list once more before its release to the public , and further delayed its release to finalize the recording of the track `` Waves '' at the behest of co-writer Chance the Rapper .
West 's musical career has been defined by frequent stylistic shifts , and has seen him develop and explore a variety of different musical approaches and genres throughout his work .
When asked about his musical inspirations , he has named A Tribe Called Quest , Stevie Wonder , Michael Jackson , George Michael , LL Cool J , Phil Collins and Madonna as early interests .
RZA spoke positively of the comparisons , stating in an interview for Rolling Stone , `` All good .
I got super respect for Kanye -LSB- ... -RSB- -LSB- he -RSB- is going to inspire people to be like him . ''
West further developed his style on his 2004 debut album , The College Dropout .
After a rough version was leaked , he meticulously refined the production , adding string arrangements , gospel choirs , and improved drum programming .
It also incorporated a myriad of foreign and vintage instruments not typical in popular music , let alone hip hop , such as a celesta , harpsichord , Chamberlin , CS-80 analog synthesizer , Chinese bells and berimbau , vibraphones , and marimba .
Rolling Stone described Late Registration as West claiming `` the whole world of music as hip-hop turf '' chronicling the album as `` his mad quest to explode every cliché about hip-hop identity . ''
Critic Robert Christgau wrote that `` there 's never been hip-hop so complex and subtle musically . ''
The musical evolution arose from him listening to music genres encompassing European Britpop and Euro-disco , American alternative and indie-rock , and his native Chicago house .
Towards this end , West retracted much of the live instrumentation that characterized his previous album and replaced it with heavy , gothic synthesizers , distorted synth-chords , rave stabs , house beats , electro-disco rhythms , and a wide array of modulated electronic noises and digital audio-effects .
To this end , the album incorporates glitches reminiscent of CD skips or corrupted MP3 's , and Auto-Tuned vocals are modulated to a point in which they are difficult to decipher .
It also continues West 's practice of eclectic samples : he employs a sample of Nina Simone 's `` Strange Fruit , '' an obscure Hindi sample on `` I Am a God '' , and a sample of 1970s Hungarian rock group Omega on `` New Slaves '' .
`` On Sight '' interpolates a melody from `` Sermon -LRB- He 'll Give Us What We Really Need -RRB- '' by the Holy Name of Mary Choral Family .
Rolling Stone called the album a `` brilliant , obsessive-compulsive career auto-correct '' .
The line was released in summer 2009 .
West has additionally designed shoewear for Bape and Italian shoemaker Giuseppe Zanotti .
He received support from DSquared2 duo Dean and Dan Caten , Olivier Theyskens , Jeremy Scott , Azzedine Alaïa , and the Olsen twins , who were also in attendance during his show .
The line 's reception was markedly improved from the previous presentation , with a number of critics heralding West for his `` much improved '' sophomore effort .
The release of the Yeezy Boosts and the full Adidas collaboration was showcased in New York City on February 12 , 2015 , with free streaming to 50 cinemas in 13 countries around the world .
The shoes released worldwide on February 28 , 2015 , were limited to select boutique stores and the Adidas UK stores .
He followed with Season 2 later that year at New York Fashion Week .
The second followed in January 2009 , while a third location is yet to be revealed , although the process is being finalized .
Ultimately , in 2009 , only two locations actually opened .
Later that year , the remaining Beverly location also was shuttered .
GOOD Music has released ten albums certified gold or higher by the Recording Industry Association of America -LRB- RIAA -RRB- .
In November 2015 , West appointed Pusha T the new president of GOOD Music .
West is notoriously secretive about the company 's operations , maintaining neither an official website nor a social media presence .
In stating DONDA 's creative philosophy , West articulated the need to `` put creatives in a room together with like minds '' in order to `` simplify and aesthetically improve everything we see , taste , touch , and feel . ''
.
Contemporary critics have noted the consistent minimalistic aesthetic exhibited throughout DONDA creative projects .
`` The challenge is to get everyone to respect music again , to recognize its value '' , stated Jay-Z on the release of Tidal .
West has been an outspoken and controversial celebrity throughout his career , receiving both criticism and praise from many , including the mainstream media , other artists and entertainers , and two U.S. presidents .
When West was presenting alongside actor Mike Myers , he deviated from the prepared script to criticize the media 's portrayal of hurricane victims , saying :
Myers spoke next and continued to read the script .
Still , West 's comment reached much of the United States .
`` I would tell George Bush in my moment of frustration , I did n't have the grounds to call him a racist '' , he told Lauer .
`` I believe that in a situation of high emotion like that we as human beings do n't always choose the right words . ''
The following day , Bush reacted to the apology in a live interview with Lauer saying he appreciated the rapper 's remorse .
`` I 'm not a hater '' , Bush said .
`` I do n't hate Kanye West .
I was talking about an environment in which people were willing to say things that hurt .
Nobody wants to be called a racist if in your heart you believe in equality of races . ''
Reactions were mixed , but some felt that West had no need to apologize .
`` It was not the particulars of your words that mattered , it was the essence of a feeling of the insensitivity towards our communities that many of us have felt for far too long '' , argued Def Jam co-founder Russell Simmons .
Bush himself was receptive to the apology , saying , `` I appreciate that .
It was n't just Kanye West who was talking like that during Katrina , I cited him as an example , I cited others as an example as well .
You know , I appreciate that . ''
People want to say Obama ca n't make these moves or he 's not executing .
That 's because he ai n't got those connections .
We do n't got family that got money like that . ''
In response to his comments , the Anti-Defamation League stated : `` There it goes again , the age-old canard that Jews are all-powerful and control the levers of power in government . ''
I do n't know how being told you have money is an insult . ''
In 2004 , West had his first of a number of public incidents during his attendance at music award events .
He later commented , `` I felt like I was definitely robbed -LSB- ... -RSB- I was the best new artist this year . ''
After the 2006 Grammy nominations were released , West said he would `` really have a problem '' if he did not win the Album of the Year , saying , `` I do n't care what I do , I do n't care how much I stunt -- you can never take away from the amount of work I put into it .
I do n't want to hear all of that politically correct stuff . ''
Hundreds of news outlets worldwide criticized the outburst .
West was performing at the event ; that night , he lost all five awards that he was nominated for , including Best Male Artist and Video of the Year .
After the show , he was visibly upset that he had lost at the VMAs two years in a row , stating that he would not come back to MTV ever again .
He has also stated that Spears has not had a hit in a long period of time and that MTV exploited her for ratings .
He was subsequently removed from the remainder of the show for his actions .
When Beyoncé later won the award for Best Video of the Year for `` Single Ladies -LRB- Put a Ring on It -RRB- '' , she called Swift up on stage so that she could finish her acceptance speech .
In addition , West 's VMA disruption sparked a large influx of Internet photo memes with blogs , forums and `` tweets '' with the `` Let you finish '' photo-jokes .
He posted a Tweet soon after the event where he stated , `` Everybody wan na booooo me but I 'm a fan of real pop culture ... I 'm not crazy y' all , I 'm just real . ''
He then posted two apologies for the outburst on his personal blog ; one on the night of the incident , and the other the following day , when he also apologized during an appearance on The Jay Leno Show .
After Swift appeared on The View two days after the outburst , partly to discuss the matter , West called her to apologize personally .
Swift said she accepted his apology .
MTV did n't need that and Taylor and her family friends and fans definitely did n't want or need that '' and concluding with `` I 'm sorry Taylor . ''
He also revealed he had written a song for Swift and if she did not accept the song , he would perform it himself .
I made that bitch famous . ''
He continued by adding that he had asked both Swift and his wife , Kim Kardashian , for permission to publish the line .
In his acceptance speech , he stated , `` Y' all might be thinking right now , ' I wonder did he smoke something before he came out here ? '
And the answer is : ` Yes , I rolled up a little something .
I knocked the edge off . ' ''
In his Pan American Games Closing Ceremony performance , close to the end of his performance , West closed the show by tossing his faulty microphone in the air and walked off stage .
The pair ended their 18-month engagement in 2008 .
West and Kardashian became engaged in October 2013 , and married on May 24 , 2014 at Fort di Belvedere in Florence , Italy .
Their private ceremony was subject to widespread mainstream coverage , with West taking issue with the couple 's portrayal in the media .
They have two children : daughter North `` Nori '' West -LRB- born June 15 , 2013 -RRB- and son Saint West -LRB- born December 5 , 2015 -RRB- .
The couple 's high status and respective careers have resulted in their relationship becoming subject to heavy media coverage ; The New York Times referred to their marriage as `` a historic blizzard of celebrity . ''
She had undergone liposuction and breast reduction .
Aboolian referred her to an internist to investigate her cardiac issue .
Adams sent condolences to Donda West 's family but declined to publicly discuss the procedure , citing confidentiality .
Adams had previously been under scrutiny by the medical board .
Two days later , he appeared again , with his attorney , stating he was there to `` defend himself '' .
He said that the recently released autopsy results `` spoke for themselves '' .
`` It was like losing an arm and a leg and trying to walk through that '' , he told reporters .
The suit claimed infringement on Knievel 's trademarked name and likeness .
Knievel also claimed that the `` vulgar and offensive '' images depicted in the video damaged his reputation .
The suit sought monetary damages and an injunction to stop distribution of the video .
West 's attorneys argued that the music video amounted to satire and therefore was covered under the First Amendment .
On September 26 , 2008 , the Los Angeles County District Attorney 's Office said it would not file felony counts against West over the incident .
West 's and Crowley 's arraignment was delayed from an original date of April 14 , 2009 .
He was later released `` with no further action '' , according to a police spokesperson .
West then says , `` I told you do n't talk to me , right ?
Then he allegedly charged the man and grabbed him and his camera .
The incident captured by TMZ , took place for a few seconds before a female voice can be heard telling West to stop .
West then released the man , and his camera , and drove away from the scene .
Medics were later called to the scene on behalf of the photographer who was grabbed .
It was reported West could be charged with felony attempted robbery behind the matter .
I have accepted Jesus as my Savior .
And I will say that I fall short every day . ''
AllMusic editor Jason Birchmeier writes of his impact , `` As his career progressed throughout the early 21st century , West shattered certain stereotypes about rappers , becoming a superstar on his own terms without adapting his appearance , his rhetoric , or his music to fit any one musical mold . ''
Rolling Stone credited West with transforming hip hop 's mainstream , `` establishing a style of introspective yet glossy rap -LSB- ... -RSB- '' , and called him `` as interesting and complicated a pop star as the 2000s produced -- a rapper who mastered , upped and moved beyond the hip-hop game , a producer who created a signature sound and then abandoned it to his imitators , a flashy , free-spending sybarite with insightful things to say about college , culture and economics , an egomaniac with more than enough artistic firepower to back it up . ''
His 2008 album 808s & Heartbreak polarized both listeners and critics upon its release , but was commercially successful and impacted hip hop and pop stylistically , as it laid the groundwork for a new wave of artists who generally eschewed typical rap braggadocio for intimate subject matter and introspection , including Frank Ocean , The Weeknd , Drake , Future , Kid Cudi , Childish Gambino , Lil Durk , Chief Keef , and Soulja Boy .
A substantial number of artists and other figures have been influenced by , or complimented , West 's work , including hip hop artists RZA of Wu-Tang Clan , Chuck D of Public Enemy , and DJ Premier of Gang Starr .
Both Drake and Casey Veggies have acknowledged being influenced directly by West .
Non-rap artists such as English singer-songwriters Adele and Lily Allen , New Zealand artist Lorde , rock band Arctic Monkeys , pop singer Halsey , Sergio Pizzorno of English rock band Kasabian and American indie rock group MGMT have cited West as an influence .
Experimental and electronic artists such as James Blake Daniel Lopatin , and Tim Hecker have also cited West 's work as an inspiration .
Experimental rock pioneer and Velvet Underground founder Lou Reed , in a review of West 's album Yeezus , wrote that `` the guy really , really , really is talented .
He 's really trying to raise the bar .
No one 's near doing what he 's doing , it 's not even on the same planet . ''
Musicians such as Paul McCartney and Prince have also commended West 's work .
West 's first six solo studio albums , all of which have gone platinum , have received numerous awards and critical acclaim .
Billboard ranked Kanye West No. 3 on their list of Top 10 Producers of the Decade .
West 's outspoken views and ventures outside of music have received significant mainstream attention .
He has been a frequent source of controversy and public scrutiny for his conduct at award shows , on social media , and in other public settings .
Tibetan Buddhism , which preserves the Vajrayana teachings of eighth century India , is practiced in regions surrounding the Himalayas , Mongolia and Kalmykia .
Buddhist schools vary on the exact nature of the path to liberation , the importance and canonicity of various teachings and scriptures , and especially their respective practices .
Taking `` refuge in the triple gem '' has traditionally been a declaration and commitment to being on the Buddhist path , and in general distinguishes a Buddhist from a non-Buddhist .
Scholars are hesitant to make unqualified claims about the historical facts of the Buddha 's life .
-LSB- dubious -- discuss -RSB-
He almost starved himself to death in the process .
He realized that he had taken this kind of practice to its limit , and had not put an end to suffering .
madhyamā-pratipad -RRB- : a path of moderation between the extremes of self-indulgence and self-mortification .
-LSB- web 2 -RSB- -LSB- web 3 -RSB-
Gautama was now determined to complete his spiritual quest .
After many days , he finally destroyed the fetters of his mind , thereby liberating himself from the cycle of suffering and rebirth , and arose as a fully enlightened being -LRB- Skt .
samyaksaṃbuddha -RRB- .
Soon thereafter , he attracted a band of followers and instituted a monastic order .
Good , skillful deeds -LRB- Pali : `` kusala '' -RRB- and bad , unskillful -LRB- Pāli : `` akusala '' -RRB- actions produce `` seeds '' in the mind that come to fruition either in this life or in a subsequent rebirth .
According to Buddhism there ultimately is no such thing as a self independent from the rest of the universe .
-LSB- page needed -RSB-
The four truths are : -LSB- note 4 -RSB-
-LSB- note 7 -RSB-
The eight factors of the path are not to be understood as stages , in which each stage is completed before moving on to the next .
-LSB- web 6 -RSB- -LSB- web 7 -RSB-
The Middle Way has several definitions :
Everything is in constant flux , and so conditions and the thing itself are constantly changing .
Since nothing lasts , there is no inherent or fixed nature to any object or experience .
In English-language Buddhist literature translated from Pāli , `` dukkha '' is often left untranslated , so as to encompass its full range of meaning .
-LSB- note 8 -RSB-
Upon careful examination , one finds that no phenomenon is really `` I '' or `` mine '' ; these concepts are in fact constructed by the mind .
It states that phenomena arise together in a mutually interdependent web of cause and effect .
-LSB- note 10 -RSB-
Mahayana Buddhism received significant theoretical grounding from Nagarjuna -LRB- perhaps c. 150 -- 250 CE -RRB- , arguably the most influential scholar within the Mahayana tradition .
The concept of emptiness brings together other key Buddhist doctrines , particularly anatta and dependent origination , to refute the metaphysics of Sarvastivada and Sautrantika -LRB- extinct non-Mahayana schools -RRB- .
Nagarjuna 's school of thought is known as the Mādhyamaka .
Some of the writings attributed to Nagarjuna made explicit references to Mahayana texts , but his philosophy was argued within the parameters set out by the agamas .
He may have arrived at his positions from a desire to achieve a consistent exegesis of the Buddha 's doctrine as recorded in the Canon .
In the eyes of Nagarjuna the Buddha was not merely a forerunner , but the very founder of the Mādhyamaka system .
Not all Yogacarins asserted that mind was truly existent ; Vasubandhu and Asanga in particular did not .
-LSB- web 11 -RSB- These two schools of thought , in opposition or synthesis , form the basis of subsequent Mahayana metaphysics in the Indo-Tibetan tradition .
There are conflicting interpretations of the tathāgatagarbha in Mahāyāna thought .
The idea may be traced to Abhidharma , and ultimately to statements of the Buddha in the Nikāyas .
In Nyingma , tathāgatagarbha also generally refers to inseparability of the clarity and emptiness of one 's mind .
According to the Gelug school , it is the potential for sentient beings to awaken since they are empty -LRB- i.e. dependently originated -RRB- .
The `` Tathāgatagarbha Sutras '' are a collection of Mahayana sutras that present a unique model of Buddha-nature .
Even though this collection was generally ignored in India , East Asian Buddhism provides some significance to these texts .
Bodhi literally means `` awakening '' , but it is more commonly translated into English as `` enlightenment '' .
-LSB- web 14 -RSB- In the later school of Mahayana Buddhism , the status of nirvana was downgraded in some scriptures , coming to refer only to the extinction of greed and hate , implying that delusion was still present in one who attained nirvana , and that one needed to attain bodhi to eradicate delusion :
In Theravada Buddhism , bodhi and nirvana carry the same meaning as in the early texts , that of being freed from greed , hate and delusion .
Buddhists do not consider Siddhartha Gautama to have been the only Buddha .
After numerous lifetimes of spiritual striving , they have reached the end of the cycle of rebirth , no longer reincarnating as human , animal , ghost , or other being .
The commentaries to the Pali Canon classify these awakened beings into three types :
In attaining bodhi , the arahant has overcome these obstacles .
Moreover , in certain Mahayana sutras , the Buddha , Dharma and Sangha are viewed essentially as One : all three are seen as the eternal Buddha himself .
Pure Land Buddhism is a very widespread and perhaps the most faith-orientated manifestation of Buddhism and centres upon the conviction that faith in Amitabha Buddha and the chanting of homage to his name liberates one at death into the Blissful -LRB- 安樂 -RRB- , Pure Land -LRB- 淨土 -RRB- of Amitabha Buddha .
This Buddhic realm is variously construed as a foretaste of Nirvana , or as essentially Nirvana itself .
The great vow of Amitabha Buddha to rescue all beings from samsaric suffering is viewed within Pure Land Buddhism as universally efficacious , if only one has faith in the power of that vow or chants his name .
This Buddha era will end when all the knowledge , evidence and teachings of Gautama Buddha have vanished .
This belief therefore maintains that many Buddha eras have started and ended throughout the course of human existence .
-LSB- web 15 -RSB- -LSB- web 16 -RSB- The Gautama Buddha , therefore , is the Buddha of this era , who taught directly or indirectly to all other Buddhas in it -LRB- see types of Buddhas -RRB- .
The understandings of this matter reflect widely differing interpretations of basic terms , such as `` world realm '' , between the various schools of Buddhism .
The idea of the decline and gradual disappearance of the teaching has been influential in East Asian Buddhism .
Theravada Buddhism primarily uses the term in relation to Gautama Buddha 's previous existences , but has traditionally acknowledged and respected the bodhisattva path as well .
-LSB- web 17 -RSB-
According to Jan Nattier , the term Mahāyāna `` Great Vehicle '' was originally even an honorary synonym for Bodhisattvayāna `` Bodhisattva Vehicle . ''
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In Pure Land Buddhism , devotion to the Buddha Amitabha is the main practice .
In Nichiren Buddhism , devotion to the Lotus Sutra is the main practice .
Meditative states alone are not an end , for according to the Buddha , even the highest meditative state is not liberating .
Instead of attaining a complete cessation of thought , some sort of mental activity must take place : a liberating cognition , based on the practice of mindful awareness .
The Buddha built upon the yogis ' concern with introspection and developed their meditative techniques , but rejected their theories of liberation .
A yogi in the Brahmanical tradition is not to practice while defecating , for example , while a Buddhist monastic should do so .
According to the Samaññaphala Sutta , this sort of vision arose for the Buddhist adept as a result of the perfection of `` meditation '' coupled with the perfection of `` discipline '' -LRB- Pali sīla ; Skt .
śīla -RRB- .
prajñā -RRB- was original .
-LSB- web 18 -RSB-
They describe meditative practices and states that existed before the Buddha as well as those first developed within Buddhism .
He mentions less likely possibilities as well .
In Mahayana , the person who chooses the bodhisattva path makes a vow or pledge , considered the ultimate expression of compassion .
These Three Jewels bring a fruition that is changeless , for once one has reached Buddhahood , there is no possibility of falling back to suffering .
It is an action committed through the body , speech , or mind , and involves an intentional effort .
It refers to moral purity of thought , word , and deed .
The four conditions of śīla are chastity , calmness , quiet , and extinguishment .
Keeping the precepts promotes not only the peace of mind of the cultivator , which is internal , but also peace in the community , which is external .
Keeping these precepts keeps the cultivator from rebirth in the four woeful realms of existence .
Lay people generally undertake to live by the five precepts , which are common to all Buddhist schools .
There is nothing improper or un-Buddhist about limiting one 's aims to this level of attainment .
The three additional precepts are :
Vinaya is the specific moral code for monks and nuns .
In this sense , living life as the vinaya prescribes it is , as one scholar puts it : `` more than merely a means to an end : it is very nearly the end in itself . ''
Buddhist meditation is fundamentally concerned with two themes : transforming the mind and using it to explore itself and other phenomena .
According to Theravada Buddhism the Buddha taught two types of meditation , samatha meditation -LRB- Sanskrit : śamatha -RRB- and vipassanā meditation -LRB- Sanskrit : vipaśyanā -RRB- .
According to Peter Harvey , whenever Buddhism has been healthy , not only monks , nuns , and married lamas , but also more committed lay people have practiced meditation .
According to Routledge 's Encyclopedia of Buddhism , in contrast , throughout most of Buddhist history before modern times , serious meditation by lay people has been unusual .
-LSB- note 11 -RSB-
The primary means of cultivating samādhi is meditation .
The cultivation of mindfulness is essential to mental concentration , which is needed to achieve insight .
There are many variations in the style of meditation , from sitting cross-legged or kneeling to chanting or walking .
The most common method of meditation is to concentrate on one 's breath -LRB- anapanasati -RRB- , because this practice can lead to both samatha and vipassana ' .
When one is in jhana , all defilements are suppressed temporarily .
Only understanding -LRB- prajñā or vipassana -RRB- eradicates the defilements completely .
Jhanas are also states that Arahants abide in order to rest .
These various defilements are traditionally summed up as greed , hatred and delusion .
To be free from suffering and stress , these defilements must be permanently uprooted through internal investigation , analyzing , experiencing , and understanding of the true nature of those defilements by using jhāna , a technique of the Noble Eightfold Path .
Nibbāna is the ultimate goal of Theravadins .
It is spoken of as the principal means of attaining nirvāṇa , through its revelation of the true nature of all things as dukkha -LRB- unsatisfactoriness -RRB- , anicca -LRB- impermanence -RRB- and anatta -LRB- not-self -RRB- .
Prajñā is also listed as the sixth of the six pāramitās of the Mahayana .
-LSB- note 13 -RSB-
-LSB- note 14 -RSB- According to Zen master Kosho Uchiyama , when thoughts and fixation on the little `` I '' are transcended , an Awakening to a universal , non-dual Self occurs : `` When we let go of thoughts and wake up to the reality of life that is working beyond them , we discover the Self that is living universal non-dual life -LRB- before the separation into two -RRB- that pervades all living creatures and all existence . ''
Tantric Buddhism is largely concerned with ritual and meditative practices .
One component of the Vajrayāna is harnessing psycho-physical energy through ritual , visualization , physical exercises , and meditation as a means of developing the mind .
Using these techniques , it is claimed that a practitioner can achieve Buddhahood in one lifetime , or even as little as three years .
In the Tibetan tradition , these practices can include sexual yoga , though only for some very advanced practitioners .
That was a period of social and religious turmoil , as there was significant discontent with the sacrifices and rituals of Vedic Brahmanism .
-LSB- note 15 -RSB- It was challenged by numerous new ascetic religious and philosophical groups and teachings that broke with the Brahmanic tradition and rejected the authority of the Vedas and the Brahmans .
-LSB- note 18 -RSB- -LSB- note 19 -RSB- -LSB- note 20 -RSB- -LSB- note 21 -RSB- -LSB- note 22 -RSB- -LSB- note 23 -RSB-
This view is supported by a study of the region where these notions originated .
This land , to the east of aryavarta , the land of the Aryas , was recognized as non-Vedic .
Other Vedic texts reveal a dislike of the people of Magadha , in all probability because the Magadhas at this time were not Brahmanised .
Ideas that developed in Greater Magadha prior to this were not subject to Vedic influence .
These include rebirth and karmic retribution that appear in a number of movements in Greater Magadha , including Buddhism .
These movements inherited notions of rebirth and karmic retribution from an earlier culture -LSB- page needed -RSB-
Many of these new movements shared the same conceptual vocabulary -- atman -LRB- `` Self '' -RRB- , buddha -LRB- `` awakened one '' -RRB- , dhamma -LRB- `` rule '' or `` law '' -RRB- , karma -LRB- `` action '' -RRB- , nirvana -LRB- `` extinguishing '' -RRB- , samsara -LRB- `` eternal recurrence '' -RRB- and yoga -LRB- `` spiritual practice '' -RRB- .
-LSB- note 24 -RSB- The shramanas rejected the Veda , and the authority of the brahmans , who claimed they possessed revealed truths not knowable by any ordinary human means .
Moreover , they declared that the entire Brahmanical system was fraudulent : a conspiracy of the brahmans to enrich themselves by charging exorbitant fees to perform bogus rites and give useless advice .
However , the Buddha was not anti-Vedic , and declared that the Veda in its true form was declared by `` Kashyapa '' to certain rishis , who by severe penances had acquired the power to see by divine eyes .
However , he did not denounce the union with Brahman , -LSB- note 26 -RSB- or the idea of the self uniting with the Self .
At the same time , the traditional Hindu itself gradually underwent profound changes , transforming it into what is recognized as early Hinduism .
Information of the oldest teachings may be obtained by analysis of the oldest texts .
One method to obtain information on the oldest core of Buddhism is to compare the oldest extant versions of the Theravadin Pali Canon and other texts .
-LSB- page needed -RSB- -LSB- page needed -RSB- -LSB- page needed -RSB- -LSB- page needed -RSB- According to Vetter , inconsistencies remain , and other methods must be applied to resolve those inconsistencies .
-LSB- note 28 -RSB-
-LSB- page needed -RSB-
-LSB- page needed -RSB- -LSB- note 32 -RSB- According to Vetter , `` the Buddha at first sought `` the deathless '' -LRB- amata/amrta -RRB- , which is concerned with the here and now .
According to Vetter , only after this realization did he become acquainted with the doctrine of rebirth . ''
Bronkhorst disagrees , and concludes that the Buddha `` introduced a concept of karma that differed considerably from the commonly held views of his time . ''
According to Bronkhorst , not physical and mental activities as such were seen as responsible for rebirth , but intentions and desire .
According to Tilmann Vetter , the core of earliest Buddhism is the practice of dhyāna .
Discriminating insight into transiency as a separate path to liberation was a later development .
Yet , it is not clear what he was awakened to .
-LSB- page needed -RSB- `` Liberating insight '' is a later addition to this text , and reflects a later development and understanding in early Buddhism .
-LSB- note 34 -RSB-
-LSB- note 35 -RSB-
According to Bronkhorst , the four truths may not have been formulated in earliest Buddhism , and did not serve in earliest Buddhism as a description of `` liberating insight '' .
K.R. Norman supposes that the these terms were already in use at the Buddha 's time , and were familiair to his hearers .
Its main scriptures are the Vinaya Pitaka and the four principal Nikayas or Agamas .
Some scholars disagree , and have proposed many other theories .
As with any ancient Indian tradition , transmission of teaching was done orally .
The primary purpose of the assembly was to collectively recite the teachings to ensure that no errors occurred in oral transmission .
Upāli , another disciple , recited the monastic rules -LRB- vinaya -RRB- .
Most scholars regard the traditional accounts of the council as greatly exaggerated if not entirely fictitious .
-LSB- note 36 -RSB- Richard Gombrich noted Sariputta led communal recitations of the Buddha 's teaching for preservation in the Buddha 's lifetime in Sangiti Sutta -LRB- Digha Nikaya # 33 -RRB- , and something similar to the First Council must have taken place to compose Buddhist scriptures .
-LSB- note 37 -RSB- The various accounts differ as to when the actual schisms occurred .
The root schism was between the Sthaviras and the Mahāsāṅghikas .
The fortunate survival of accounts from both sides of the dispute reveals disparate traditions .
The Sthavira group offers two quite distinct reasons for the schism .
Both parties , therefore , appealed to tradition .
Therefore the seven Abhidharma works are generally claimed not to represent the words of the Buddha himself , but those of disciples and great scholars .
-LSB- note 38 -RSB- Every school had its own version of the Abhidharma , with different theories and different texts .
The different Abhidharmas of the various schools did not agree with each other .
-LSB- note 38 -RSB-
A.K. Warder believes that `` the Mahāyāna originated in the south of India and almost certainly in the Āndhra country . ''
Anthony Barber and Sree Padma note that `` historians of Buddhist thought have been aware for quite some time that such pivotally important Mahayana Buddhist thinkers as Nāgārjuna , Dignaga , Candrakīrti , Āryadeva , and Bhavaviveka , among many others , formulated their theories while living in Buddhist communities in Āndhra . ''
Initially it was known as Bodhisattvayāna -LRB- the `` Vehicle of the Bodhisattvas '' -RRB- .
This continues today with the Dharmaguptaka ordination lineage in East Asia , and the Mūlasarvāstivāda ordination lineage in Tibetan Buddhism .
Therefore Mahāyāna was never a separate rival sect of the early schools .
-LSB- note 40 -RSB-
In India , the two main philosophical schools of the Mahayana were the Madhyamaka and the later Yogacara .
According to Dan Lusthaus , Madhyamaka and Yogacara have a great deal in common , and the commonality stems from early Buddhism .
There were no great Indian teachers associated with tathagatagarbha thought .
These two missions , in opposite directions , would ultimately lead , in the first case to the spread of Buddhism into China , and in the second case , to the emergence of Theravāda Buddhism and its spread from Sri Lanka to the coastal lands of Southeast Asia .
This period marks the first known spread of Buddhism beyond India .
The gradual spread of Buddhism into adjacent areas meant that it came into contact with new ethnical groups .
Striking examples of this syncretistic development can be seen in the emergence of Greek-speaking Buddhist monarchs in the Indo-Greek Kingdom , and in the development of the Greco-Buddhist art of Gandhāra .
The Dharmagupta school spread -LRB- also in 3rd century BCE -RRB- north to Kashmir , Gandhara and Bactria -LRB- Afghanistan -RRB- .
The Silk Road transmission of Buddhism to China is most commonly thought to have started in the late 2nd or the 1st century CE , though the literary sources are all open to question .
By the late Middle Ages , Buddhism had become virtually extinct in India , although it continued to exist in surrounding countries .
It is now again gaining strength worldwide .
-LSB- web 20 -RSB-
At the present time , the teachings of all three branches of Buddhism have spread throughout the world , and Buddhist texts are increasingly translated into local languages .
Buddhists in Asia are frequently well organized and well funded .
In countries such as Cambodia and Bhutan , it is recognized as the state religion and receives government support .
-LSB- web 21 -RSB-
-LSB- web 1 -RSB- They are mostly followers of Chinese schools of Mahayana , making this the largest body of Buddhist traditions .
Mahayana , also practiced in broader East Asia , is followed by over half of world Buddhists .
-LSB- web 1 -RSB-
According to them , there was a fast annual growth of Buddhism in Pakistan , Saudi Arabia , Lebanon and several Western European countries -LRB- 1910 -- 2010 -RRB- .
More recently -LRB- 2000 -- 2010 -RRB- , the countries with highest growth rates are Qatar , the United Arab Emirates , Iran and some African countries .
Some scholars -LSB- note 44 -RSB- use other schemes .
Buddhists themselves have a variety of other schemes .
Each tradition , however , does have its own core concepts , and some comparisons can be drawn between them .
It is relatively conservative , and generally closest to early Buddhism .
After unsuccessfully trying to modify the Vinaya , a small group of `` elderly members '' , i.e. sthaviras , broke away from the majority Mahāsāṃghika during the Second Buddhist council , giving rise to the Sthavira sect .
They also emphasized Theravada being rational and scientific .
Theravāda is primarily practiced today in Sri Lanka , Burma , Laos , Thailand , Cambodia as well as small portions of China , Vietnam , Malaysia and Bangladesh .
Monks follow the vinaya : meditating , teaching and serving their lay communities .
Mahayana Buddhism flourished in India from the 5th century CE onwards , during the dynasty of the Guptas .
.
In most of this area however , they are fused into a single unified form of Buddhism .
In Japan in particular , they form separate denominations with the five major ones being : Nichiren , peculiar to Japan ; Pure Land ; Shingon , a form of Vajrayana ; Tendai , and Zen .
In Korea , nearly all Buddhists belong to the Chogye school , which is officially Son -LRB- Zen -RRB- , but with substantial elements from other traditions .
The Samvara tantra texts adopted the pitha list from the Saiva text Tantrasadbhava , introducing a copying error where a deity was mistaken for a place .
Different schools of Buddhism place varying levels of value on learning the various texts .
Buddhist scriptures are mainly written in Pāli , Tibetan , Mongolian , and Chinese .
Some texts still exist in Sanskrit and Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit .
-LSB- page needed -RSB- This could be considered misleading , as Mahāyāna considers these merely a preliminary , and not a core , teaching .
Other scholars say there is no universally accepted common core .
Other such efforts have persisted to present day , but currently there is no single text that represents all Buddhist traditions .
The Vinaya Pitaka contains disciplinary rules for the Buddhist monks and nuns , as well as explanations of why and how these rules were instituted , supporting material , and doctrinal clarification .
The Sutta Pitaka contains discourses ascribed to Gautama Buddha .
The Abhidhamma Pitaka contains material often described as systematic expositions of the Gautama Buddha 's teachings .
We have portions of the Tipitakas of the Sārvāstivāda , Dharmaguptaka , Sammitya , Mahāsaṅghika , Kāśyapīya , and Mahīśāsaka schools , most of which survive in Chinese translation only .
These became the basis of the Tripitaka .
However , this record was initially transmitted orally in form of chanting , and was committed to text in the last century BCE .
Both the sūtras and the vinaya of every Buddhist school contain a wide variety of elements including discourses on the Dharma , commentaries on other teachings , cosmological and cosmogonical texts , stories of the Gautama Buddha 's previous lives , and various other subjects .
According to Peter Harvey , it contains material at odds with later Theravadin orthodoxy .
That path is explained as being built upon the motivation to liberate all living beings from unhappiness .
Generally , scholars conclude that the Mahayana scriptures were composed from the 1st century CE onwards : `` Large numbers of Mahayana sutras were being composed in the period between the beginning of the common era and the fifth century '' , five centuries after the historical Gautama Buddha .
Some of these had their roots in other scriptures composed in the 1st century BCE .
Scholar Isabelle Onians asserts that although `` the Mahāyāna ... very occasionally referred contemptuously to earlier Buddhism as the Hinayāna , the Inferior Way , '' `` the preponderance of this name in the secondary literature is far out of proportion to occurrences in the Indian texts . ''
Many sources commonly refer to Buddhism as a religion .
For example :
The concept of the series is to find new solo recording artists , with the winner being determined by the viewers in America .
Winners chosen by viewers through telephone , Internet , and SMS text voting were Kelly Clarkson , Ruben Studdard , Fantasia Barrino , Carrie Underwood , Taylor Hicks , Jordin Sparks , David Cook , Kris Allen , Lee DeWyze , Scotty McCreery , Phillip Phillips , Candice Glover , Caleb Johnson , and Nick Fradiani .
American Idol employs a panel of judges who critique the contestants ' performances .
The success of American Idol has been described as `` unparalleled in broadcasting history '' .
It has become a recognized springboard for launching the career of many artists as bona fide stars .
Fuller was inspired by the idea from Popstars of employing a panel of judges to select singers in audition .
Cowell was initially offered the job as showrunner but refused ; Lythgoe then took over that position .
Much to Cowell 's surprise , it became one of the hit shows for the summer that year .
The show , with the personal engagement of the viewers with the contestants through voting , and the presence of the acid-tongued Cowell as a judge , grew into a phenomenon .
All three original judges stayed on the judging panel for eight seasons .
Jennifer Lopez and Steven Tyler joined the judging panel in season ten , but both left after two seasons .
They were replaced by three new judges , Mariah Carey , Nicki Minaj and Keith Urban , who joined Randy Jackson in season 12 .
However both Carey and Minaj left after one season , and Randy Jackson also announced that he would depart the show after twelve seasons as a judge but would return as a mentor .
Urban is the only judge from season 12 to return in season 13 .
He was joined by previous judge Jennifer Lopez and former mentor Harry Connick , Jr. .
Lopez , Urban and Connick , Jr. all returned as judges for the show 's fourteenth and fifteenth seasons .
Guest judges may occasionally be introduced .
Dunkleman quit thereafter , making Seacrest the sole emcee of the show starting with season two .
The mentors regularly bring in guest mentors to aid them , including Akon , Alicia Keys , Lady Gaga , and current judge Harry Connick , Jr. .
.
Successful contestants then sing in front of producers , where more may be cut .
Between 10 -- 60 people in each city may make it to Hollywood -LSB- citation needed -RSB- .
In the first round the contestants emerged in groups but performed individually .
For the next round , the contestants put themselves in small groups and perform a song together .
In the final round , the contestants perform solo with a song of their choice a cappella or accompanied by a band -- depending on the season .
At the end of this stage of the competition , 24 to 36 contestants are selected to move on to the semi-final stage .
In season thirteen , a new round called `` Hollywood or Home '' was added , where if the judges were uncertain about some contestants , those contestants were required to perform soon after landing in Los Angeles , and those who failed to impress were sent back home before they reached Hollywood .
During the contestant 's performance as well as the recap at the end , a toll-free telephone number for each contestant is displayed on the screen .
For a two-hour period after the episode ends -LRB- up to four hours for the finale -RRB- in each US time zone , viewers may call or send a text message to their preferred contestant 's telephone number , and each call or text message is registered as a vote for that contestant .
Viewers are allowed to vote as many times as they can within the two-hour voting window .
However , the show reserves the right to discard votes by power dialers .
One or more of the least popular contestants may be eliminated in successive weeks until a winner emerges .
Voting via text messaging was made available in the second season when AT&T Wireless joined as a sponsor of the show , and 7.5 million text messages were sent to American Idol that season .
Online voting was offered for the first time in season ten .
In the first three seasons , the semi-finalists were split into different groups to perform individually in their respective night .
In season one , only one wildcard contestant was chosen by the judges , giving a total of ten finalists .
Starting season ten , the girls and boys perform on separate nights .
Each finalist performs songs based on a weekly theme which may be a musical genre such as Motown , disco , or big band , songs by artists such as Michael Jackson , Elvis Presley or The Beatles , or more general themes such as Billboard Number 1 hits or songs from the contestant 's year of birth .
Contestants usually work with a celebrity mentor related to the theme .
The most popular contestants are usually not revealed in the results show .
Instead , typically the three contestants -LRB- two in later rounds -RRB- who received the lowest number of votes are called to the center of the stage .
The contestant with the fewest votes is then revealed and eliminated from the competition .
A montage of the eliminated contestant 's time on the show is played and they give their final performance .
In the eighth , ninth , tenth , and fourteenth seasons , a double elimination then took place in the week following the activation of the save , but in the eleventh and thirteenth seasons , a regular single elimination took place .
The save was not activated in the twelfth season and consequently , a non-elimination took place in the week after its expiration with the votes then carrying over into the following week .
All winners prior to season nine reportedly earned at least $ 1 million in their first year as winner .
All the runners-up of the first ten seasons , as well as some of other finalists , have also received record deals with major labels .
However , starting in season 11 , the runner-up may only be guaranteed a single-only deal .
Prominent music mogul Clive Davis also produced some of the selected contestants ' albums , such as Kelly Clarkson , Clay Aiken , Fantasia Barrino and Diana DeGarmo .
All top 10 -LRB- 11 in seasons 10 and 12 -RRB- finalists earn the privilege of going on a tour , where the participants may each earn a six-figure sum .
Each season premieres with the audition round , taking place in different cities .
The audition episodes typically feature a mix of potential finalists , interesting characters and woefully inadequate contestants .
Based on their performances during the Hollywood round -LRB- Las Vegas round for seasons 10 onwards -RRB- , 24 to 36 contestants are selected by the judges to participate in the semifinals .
From the semifinal onwards the contestants perform their songs live , with the judges making their critiques after each performance .
The results shows feature group performances by the contestants as well as guest performers .
The Top-three results show also features the homecoming events for the Top 3 finalists .
The season reaches its climax in a two-hour results finale show , where the winner of the season is revealed .
With the exception of seasons one and two , the contestants in the semifinals onwards perform in front of a studio audience .
They perform with a full band in the finals .
Assistance may also be given by vocal coaches and song arrangers , such as Michael Orland and Debra Byrd to contestants behind the scene .
In the first nine seasons , performances were usually aired live on Tuesday nights , followed by the results shows on Wednesdays in the United States and Canada , but moved to Wednesdays and Thursdays in season ten .
Guarini did not release any song immediately after the show and remains the only runner-up not to do so .
The number of episodes increased , as did the show 's budget and the charge for commercial spots .
Dunkleman left the show , leaving Seacrest as the lone host .
Clark also claimed that Abdul gave him preferential treatment on the show due to their affair .
The allegations were dismissed by Fox after an independent investigation .
This slim margin of victory was controversial due to the large number of calls that failed to get through .
His exposure on Idol landed him a record deal and surprisingly he became the third best-selling singer from that season .
All three unexpectedly landed on the bottom three on the top seven result show , with Hudson controversially eliminated .
Fantasia went on to gain some successes as a recording artist , while Hudson , who placed seventh , became the only Idol contestant so far to win both an Academy Award and a Grammy .
It remains the highest-rated season in the show 's run so far .
He was eliminated at the top four in a shocking result .
Other contestants , such as Hicks , McPhee , Bucky Covington , Mandisa , Kellie Pickler , and Elliott Yamin have had varying levels of success .
Sparks has had some success as a recording artist post-Idol .
Cornell himself said he was ` flattered ' and praised David Cook 's performance .
David Cook was taken to the hospital after the top-nine performance show due to heart palpitations and high blood pressure .
The finalists were Cook and Archuleta .
Both Cook and Archuleta had some success as recording artists with both selling over a million albums in the U.S.
From ten of the most popular submissions , each of the final two contestants chose a song to perform , although neither of their selections was used as the `` coronation song '' .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The upheaval at the judging panel continued .
The next week Katie Stevens and Andrew Garcia were eliminated .
This is the first season where neither finalist achieved significant album sales .
Many changes were introduced this season , from the format to the personnel of the show .
Karen Rodriguez was one such auditioner and reached the final rounds .
The judges used their one save on Abrams on the Top 11 , and as a result this was the first season that 11 finalists went on tour instead of 10 .
In the following week , Naima Adedapo and Thia Megia were both eliminated the following week .
Jones denied the accusation that he concealed his arrests .
He underwent surgery to remove the stones and reconstruct his kidney soon after the season had finished .
Phillips ' `` Home '' has since become the best selling of all coronation songs .
This season 's judging panel consisted of Randy Jackson , along with Mariah Carey , Keith Urban and Nicki Minaj .
For the first time in the show 's history , the top 5 contestants were all female .
Glover is the first female to win American Idol since Jordin Sparks .
Mariah Carey and Nicki Minaj left the panel after one season .
By winning , Fradiani became the first winner from the Northeast region .
Others also suggest that the Southern character of these contestants appeal to the South , as well as local pride .
who 's the nicest guy in a popularity contest , '' he says , `` And that has led to this dynasty of four , and possibly now five , consecutive , affable , very nice , good-looking white boys . ''
Voting results have been a consistent source of controversy .
That episode was placed third amongst all age groups , but more importantly it led in the 18 -- 49 demographic , the age group most valued by advertisers .
By season three , the show had become the top show in the 18 -- 49 demographic a position it has held for all subsequent years up to and including season ten , and its competition stages ranked first in the nationwide overall ratings .
The season finale saw a drop in ratings of 16 % from the previous year .
However , the ratings rebounded for the season seven finale with the excitement over the battle of the Davids , and improved over season six as the series ' third most watched finale .
The declining trend however continued into season eight , as total viewers numbers fell by 5 -- 10 % for early episodes compared to season seven , and by 9 % for the finale .
In season ten , the total viewer numbers for the first week of shows fell 12 -- 13 % , and by up to 23 % in the 18 -- 49 demo compared to season nine .
Later episodes , however , retained viewers better , and the season ended on a high with a significant increase in viewership for the finale -- up 12 % for the adults 18 -- 49 demo and a 21 % increase in total viewers from the season nine finale .
By the time of the 2010 -- 11 television season , Fox was in its seventh consecutive season of victory overall in the 18 -- 49 demographic ratings in the United States .
Season eleven , however , suffered a steep drop in ratings , a drop attributed by some to the arrival of new shows such as The Voice and The X-Factor .
The ratings for the first two episodes of season eleven fell 16 -- 21 % in overall viewer numbers and 24 -- 27 % in the 18/49 demo , while the season finale fell 27 % in total viewer number and 30 % in the 18-49 demo .
The average viewership for the season fell below 20 million viewers the first time since 2003 , a drop of 23 % in total viewers and 30 % in the 18/49 demo .
The loss of viewers continued into season 12 , which saw the show hitting a number of series low in the 18-49 demo .
Despite these changes , the show 's ratings would decline more sharply .
The enormous success of the show and the revenue it generated was transformative for Fox Broadcasting Company .
Its success also helped lift the ratings of other shows that were scheduled around it such as House and Bones , and Idol , for years , had become Fox 's strongest platform primetime television program for promoting eventual hit shows of the 2010s -LRB- of the same network -RRB- such as Glee and New Girl .
It helped create a number of highly successful recording artists , such as Kelly Clarkson , Daughtry and Carrie Underwood , as well as others of varying notability .
In 2007 , American Idol alums accounted for 2.1 % of all music sales .
The striking effect of former American Idol contestants on Broadway has been noted and commented on .
The casting of a popular Idol contestant can lead to significantly increased ticket sales .
Early reviews were mixed in their assessment .
Others , however , thought that `` the most striking aspect of the series was the genuine talent it revealed '' .
It was also described as a `` sadistic musical bake-off '' , and `` a romp in humiliation '' .
Other aspects of the show have attracted criticisms .
Lisa de Moraes of The Washington Post noted sarcastically that `` The terrorists have won '' and , with a sideswipe at the show 's commercialism and voting process , that the decision as to who `` gets to turn this important site into just another cog in the ` Great American Idol Marketing Mandala ' is in the hands of the millions of girls who have made American Idol a hit .
Them and a handful of phone-redialer geeks who have been clocking up to 10,000 calls each week for their contestant of choice -LRB- but who , according to Fox , are in absolutely no way skewing the outcome -RRB- . ''
Some in the entertainment industry were critical of the star-making aspect of the show .
Musician Michael Feinstein , while acknowledging that the show had uncovered promising performers , said that American Idol `` is n't really about music .
It 's about all the bad aspects of the music business -- the arrogance of commerce , this sense of ' I know what will make this person a star ; artists themselves do n't know . ' ''
That American Idol is seen to be a fast track to success for its contestants has been a cause of resentment for some in the industry .
It is a common theme that has been echoed by many others .
The success of the show 's alumni however has led to a more positive assessment of the show , and the show was described as having `` proven it has a valid way to pick talent and a proven way to sell records '' .
According to a CMT exec , reflecting on the success of Idol alumni in the country genre , `` if you want to try and get famous fast by going to a cattle call audition on TV , Idol reasonably remains the first choice for anyone , '' and that country music and Idol `` go together well '' .
It won the People 's Choice Award , which honors the popular culture of the previous year as voted by the public , for favorite competition/reality show in 2005 , 2006 , 2007 , 2010 , 2011 and 2012 .
It won the first Critics ' Choice Television Award in 2011 for Best Reality Competition .
The dominance of American Idol in the ratings had made it the most profitable show in U.S. TV for many years .
By season seven , the show was estimated to earn around $ 900 million from its ad revenue alone , not including ancillary sponsorship deals and other income .
Sponsors that bought fully integrated packages can expect a variety of promotions of their products on the show , such as product placement , adverts and product promotion integrated into the show , and various promotional opportunities .
Other off-air promotional partners pay for the rights to feature `` Idol '' branding on their packaging , products and marketing programs .
Estimated revenue more than doubled from $ 404 million in season three to $ 870 million in season six .
However , the sharp drop in ratings in season eleven also resulted in a sharp drop in advertising rate for season twelve , and the show lost its leading position as the costliest show for advertisers .
Ford Motor Company and Coca-Cola were two of the first sponsors of American Idol in its first season .
American Idol prominent display of its sponsors ' logo and products had been noted since the early seasons .
The top ten -LRB- eleven in season ten -RRB- toured at the end of every season .
Starting late in season five , individual performances were released during the season as digital downloads , initially from the American Idol official website only .
In Season ten the weekly studio recordings were also released as compilation digital album straight after performance night .
From 2008-2010 , Sony Music handled the distribution following their acquisition of BMG .
Those selected then performed on a stage in a 1000-seat theater replicating the Idol set .
Three judges , whose mannerisms and style mimicked those of the real Idol judges , critiqued the performances .
Audience members then voted for their favorite performer .
There were several preliminary-round shows during the day that culminated in a `` finals '' show in the evening where one of the winners of the previous rounds that day was selected as the overall winner .
In most nations these are not live broadcasts and may be tape delayed by several days or weeks .
In Latin America , the show is broadcast and subtitled by Sony Entertainment Television .
In Philippines , it is aired every Thursday and Friday nine or ten hours after its United States telecast ; from 2002 to 2007 on ABC 5 ; 2008 -- 11 on QTV , then GMA News TV ; and since 2012 on ETC. .
On Philippine television history .
In Australia , it is aired a few hours after the U.S. telecast .
It was aired on Network Ten from 2002 to 2007 and then again in 2013 , from 2008 to 2012 on Fox8 , from season 13 onwards it airs on digital channel , Eleven , a sister channel to Network Ten .
As of season 12 , the episodes air on 5 * .
It is also aired in Ireland on TV3 two days after the telecast .
In Brazil and Israel , the show airs two days after its original broadcast .
In the instances where the airing is delayed , the shows may sometimes be combined into one episode to summarize the results .
A number of contestants had been disqualified for various reasons , such as for having an existing contract or undisclosed criminal records , although the show had been accused of double standard for disqualifying some but not others .
Seasonal rankings -LRB- based on average total viewers per episode -RRB- of American Idol .
Dogs perform many roles for people , such as hunting , herding , pulling loads , protection , assisting police and military , companionship , and , more recently , aiding handicapped individuals .
The term `` domestic dog '' is generally used for both of the domesticated and feral varieties .
The word also shows the familiar petname diminutive - ga also seen in frogga `` frog '' , picga `` pig '' , stagga `` stag '' , wicga `` beetle , worm '' , among others .
It is believed this `` dog '' type was so common , it eventually became the prototype of the category `` hound '' .
Canis is a Latin word meaning dog , and the list included the dog-like carnivores : the domestic dog , wolves , foxes and jackals .
Canis familiaris is used for domestic dogs , although taxonomically it should probably be synonymous with Canis lupus . ''
Canis familiaris has page priority over Canis lupus , but both were published simultaneously in Linnaeus -LRB- 1758 -RRB- , and Canis lupus has been universally used for this species '' , which avoided classifying the wolf as the family dog .
The dog is now listed among the many other Latin-named subspecies of Canis lupus as Canis lupus familiaris .
The origin of the domestic dog -LRB- Canis lupus familiaris or Canis familiaris -RRB- is not clear .
Modern dogs are more closely related to ancient wolf fossils that have been found in Europe than they are to modern gray wolves .
Domestic dogs have been selectively bred for millennia for various behaviors , sensory capabilities , and physical attributes .
The smallest known adult dog was a Yorkshire Terrier , that stood only 6.3 cm -LRB- 2.5 in -RRB- at the shoulder , 9.5 cm -LRB- 3.7 in -RRB- in length along the head-and-body , and weighed only 113 grams -LRB- 4.0 oz -RRB- .
The tallest dog is a Great Dane that stands 106.7 cm -LRB- 42.0 in -RRB- at the shoulder .
Thus , many breeds will have an occasional `` blaze '' , stripe , or `` star '' of white fur on their chest or underside .
In some hunting dogs , however , the tail is traditionally docked to avoid injuries .
In some breeds , such as the Braque du Bourbonnais , puppies can be born with a short tail or no tail at all .
Both of these are acute conditions , and can kill rapidly .
Dogs can get it by scavenging in garbage or ashtrays ; eating cigars and cigarettes .
Signs can be vomiting of large amounts -LRB- e.g. , from eating cigar butts -RRB- or diarrhea .
Some other signs are abdominal pain , loss of coordination , collapse , or death .
Dogs are highly susceptible to theobromine poisoning , typically from ingestion of chocolate .
Individual dogs may live well beyond the median of their breed .
The median longevity of mixed-breed dogs , taken as an average of all sizes , is one or more years longer than that of purebred dogs when all breeds are averaged .
At the peak of the cycle , females will come into estrus , being mentally and physically receptive to copulation .
Because the ova survive and are capable of being fertilized for a week after ovulation , it is possible for a female to mate with more than one male .
Dogs have been shown to learn by inference .
He inferred the names of novel items by exclusion learning and correctly retrieved those novel items immediately and also 4 weeks after the initial exposure .
Dogs demonstrate a theory of mind by engaging in deception .
Another study indicated that after undergoing training to solve a simple manipulation task , dogs that are faced with an insoluble version of the same problem look at the human , while socialized wolves do not .
Behavioral scientists have uncovered a surprising set of social-cognitive abilities in the otherwise humble domestic dog .
These abilities are not possessed by the dog 's closest canine relatives nor by other highly intelligent mammals such as great apes .
Domesticated dogs are clearly distinguishable from wolves by starch gel electrophoresis of red blood cell acid phosphatase .
The tympanic bullae are large , convex and almost spherical in gray wolves , while the bullae of dogs are smaller , compressed and slightly crumpled .
Compared to equally sized wolves , dogs tend to have 20 % smaller skulls and 30 % smaller brains. :35 The teeth of gray wolves are also proportionately larger than those of dogs ; the premolars and molars of wolves are much less crowded and have more complex cusp patterns .
Wolves do not have dewclaws on their back legs , unless there has been admixture with dogs .
Dogs require fewer calories to function than wolves .
The skin of domestic dogs tends to be thicker than that of wolves , with some Inuit tribes favoring the former for use as clothing due to its greater resistance to wear and tear in harsh weather .
Some of these genes have been associated with aggression in some dog breeds , indicating their importance in both the initial domestication and then later in breed formation .
Furthermore , in areas where both dogs and other large predators live , dogs can be a major food source for big cats or canines .
In Wisconsin , more compensation has been paid for dog losses than livestock .
Some wolf pairs have been reported to prey on dogs by having one wolf lure the dog out into heavy brush where the second animal waits in ambush .
Coyotes and big cats have also been known to attack dogs .
It is common for most breeds to shed this coat .
Dog types are broad categories based on function , genetics , or characteristics .
Dog breeds are groups of animals that possess a set of inherited characteristics that distinguishes them from other animals within the same species .
Humans would also have derived enormous benefit from the dogs associated with their camps .
People and dogs have become increasingly integrated and implicated in each other 's lives , to the point where pet dogs actively shape the way a family and home are experienced .
The list of goods , services and places available is enormous : from dog perfumes , couture , furniture and housing , to dog groomers , therapists , trainers and caretakers , dog cafes , spas , parks and beaches , and dog hotels , airlines and cemeteries .
Dog training books , classes and television programs proliferated as the process of commodifying the pet dog continued .
However it has been disputed that `` trying to achieve status '' is characteristic of dog -- human interactions .
Pet dogs play an active role in family life ; for example , a study of conversations in dog -- human families showed how family members use the dog as a resource , talking to the dog , or talking through the dog , to mediate their interactions with each other .
The same survey shows nearly 40 % of American households own at least one dog , of which 67 % own just one dog , 25 % two dogs and nearly 9 % more than two dogs .
There does not seem to be any gender preference among dogs as pets , as the statistical data reveal an equal number of female and male dog pets .
Yet , although several programs are undergoing to promote pet adoption , less than a fifth of the owned dogs come from a shelter .
It is estimated that 13 -- 16 million dogs are killed and consumed in Asia every year .
Other cultures , such as Polynesia and pre-Columbian Mexico , also consumed dog meat in their history .
Dog meat is also consumed in some parts of Switzerland .
Variations of the dish contain chicken and bamboo shoots .
While the dishes are still popular in Korea with a segment of the population , dog is not as widely consumed as beef , chicken , and pork .
A 2015 study estimated that 1.8 % of the U.S. population is bitten each year .
77 % of dog bites are from the pet of family or friends , and 50 % of attacks occur on the property of the dog 's legal owner .
It has been estimated around 2 % of dog-related injuries treated in UK hospitals are domestic accidents .
Dog feces can also contain hookworms that cause cutaneous larva migrans in humans .
In one study , new guardians reported a highly significant reduction in minor health problems during the first month following pet acquisition , and this effect was sustained in those with dogs through to the end of the study .
The results provide evidence that keeping pets may have positive effects on human health and behaviour , and that for guardians of dogs these effects are relatively long-term .
Pet guardianship has also been associated with increased coronary artery disease survival , with human guardians being significantly less likely to die within one year of an acute myocardial infarction than those who did not own dogs .
The health benefits of dogs can result from contact with dogs in general , and not solely from having dogs as pets .
Dogs may have as many as 300 million odour receptors in their nose , while humans may have only 5 million .
Each dog is trained specifically for the detection of single disease from the blood glucose level indicative to diabetes to cancer .
To train a cancer dog requires 6 months .
In Welsh mythology , Annwn is guarded by Cŵn Annwn .
Jewish law does not prohibit keeping dogs and other pets .
The role of the dog in Chinese mythology includes a position as one of the twelve animals which cyclically represent years -LRB- the zodiacal dog -RRB- .
Dogs were depicted to symbolize guidance , protection , loyalty , fidelity , faithfulness , watchfulness , and love .
Some dog breeds have acquired traits through selective breeding that interfere with reproduction .
For many dogs of this breed , the female must be artificially inseminated in order to reproduce .
Although it is said that the `` dog is man 's best friend '' regarding 17 -- 24 % of dogs in the developed countries , in the developing world they are feral , village or community dogs , with pet dogs uncommon .
They would have benefited from humans ' upright gait that gives them larger range over which to see potential predators and prey , as well as color vision that , at least by day , gives humans better visual discrimination .
Camp dogs would also have benefited from human tool use , as in bringing down larger prey and controlling fire for a range of purposes .
The scientific evidence is mixed as to whether companionship of a dog can enhance human physical health and psychological wellbeing .
Large-scale counter-protests by overseas Chinese and foreign-based Chinese nationals became prevalent in later segments of the relay .
The Committee stated that the relay was being cancelled to enable the Chinese government to `` focus on the rescue and relief work '' following the Sichuan earthquake .
Each can will light the torch for 15 minutes .
It is designed by a team from Lenovo Group .
The Torch is designed in reference to the traditional Chinese concept of the 5 elements that make up the entire universe .
By the midnight deadline for concluding the negotiation on September 21 , 2007 , Taiwan and China were unable to come to terms with the issue of the Torch Relay .
In the end , both sides of the Taiwan Strait decided to eliminate the Taipei leg .
Following the recent unrest in Tibet , three members of Reporters Without Borders , including Robert Ménard , breached security and attempted to disrupt a speech by Liu Qi , the head of Beijing 's Olympic organising committee during the torch lighting ceremony in Olympia , Greece .
The People 's Republic of China called this a `` disgraceful '' attempt to sabotage the Olympics .
After the hand-off , protests continued internationally , with particularly violent confrontations with police in Nepal .
China : In China , the torch was first welcomed by Politburo Standing Committee member Zhou Yongkang and State Councilor Liu Yandong .
It was subsequently passed onto CPC General Secretary Hu Jintao .
There were also calls to extend the boycott to include French luxury goods and cosmetic products .
The Carrefour boycott was met with anti-boycott demonstrators who insisted on entering one of the Carrefour stores in Kunming , only to be blocked by boycotters wielding large Chinese flags and hit by water bottles .
The BBC reported that hundreds of people demonstrated in Beijing , Wuhan , Hefei , Kunming and Qingdao .
This gives him the distinction of the being the first active MMA fighter to carry the Olympic flame .
Home Secretary Jacqui Smith has officially complained to Beijing Organising Committee about the conduct of the tracksuit-clad Chinese security guards .
Had I known so , we would have said no . ''
The pro-Tibetan Member of Parliament Norman Baker asked all bearers to reconsider .
The London relay saw the torch surrounded by what the BBC described as `` a mobile protective ring . ''
Protests began as soon as Redgrave started the event , leading to at least thirty-five arrests .
The Chinese ambassador carried the torch through Chinatown after an unpublicized change to the route amid security concerns .
The torch made an unscheduled move onto a bus along Fleet Street amid security concerns and efforts to evade the protesters .
In an effort to counter the pro-Tibet protesters and show their support for the 2008 Beijing Olympics , more than 2,000 Chinese also gathered on the torch route and demonstrated with signs , banners and Chinese flags .
A large number of supporters were concentrated in Trafalgar Square , displaying the Olympic slogan `` One World , One Dream '' .
The relay was initially supposed to cover 28 km , but it was shortened at the demand of Chinese officials following widespread protests by pro-Tibet and human rights activists , who repeatedly attempted to disrupt , hinder or halt the procession .
Paris City officials had announced plans to greet the Olympic flame with peaceful protest when the torch was to reach the French capital .
The city government attached a banner reading `` Paris defends human rights throughout the world '' to the City Hall , in an attempt to promote values `` of all humanity and of human rights . ''
Members from Reporters Without Borders turned out in large numbers to protest .
This was later denied by the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs , despite video footage broadcast by French television network France 2 which showed Chinese flame attendants extinguishing the torch .
Backup flames are with the relay at all times to relight the torch .
They extinguished the flame despite the fact that there was no risk , and they could see it and they knew it .
I do n't know why they did it . ''
In interviews , Jin Jing said that she was `` tugged at , scratched '' and `` kicked '' , but that she `` did not feel the pain at the time . ''
The Chinese government gave the comment that `` the Chinese respect France a lot '' but `` Paris -LSB- has slapped -RSB- its own face . ''
several times as it passed .
On the day of the relay officials diverted the torch run to an unannounced route .
The route changes allowed the run to avoid large numbers of China supporters and protesters against China .
As people found out there would be no closing ceremony at Justin Herman Plaza , there were angry reactions .
One demonstrator was quoted as saying that the route changes were an effort to `` thwart any organized protest that had been planned . ''
San Francisco Board of Supervisors President Aaron Peskin , a critic of Mayor Gavin Newsom , said that it was a `` cynical plan to please the Bush State Department and the Chinese government because of the incredible influence of money . ''
Newsom , on the other hand , said he felt it was in `` everyone 's best interest '' and that he believed people had been `` afforded the right to protest and support the torch '' despite the route changes .
People who saw the torch were surprised and cheered as shown from live video of CBS and NBC .
The cost to the city for hosting the event was reported to be USD $ 726,400 , nearly half of which has been recovered by private fundraising .
Mayor Gavin Newsom said that `` exponential '' costs associated with mass arrests were avoided by his decision to change the route in consultation with police chief Heather Fong .
Some advocates for Tibet , Darfur , and the spiritual practice Falun Gong , planned to protest the April 9 arrival of the torch in San Francisco .
Free Tibet '' , and the other , `` Free Tibet ' 08 '' .
`` Sutherlin said he was worried that the torch 's planned route through Tibet would lead to more arrests and Chinese officials would use force to stifle dissent . ''
The torch was lit at a park outside at AT&T Park at about 1:17 pm PDT -LRB- 20:17 UTC -RRB- , briefly held aloft by American and Chinese Olympic officials .
There were clashes between thousands of pro-China demonstrators , many of whom said they were bused in by the Chinese Consulate and other pro-China groups , and both pro-Tibet and Darfur protesters .
The non-Chinese demonstrators were reported to have been swamped and trailed by angry crowds .
Television reports showed the flame flanked by motorcycles and uniformed police officers .
Two torchbearers carried the flame running slowly behind a truck and surrounded by Olympic security guards .
The closing ceremony at Justin Herman Plaza was canceled due to the presence of large numbers of protesters at the site .
San Jose Mercury News described the `` deceiving '' event as `` a game of Where 's Waldo , played against the landscape of a lovely city . ''
International Olympic Committee President Jacques Rogge said the San Francisco relay had `` fortunately '' avoided much of the disruptions that marred the legs in London and Paris , but `` was , however , not the joyous party that we had wished it to be . ''
The leg finished at the Buenos Aires Riding Club in the Palermo district , the last torchbearer being Gabriela Sabatini .
The 13.8 km route included landmarks like the obelisk and Plaza de Mayo .
The day was marked by several pro-Tibet protests , which included a giant banner reading `` Free Tibet '' , and an alternative `` human rights torch '' that was lit by protesters and paraded along the route the flame was to take .
Most of these protests were peaceful in nature , and the torch was not impeded .
Chinese immigrants also turned out in support of the Games , but only minor scuffles were reported between both groups .
Runners surrounded by rows of security carried the Olympic flame past thousands of jubilant Argentines in the most trouble-free torch relay in nearly a week .
Argentine activists told a news conference that they would not try to snuff out the torch 's flame as demonstrators had in Paris and London .
`` We 'll be carrying out surprise actions throughout the city of Buenos Aires , but all of these will be peaceful . ''
Congressman Tom Lanto 's wife and Ambassador Mark Palmer of NED .
The torch was lit by Vice-President Ali Mohamed Shein .
About a thousand people followed the relay , waving the Olympic flag .
The only noted instance of protest was Nobel Peace Prize laureate Wangari Maathai 's withdrawal from the list of torchbearers , in protest against human rights abuses in Tibet .
No protests or incidents were reported .
One of the torchbearers was Syrian actress Sulaf Fawakherji .
Security was high , for what one newspaper called the `` most sensitive leg '' of the torch 's Olympic journey .
The relay was initially supposed to carry the torch around Islamabad , but the entire relay was cancelled due to security concerns regarding `` militant threats or anti-China protests '' , and replaced by an indoors ceremony with the torch carried around the track of Jinnah Stadium .
In fear of violent protests and bomb attacks , the torch relay in Pakistan took place in a stadium behind closed doors .
Although the relay was behind closed doors , thousands of policemen and soldiers guarded the flame .
As a consequence , no incidents arose .
It concluded at the India Gate .
The event was peaceful due to the public not being allowed at the relay .
Bhutia , who is Sikkimese , is the first athlete to refuse to run with the torch .
Indian film star Aamir Khan states on his personal blog that the `` Olympic Games do not belong to China '' and confirms taking part in the torch relay `` with a prayer in his heart for the people of Tibet , and ... for all people across the world who are victims of human rights violations '' .
Rahul Gandhi , son of the Congress President Sonia Gandhi and scion of the Nehru-Gandhi family , also refused to carry the torch .
The torch was carried past Democracy Monument , Chitralada Palace and a number of other city landmarks .
Several hundred protesters were present , along with Olympic supporters .
A coalition of Thai human rights groups announced that it would organise a `` small demonstration '' during the relay , and several hundred people did indeed take part in protests , facing Beijing supporters .
Among the landmarks the Olympic flame passed next to were the Parliament House , National Mosque , KL Tower and Merdeka Stadium .
As many as 1,000 personnel from the special police unit were expected to be deployed on the day of the relay .
One of the protesting Malaysian was hit in the head .
Several dozen pro-Tibet protesters gathered near the stadium , and were dispersed by the police .
The event was held in the streets around the city main 's stadium .
The cancelling of the relay through the city itself was decided due to security concerns and at the request of the Chinese embassy .
Protests took place outside the stadium .
Hundreds of pro-Tibet protesters and thousands of Chinese students reportedly attended .
Demonstrators and counter-demonstrators were kept apart by the Australian Federal Police .
Australian authorities stated that such a request , if it were to be made , would be refused .
Chinese officials labeled it a rumor .
It is obviously a well-coordinated plan to take the day by weight of numbers .
But we have assurances that it will be done peacefully . ''
.
People demonstrated both for China and for Tibet .
At least five people were arrested during the torch relay .
Police said `` the five were arrested for interfering with the event under special powers enacted in the wake of massive protests against Chinese policy toward Tibet . ''
At one point , groups of Chinese students surrounded and intimidated pro-Tibet protesters .
One person had to be pulled aboard a police launch when a group of pro-Chinese students looked like they might force him into the lake .
as well as the risk of disruption by violent protests .
Parts of Zenkō-ji temple 's main building -LRB- Zenkō-ji Hondō -RRB- , reconstructed in 1707 and one of the National Treasures of Japan , was then vandalized with spraypaint .
An event the city had planned to hold at the Minami Nagano Sports Park following the torch relay was also canceled out of concern about disruptions caused by demonstrators protesting against China 's recent crackdown in Tibet .
Thousands of riot police were mobilized to protect the torch along its route .
The show of force kept most protesters in check , but slogans shouted by pro-China or pro-Tibet demonstrators , Japanese nationalists , and human rights organizations flooded the air .
Five men were arrested and four injured amidst scenes of mob violence .
The torch route was packed with mostly peaceful demonstrators .
The public was not allowed at the parking lot where the relay started .
After the Zenkoji monks held a prayer ceremony for victims of the recent events in Tibet .
More than 100 police officers ran with the torch and riot police lined the streets while three helicopters flew above .
A man with a Tibetan flag tried to stop the torch at the beginning of the relay but was dragged off by police .
Some raw eggs were also thrown from the crowd .
Intended torchbearers Choi Seung-kook and Park Won-sun boycotted the event to protest against the Chinese government 's crackdown in Tibet .
A North Korean defector whose brother defected to China but was captured and executed by the DPRK , attempted to set himself on fire in protest of China 's treatment of North Korean refugees .
He poured gasoline on himself but police quickly surrounded him and carried him away .
Two other demonstrators tried to storm the torch but failed .
Fighting broke out near the beginning of the relay between a group of 500 Chinese supporters and approximately 50 protesters who carried a banner that read : `` Free North Korean refugees in China . ''
The students threw stones and water bottles as approximately 2,500 police tried to keep the groups separated .
Police said they arrested five people , including a Chinese student who was arrested for allegedly throwing rocks .
Thousands of Chinese followed the torch on its 4.5 hour journey , some chanting , `` Go China , go Olympics ! ''
By the end of the relay , Chinese students became violent , and it was reported in Korean media that they were `` lynching '' everyone who was disagreeing with them .
One police man was also rushed to hospital after being attacked by Chinese students .
On Apr 29 , the Secretary of Justice , Kim Kyung Han , told the prime minister that he will find `` every single Chinese who was involved and bring them to justice . ''
Later in the day , South Korea 's Prosecutor 's Office , National Police Agency , Ministry of Foreign Affairs and National Intelligence Service made a joint statement saying that they will be deporting every Chinese student that was involved in the incident .
China defended the conduct of the students .
North Korea : The event was held in Pyongyang on April 28 .
It was the first time that the Olympic torch has traveled to North Korea .
The event was presided over by the head of the country 's parliament , Kim Yong Nam .
The North , an ally of China , has been critical of disruptions to the torch relay elsewhere and has supported Beijing in its actions against protests in Tibet .
`` It was unconscionable , '' said a UN official who was briefed on the arguments .
Outside Vietnam , there were protests by overseas Vietnamese in Paris , San Francisco and Canberra .
No politicians from the pro-democracy camp were selected as torchbearers .
One torchbearer could not participate due to flight delay .
It was estimated that more than 200,000 spectators came out and watched the relay .
Many enthusiastic supporters wore red shirts and waved large Chinese flags .
According to Hong Kong Chief Secretary for Administration Henry Tang , 3,000 police were deployed to ensure order .
There were several protests along the torch relay route .
Pro-democracy activists were overwhelmed by a crowd of torch supporters with insults like `` running dog , '' `` traitor , '' `` get out !
, '' and `` I love the Communist Party . ''
At the same time , about 10 members of the Civil Human Rights Front had orange banners calling for human rights improvements and universal suffrage .
Onlookers were saying `` Are n't you Chinese ? ''
in Mandarin putonghua as they tried to cover the orange banners with a large Chinese national flag .
One woman had an orange sign that said , `` Olympic flame for democracy '' , while a man carried a poster with a tank and the slogan `` One world , two dreams '' .
Several onlookers heckled Chan , shouting `` What kind of Chinese are you ? ''
and `` What a shame ! ''
Chan is currently -LSB- when ? -RSB-
-LRB- case number HCAL139/08 -RRB-
In response , Lee Cheuk Yan , vice chairman of the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements in China , said , `` It 's outrageous that the government is willing to sacrifice the image of Hong Kong because of the torch relay . ''
She later gave a speech criticizing China 's relations with Sudan in Hong Kong , as there was also a small minority of people protesting about China 's role in the crisis of Darfur .
It was the first time that the Olympic torch had traveled to Macau .
Afterward , the torch traveled through Macau , passing by a number of landmarks including A-Ma Temple , Macau Tower , Ponte Governador Nobre de Carvalho , Ponte de Sai Van , Macau Cultural Centre , Macau Stadium and then back to the Fisherman 's Wharf for the closing ceremony .
Parts of the route near Ruins of St. Paul 's and Taipa was shortened due to large crowds of supporters blocking narrow streets .
-LRB- some of whom had already been torchbearers of other sporting events -RRB-
This fueled speculation that the shutdowns were targeting speeches against the relay .
About 2,200 police were deployed on the streets , there were no interruptions .
China : The torch returned to China for the first time since April .
The entire relay through Mainland China was largely a success with many people welcoming the arrival of the torch along the way .
The coverage of the events by the media came under scrutiny during the relay .
However , the Chinese media published articles about crowds supporting the torch relay .
The Beijing Organising Committee for the Games mentioned the `` smiling faces of the elderly , children and the artists on the streets '' , of cheering and supportive Londoners .
Reports on the Delhi relay were similarly distinct .
The Telegraph also asked its readers to send their views in response to the question `` Is the West demonising China ? ''
The BBC reported on a demonstration in Sydney by Chinese Australians `` voicing support for Beijing amid controversy over Tibet '' and protesting against what they saw as Western media bias .
The report showed demonstrators carrying signs which read `` Shame on some Western media '' , `` BBC CNN lies too '' and `` Stop media distortion ! ''
.
One demonstrator interviewed by the BBC stated : `` I saw some news from CNN , from the BBC , some media -LSB- inaudible -RSB- , and they are just lying . ''
CNN issued a statement on April 14 , responded to China over ` thugs and goons ' comment by Jack Cafferty .
He also quoted critical Chinese responses , and invited readers to comment .
It included images of Chinese people demonstrating in France , the United Kingdom , Germany and the United States .
One picture showed Chinese demonstrators holding a sign which claimed , incorrectly , that the BBC had not reported on Jin Jing .
The People 's Daily quoted one protestor who claimed the `` BBC on some of the recent events has misled the British public and the rest of the world by providing intensive untruthful reports and biased coverage . ''
A Chinese government spokesman insisted the site was spontaneously set up by a Chinese citizen angered over media coverage .
There were also calls to extend the boycott to include French luxury goods and cosmetic products .
Some shoppers who insisted on entering one of the Carrefour stores in Kunming were blocked by boycotters wielding large Chinese flags and hit by water bottles .
Hundreds of people joined Anti-French rallies in Beijing , Wuhan , Hefei , Kunming and Qingdao , which quickly spread to other cities like Xi'an , Harbin and Jinan .
Carrefour denied any support or involvement in the Tibetan issue , and had its staff in its Chinese stores wear uniforms emblazoned with the Chinese national flag and caps with Olympic insignia and as well as the words `` Beijing 2008 '' to show its support for the games .
The effort had to be ceased when the BOCOG deemed the use of official Olympic insignia as illegal and a violation of copyright .
Washizawa 's aides said the mayor 's remark was not criticism about the relay itself but about the potential disruptions and confusion surrounding it .
A city employee of the Nagano City Office ridiculed the protests in Europe , he said `` They are doing something foolish '' , in a televised interview .
Nagano City officially apologized later and explained what he had wanted to say was `` Such violent protests were not easy to accept '' .
The Olympic Flame is supposed to remain lit for the whole relay .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
A union planned to protest at the relay for better living conditions .
This arrangement has however sparked several controversies .
Whitehead did not begin his career as a philosopher .
Whitehead was unimpressed by this objection .
In the notes of one his students for a 1927 class , Whitehead was quoted as saying : `` Every scientific man in order to preserve his reputation has to say he dislikes metaphysics .
What he means is he dislikes having his metaphysics criticized . ''
They are useful abstractions , but are not the world 's basic building blocks .
After all , people change all the time , if only because they have aged by another second and had some further experience .
On the other hand , what ordinary thinking often regards as `` the essence of a thing '' or `` the identity/core of a person '' is an abstract generalization of what is regarded as that person or thing 's most important or salient features across time .
A student taking notes in one of Whitehead 's fall 1924 classes wrote that :
However , it was not until the 1970s and 1980s that Whitehead 's thought drew much attention outside of a small group of philosophers and theologians , primarily Americans , and even today he is not considered especially influential outside of relatively specialized circles .
In physics , Whitehead 's thought has had some influence .
He articulated a view that might perhaps be regarded as dual to Einstein 's general relativity , see Whitehead 's theory of gravitation .
Yutaka Tanaka , who suggests that the gravitational constant disagrees with experimental findings , proposes that Einstein 's work does not actually refute Whitehead 's formulation .
An exact replacement of Whitehead 's cosmology would need to admit a Riemannian geometry .
Also , although Whitehead himself gave only secondary consideration to quantum theory , his metaphysics of processes has proved attractive to some physicists in that field .
This work has been pioneered by John B. Cobb , Jr. , whose book Is It Too Late ?
A Theology of Ecology -LRB- 1971 -RRB- was the first single-authored book in environmental ethics .
This has led in part to a focus on identifying and investigating the effect of temporal events -LRB- as opposed to static things -RRB- within organizations through an `` organization studies '' discourse that accommodates a variety of ` weak ' and ` strong ' process perspectives from a number of philosophers .
Whitehead himself recalled both of them as being very successful schoolmasters , but that his grandfather was the more extraordinary man .
This is not to say that Whitehead 's thought was widely accepted or even well-understood .
Wieman 's words proved prophetic .
As a human being 's actions can not always be predicted , the same can be said of where a tree 's roots will grow , or how an electron will move , or whether it will rain tomorrow .
Since Whitehead 's metaphysics described a universe in which all entities experience , he needed a new way of describing perception that was not limited to living , self-conscious beings .
For Whitehead , the term `` prehension '' indicates that the perceiver actually incorporates aspects of the perceived thing into itself .
By way of illustration , Whitehead uses the example of a person 's encounter with a chair .
This is not the normal human reaction ; most people place objects in categories by habit and instinct , without even thinking about it .
Moreover , animals do the same thing .
Whitehead 's idea of God differs from traditional monotheistic notions .
Rather than springing primarily from religious faith , Whitehead saw God as necessary for his metaphysical system .
However , Whitehead was also interested in religious experience .
As Whitehead puts it , '' -LSB- God -RSB- saves the world as it passes into the immediacy of his own life .
God gives creatures permanence , while the creatures give God actuality and change .
Here it is worthwhile to quote Whitehead at length :
While he acknowledged that individuals can not ever be fully separated from their society , he argued that life is an internal fact for its own sake before it is an external fact relating to others .
Whitehead writes further that each entity `` can find no such value till it has merged its individual claim with that of the objective universe .
Religion is world-loyalty .
Overall , however , Whitehead 's influence is very difficult to characterize .
However , process theology has been formulated in a wide variety of ways .
Franklin I. Gamwell writes on theology and political theory .
As the glut in global investment capital caused the yields on credit assets to decline , asset managers were faced with the choice of either investing in assets where returns did not reflect true credit risk or returning funds to clients .
IndyMac Bancorp filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in July 2008 .
IndyMac concluded that these downgrades would have negatively impacted the Company 's risk-based capital ratio as of June 30 , 2008 .
The letter outlined the Senator 's concerns with IndyMac .
Until then , depositors would have access their insured deposits through ATMs , their existing checks , and their existing debit cards .
Telephone and Internet account access was restored when the bank reopened .
Yet , even with the pending sale of Indymac to IMB Management Holdings , an estimated 10,000 uninsured depositors of Indymac are still at a loss of over $ 270 million .
Initially the companies affected were those directly involved in home construction and mortgage lending such as Northern Rock and Countrywide Financial , as they could no longer obtain financing through the credit markets .
Several major institutions either failed , were acquired under duress , or were subject to government takeover .
These included Lehman Brothers , Merrill Lynch , Fannie Mae , Freddie Mac , Washington Mutual , Wachovia , Citigroup , and AIG .
Fuld said he was a victim of the collapse , blaming a `` crisis of confidence '' in the markets for dooming his firm .
This interrupted the ability of corporations to rollover -LRB- replace -RRB- their short-term debt .
The U.S. government responded by extending insurance for money market accounts analogous to bank deposit insurance via a temporary guarantee and with Federal Reserve programs to purchase commercial paper .
There is a direct relationship between declines in wealth and declines in consumption and business investment , which along with government spending , represent the economic engine .
Total retirement assets , Americans ' second-largest household asset , dropped by 22 % , from $ 10.3 trillion in 2006 to $ 8 trillion in mid-2008 .
During the same period , savings and investment assets -LRB- apart from retirement savings -RRB- lost $ 1.2 trillion and pension assets lost $ 1.3 trillion .
Taken together , these losses total a staggering $ 8.3 trillion .
Since peaking in the second quarter of 2007 , household wealth is down $ 14 trillion .
In November 2008 , economist Dean Baker observed : `` There is a really good reason for tighter credit .
Businesses are facing the worst downturn since the Great Depression .
This matters for credit decisions .
A homeowner with equity in her home is very unlikely to default on a car loan or credit card debt .
They will draw on this equity rather than lose their car and/or have a default placed on their credit record .
Several commentators have suggested that if the liquidity crisis continues , an extended recession or worse could occur .
The financial crisis is likely to yield the biggest banking shakeout since the savings-and-loan meltdown .
The United Kingdom had started systemic injection , and the world 's central banks were now cutting interest rates .
UBS emphasized the United States needed to implement systemic injection .
UBS further emphasized that this fixes only the financial crisis , but that in economic terms `` the worst is still to come '' .
The economic crisis in Iceland involved all three of the country 's major banks .
Some developing countries that had seen strong economic growth saw significant slowdowns .
Especially states with a fragile political system have to fear that investors from Western states withdraw their money because of the crisis .
This group is in the best position to absorb the economic shocks .
They entered the crisis in exceptionally strong positions .
Significantly lower oil prices could cause a reversal of economic performance as has been the case in past oil shocks .
Initial impact will be seen on public finances and employment for foreign workers .
With the decline of gross domestic product came the decline in innovation .
Compared to the previous 5 years of exponential increases in patent application , this stagnation correlates to the similar drop in GDP during the same time period .
Lending to AA-rated sovereigns has a risk-weight of zero , thus increasing lending to governments and leading to the next crisis .
The crisis completely overturned this relationship .
In the tables , the names of emergent economies are shown in boldface type , while the names of developed economies are in Roman -LRB- regular -RRB- type .
Three years later , commercial real estate started feeling the effects .
Denice A. Gierach , a real estate attorney and CPA , wrote :
As prices declined , borrowers with adjustable-rate mortgages could not refinance to avoid the higher payments associated with rising interest rates and began to default .
By August 2008 , 9.2 % of all U.S. mortgages outstanding were either delinquent or in foreclosure .
Financing these deficits required the country to borrow large sums from abroad , much of it from countries running trade surpluses .
Clayton 's analysis further showed that 39 % of these loans -LRB- i.e. those not meeting any issuer 's minimal underwriting standards -RRB- were subsequently securitized and sold to investors .
Such loans were written into extensively detailed contracts , and swapped for more expensive loan products on the day of closing .
In other cases , laws were changed or enforcement weakened in parts of the financial system .
Key examples include :
The shift from first-loss tranches to AAA tranches was seen by regulators as a risk reduction that compensated the higher leverage .
With the exception of Lehman , these companies required or received government support .
Lehman reported that it had been in talks with Bank of America and Barclays for the company 's possible sale .
However , both Barclays and Bank of America ultimately declined to purchase the entire company .
Indeed , we have been in the grips of precisely this adverse feedback loop for more than a year .
Consumers are pulling back on purchases , especially on durable goods , to build their savings .
And , financial institutions are shrinking assets to bolster capital and improve their chances of weathering the current storm .
Once again , Minsky understood this dynamic .
He spoke of the paradox of deleveraging , in which precautions that may be smart for individuals and firms -- and indeed essential to return the economy to a normal state -- nevertheless magnify the distress of the economy as a whole . ''
These products vary in complexity and the ease with which they can be valued on the books of financial institutions .
As described in the section on subprime lending , the CDS and portfolio of CDS called synthetic CDO enabled a theoretically infinite amount to be wagered on the finite value of housing loans outstanding , provided that buyers and sellers of the derivatives could be found .
For example , buying a CDS to insure a CDO ended up giving the seller the same risk as if they owned the CDO , when those CDO 's became worthless .
Instead of spreading risk this provided the ground for fraudulent acts , misjudgments and finally market collapse .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
For example , the pricing model for CDOs clearly did not reflect the level of risk they introduced into the system .
It was a shocking abdication of responsibility . ''
Despite the dominance of the above formula , there are documented attempts of the financial industry , occurring before the crisis , to address the formula limitations , specifically the lack of dependence dynamics and the poor representation of extreme events .
These entities became critical to the credit markets underpinning the financial system , but were not subject to the same regulatory controls .
This meant that disruptions in credit markets would make them subject to rapid deleveraging , selling their long-term assets at depressed prices .
He described the significance of these entities :
The authors also indicate that some forms of securitization are `` likely to vanish forever , having been an artifact of excessively loose credit conditions . ''
Investors are also uncertain about coming legal and accounting rule changes and regulatory reforms .
Issuance of residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities and CDOs remains dormant . ''
A pattern of spiking instability in the price of oil over the decade leading up to the price high of 2008 has been recently identified .
The destabilizing effects of this price variance has been proposed as a contributory factor in the financial crisis .
Mr Greenberger was later corrected on this matter .
, Rajan `` argued that disaster might loom . ''
Rajan argued that financial sector managers were encouraged to `` take risks that generate severe adverse consequences with small probability but , in return , offer generous compensation the rest of the time .
But perhaps the most important concern is whether banks will be able to provide liquidity to financial markets so that if the tail risk does materialise , financial positions can be unwound and losses allocated so that the consequences to the real economy are minimised . ''
A number of heterodox economists predicted the crisis , with varying arguments .
Examples of other experts who gave indications of a financial crisis have also been given .
Popular articles published in the mass media have led the general public to believe that the majority of economists have failed in their obligation to predict the financial crisis .
`` It 's very troubling if you have a mirror image , '' said Dow .
The past two years ranked third , however .
Ultimately , loans were made to many borrowers who simply could not afford to make their payments .
The thrift remained profitable only as long as it was able to sell those loans in the secondary mortgage market .
Typical American families did not fare as well , nor did those `` wealthy-but-not wealthiest '' families just beneath the pyramid 's top .
As a consequence , starting from November 2008 , several countries launched large `` help packages '' for their economies .
The response of the Federal Reserve , the European Central Bank , the Bank of England and other central banks was immediate and dramatic .
This was the largest liquidity injection into the credit market , and the largest monetary policy action , in world history .
By creating $ 600 billion and inserting -LSB- clarification needed -RSB- this directly into banks , the Federal Reserve intended to spur banks to finance more domestic loans and refinance mortgages .
Banks were also investing in foreign currencies , which Stiglitz and others point out may lead to currency wars while China redirects its currency holdings away from the United States .
These bills must now be reconciled .
The New York Times provided a comparative summary of the features of the two bills , which address to varying extent the principles enumerated by the Obama administration .
In many areas , the housing market also suffered , resulting in evictions , foreclosures and prolonged unemployment .
Questions regarding bank solvency , declines in credit availability and damaged investor confidence had an impact on global stock markets , where securities suffered large losses during 2008 and early 2009 .
Economies worldwide slowed during this period , as credit tightened and international trade declined .
Governments and central banks responded with unprecedented fiscal stimulus , monetary policy expansion and institutional bailouts .
Many causes for the financial crisis have been suggested , with varying weight assigned by experts .
Research into the causes of the financial crisis has also focused on the role of interest rate spreads .
Some experts believe these institutions had become as important as commercial -LRB- depository -RRB- banks in providing credit to the U.S. economy , but they were not subject to the same regulations .
However , as market power shifted from securitizers to originators and as intense competition from private securitizers undermined GSE power , mortgage standards declined and risky loans proliferated .
Some believe this was an early warning to the systemic risk that the growing market in subprime mortgages posed to the U.S. financial system that went unheeded .
The majority of these were prime loans .
In addition , an analysis by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas in 2009 , however , concluded that the CRA was not responsible for the mortgage loan crisis , pointing out that CRA rules have been in place since 1995 whereas the poor lending emerged only a decade later .
Furthermore , most sub-prime loans were not made to the LMI borrowers targeted by the CRA , especially in the years 2005 -- 2006 leading up to the crisis .
Nor did it find any evidence that lending under the CRA rules increased delinquency rates or that the CRA indirectly influenced independent mortgage lenders to ramp up sub-prime lending .
To other analysts the delay between CRA rule changes -LRB- in 1995 -RRB- and the explosion of subprime lending is not surprising , and does not exonerate the CRA .
Both causes had to be in place before the crisis could take place .
Others have pointed out that there were not enough of these loans made to cause a crisis of this magnitude .
It lies northeast of Saba and St Eustatius , and north of St Kitts .
A much bigger islet , Île Fourchue , lies on the north of the island , in the Saint-Barthélemy Channel .
Most of them are descendants of the first settlers , of Breton , Norman , Poitevin , Saintongeais and Angevin lineage .
English is understood in hotels and restaurants , and a small population of Anglophones have been resident in Gustavia for many years .
-LSB- page needed -RSB-
Duty-free port attractions , retail trade , high-end tourism -LRB- mostly from North America -RRB- and its luxury hotels and villas have increased the island 's prosperity , reflected in the high standard of living of its citizens .
Hotels are classified in the traditional French manner ; 3 Star , 4 Star and 4 Star Luxe .
Of particular note are Eden Rock and Cheval Blanc .
The island 's tourism industry , though expensive , attracts 70,000 visitors every year to its luxury hotels and villas and another 130,000 people arrive by luxury boats .
During the rainy season the area turns green with vegetation and grass .
Important plants noted on the island are :
They are a protected species and in the endangered list .
It is stated that it will take 15 -- 50 years for this species to attain reproductive age .
Though they live in the sea , the females come to the shore to lay eggs and are protected by private societies .
Three species of turtles are particularly notable .
The marine life found here consists of anemones , urchins , sea cucumbers , and eels , which all live on the reefs along with turtles , conch and many varieties of marine fishes .
Its meat is a favourite food supplement item and their shells are a collectors item .
They spend some months in the sea during and after the hatching season .
The Reserve includes the bays of Grand Cul de Sac , Colombier , Marigot , Petit Cul de Sac , Petite Anse as well as waters around offshore rocks such as Les Gross Islets , Pain de Sucre , Tortue and Forchue .
The Reserve has two levels of protection , the yellow zones of protection where certain non-extractive activities , like snorkeling and boating , are allowed and the red zones of high protection where most activities including SCUBA are restricted in order to protect or recover marine life .
However , the ruins have been replaced by a modern military building which now houses the local gendarmerie .
The other fort known as Fort Karl now presents a very few ruins .
French cuisine , West Indian cuisine , Creole cuisine , Italian cuisine and Asian cuisine are common in St. Barthélemy .
Kitesurfing and other water sports have also become popular on the island in recent years , especially at Grand Cul-de-Sac beach -LRB- Baie de Grand Cul de Sac -RRB- for windy sports as kitesurfing and Saint Jean Beach -LRB- Baie de Saint Jean -RRB- , Lorient , Toiny and Anse des Cayes for surfing .
Tennis is also popular on the island and it has several tennis clubs , Tennis Clube de Flamboyant in Grand Cul-de-Sac , AJOE Tennis Club in Orient and ASCO in Colombier .
Several international airlines and domestic Caribbean airlines operate in this sector .
St. Barthélemy lies about 35 kilometres -LRB- 22 mi -RRB- southeast of St. Martin and north of St. Kitts .
Symbolism from the Swedish national arms , the Three Crowns , still appears in the island 's coat of arms .
The language , cuisine , and culture , however , are distinctly French .
The island of Saint Barthélemy became an Overseas Collectivity -LRB- COM -RRB- .
A governing territorial council was elected for its administration , which has provided the island with a certain degree of autonomy .
St. Barthélemy has retained its free port status .
In the bight of St. Jean Bay there is a narrow cut through the reef .
The beach of St Jean is suitable for water sports and facilities have been created for that purpose .
The long beach at Lorient has shade and is a quiet beach as compared to St. Jean .
The eastern side is wetter than the western .
Winter from December to April is the dry season .
Sunshine is very prominent for nearly the entire year and even during the rainy season .
Humidity , however , is not very high due to the winds .
The average temperature is around 25 °C with day temperatures rising to 32 °C .
The average high and low temperatures in January are 28 °C and 22 °C , respectively , while in July they are 30 °C and 24 °C .
The Caribbean sea waters in the vicinity generally maintain a temperature of about 27 °C .
It was then their prime trading center .
They used it as trading post of contraband and the city of Gustavia prospered but this prosperity was short lived .
The museum is housed in an old stone house , a two-storey building which has been refurbished .
It also houses a library .
The genome includes both the genes and the non-coding sequences of the DNA/RNA .
The Oxford Dictionary suggests the name to be a blend of the words gene and chromosome .
However , see omics for a more thorough discussion .
Some organisms have multiple copies of chromosomes : diploid , triploid , tetraploid and so on .
The term genome can be applied specifically to mean what is stored on a complete set of nuclear DNA -LRB- i.e. , the `` nuclear genome '' -RRB- but can also be applied to what is stored within organelles that contain their own DNA , as with the `` mitochondrial genome '' or the `` chloroplast genome '' .
Additionally , the genome can comprise non-chromosomal genetic elements such as viruses , plasmids , and transposable elements .
Even in species that exist in only one sex , what is described as a `` genome sequence '' may be a composite read from the chromosomes of various individuals .
Colloquially , the phrase `` genetic makeup '' is sometimes used to signify the genome of a particular individual or organism .
A few months later , the first eukaryotic genome was completed , with sequences of the 16 chromosomes of budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae published as the result of a European-led effort begun in the mid-1980s .
The development of new technologies has made it dramatically easier and cheaper to do sequencing , and the number of complete genome sequences is growing rapidly .
A genome map is less detailed than a genome sequence and aids in navigating around the genome .
In prokaryotes , most of the genome -LRB- 85 -- 90 % -RRB- is non-repetitive DNA , which means coding DNA mainly forms it , while non-coding regions only take a small part .
In such circumstances then , `` genome '' describes all of the genes and information on non-coding DNA that have the potential to be present .
So although these organisms contain chloroplasts or mitochondria that have their own DNA , the genetic information contained by DNA within these organelles is not considered part of the genome .
Since genomes are very complex , one research strategy is to reduce the number of genes in a genome to the bare minimum and still have the organism in question survive .
A bigger genome does not mean more genes , and the proportion of non-repetitive DNA decreases along with increasing genome size in higher eukaryotes .
It had been found that the proportion of non-repetitive DNA can vary a lot between species .
Higher eukaryotes tend to have more repetitive DNA than non-repetitive ones .
Interspersed repeats mainly come from transposable elements -LRB- TEs -RRB- , but they also include some protein coding gene families and pseudogenes .
Retrotransposons can be divided into Long terminal repeats -LRB- LTRs -RRB- and Non-Long Terminal Repeats -LRB- Non-LTR -RRB- .
Genomes are more than the sum of an organism 's genes and have traits that may be measured and studied without reference to the details of any particular genes and their products .
Duplication may range from extension of short tandem repeats , to duplication of a cluster of genes , and all the way to duplication of entire chromosomes or even entire genomes .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Comprehensive schools are primarily about providing an entitlement curriculum to all children , without selection whether due to financial considerations or attainment .
Providing post-16 education cost-effectively becomes more challenging for smaller comprehensive schools , because of the number of courses needed to cover a broader curriculum with comparatively fewer students .
Comprehensive schools do not select their intake on the basis of academic achievement or aptitude , but there are demographic reasons why the attainment profiles of different schools vary considerably .
In these schools children could be selected on the basis of curriculum aptitude related to the school 's specialism even though the schools do take quotas from each quartile of the attainment range to ensure they were not selective by attainment .
A problem with this is whether the quotas should be taken from a normal distribution or from the specific distribution of attainment in the immediate catchment area .
In the selective school system , which survives in several parts of the United Kingdom , admission is dependent on selection criteria , most commonly a cognitive test or tests .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- -LRB- though this is a small number compared to approximately 3500 state secondary schools in England -RRB- .
Most comprehensives are secondary schools for children between the ages of 11 to 16 , but in a few areas there are comprehensive middle schools , and in some places the secondary level is divided into two , for students aged 11 to 14 and those aged 14 to 18 , roughly corresponding to the US middle school -LRB- or junior high school -RRB- and high school , respectively .
With the advent of key stages in the National Curriculum some local authorities reverted from the Middle School system to 11 -- 16 and 11 -- 18 schools so that the transition between schools corresponds to the end of one key stage and the start of another .
The division to lower comprehensive school -LRB- grades 1 -- 6 , ala-aste , alakoulu -RRB- and upper comprehensive school -LRB- grades 7 -- 9 , yläaste , yläkoulu -RRB- has been discontinued .
While some German schools such as the Gymnasium and the Realschule have rather strict entrance requirements , the Gesamtschule does not have such requirements .
The percentage of students attending a Gesamtschule varies by Bundesland .
Gesamtschule senior students of average mathematical ability found themselves in the upper half of their class and had an average grade of `` Three Plus '' .
When a central Abitur examination was established in the State of North Rhine-Westphalia , it was revealed that Gesamtschule students did worse than could be predicted by their grades or class rank .
-LSB- ... -RSB- The comprehensives do not help students achieve -LSB- ... -RSB- I am sick and tired of the comprehensive schools blaming their problems on the social class origins of their students .
What kind of attitude is this to blame their own students ?
She also called the Abitur awarded by the Gymnasium the true Abitur and the Abitur awarded by the Gesamtschule `` Abitur light '' .
She also said that many of the students awarded the Abitur by the comprehensives came from `` underprivileged groups '' and sneering at their performance was a `` piece of impudence '' .
Also working class students attending a Gymnasium or a Realschule outperform students from similar backgrounds attending a comprehensive .
While working class alumni of comprehensive schools were awarded better school diplomas at age 35 , they held similar occupational positions as working class alumni of the tripartite system and were as unlikely to graduate from college .
Between the ages of 12 and 16 two comprehensive schools cater for girls and boys separately .
Until then , education in Ireland was largely dominated by religious persuasion , particularly the voluntary secondary school system was a particular realisation of this .
The Irish word for a comprehensive school is a ` scoil chuimsitheach . '
The comprehensive model generally incorporated older schools that were under Roman Catholic or Protestant ownership , and the various denominations still manage the school as patrons or trustees .
The model was adopted to make state schools more acceptable to a largely conservative society of the time .
Community schools are divided into two models , the community school vested in the Minister for Education and the community college vested in the local Education and Training Board .
The first comprehensives were set up after the Second World War .
The policy decision was implemented by Circular 10/65 , an instruction to local education authorities to plan for conversion .
Students sat the 11 + examination in their last year of primary education and were sent to one of a secondary modern , secondary technical or grammar school depending on their perceived ability .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
By the mid-1970s the system had been almost fully implemented , with virtually no secondary modern schools remaining .
Many grammar schools were either closed or changed to comprehensive status .
He went on to list the areas he felt needed closest scrutiny : the case for a core curriculum , the validity and use of informal teaching methods , the role of school inspection and the future of the examination system .
They account for around 90 % of pupils , or 64 % if one does not count schools with low-level selection .
This figure varies by region .
The concept of `` school choice '' introduces the idea of competition between state schools , a fundamental change to the original `` neighbourhood comprehensive '' model , and is partly intended as a means by which schools that are perceived to be inferior are forced either to improve or , if hardly anyone wants to go there , to close down .
Most initiatives focus on parental choice and information , implementing a pseudo-market incentive to encourage better schools .
It has different ages of transfer , different examinations and a different philosophy of choice and provision .
All publicly funded primary and secondary schools are comprehensive .
Congo-Brazzaville was formerly part of the French colony of Equatorial Africa .
The People 's Republic of the Congo was a Marxist -- Leninist one-party state from 1970 to 1991 .
The Bakongo , a Bantu ethnic group that also occupied parts of present-day Angola , Gabon , and Democratic Republic of the Congo , formed the basis for ethnic affinities and rivalries among those countries .
Several Bantu kingdoms -- notably those of the Kongo , the Loango , and the Teke -- built trade links leading into the Congo River basin .
The French designated Brazzaville as the federal capital .
Economic development during the first 50 years of colonial rule in Congo centered on natural-resource extraction .
Congo benefited from the postwar expansion of colonial administrative and infrastructure spending as a result of its central geographic location within AEF and the federal capital at Brazzaville .
Antagonism between the pro-Opangault Mbochis and the pro-Youlou Balalis resulted in a series of riots in Brazzaville in February 1959 , which the French Army subdued .
In 1965 , Congo established relations with the Soviet Union , the People 's Republic of China , North Korea and North Vietnam .
An 11-member Military Committee of the Party -LRB- CMP -RRB- was then named to head an interim government with Joachim Yhombi-Opango to serve as President of the Republic .
Two years later , Yhombi-Opango was forced from power and Denis Sassou Nguesso become the new president .
As presidential elections scheduled for July 1997 approached , tensions between the Lissouba and Sassou camps mounted .
Thus began a four-month conflict that destroyed or damaged much of Brazzaville and caused tens of thousands of civilian deaths .
In mid-October , the Lissouba government fell .
Soon thereafter , Sassou declared himself president .
In the controversial elections in 2002 , Sassou won with almost 90 % of the vote cast .
International observers took issue with the organization of the presidential election and the constitutional referendum , both of which were reminiscent in their organization of Congo 's era of the one-party state .
On October 25 the government held a referendum to allow Sassou Nguesso to run in the next election .
The government claimed that the proposal as approved by 92 percent of voters with 72 percent of eligible voters participating .
The opposition , who had boycotted the referendum claimed that the government 's statistics were false and that the vote was a sham .
This law is the first of its kind in Africa , and its adoption is a historic development for indigenous peoples on the continent .
The average yearly rainfall ranges from 1,100 millimetres -LRB- 43 in -RRB- in south in the Niari Valley to over 2,000 millimetres -LRB- 79 in -RRB- in central parts of the country .
The country also has large untapped mineral wealth .
The government has mortgaged a substantial portion of its petroleum earnings , contributing to a shortage of revenues .
Economic reform efforts continued with the support of international organizations , notably the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund .
When Sassou Nguesso returned to power at the end of the war in October 1997 , he publicly expressed interest in moving forward on economic reforms and privatization and in renewing cooperation with international financial institutions .
In rural areas , industrial and commercial activity has declined rapidly in recent years , leaving rural economies dependent on the government for support and subsistence .
The most significant subgroups of the Kongo are Laari in Brazzaville and Pool regions and Vili around Pointe-Noire and along the Atlantic coast .
The second largest group are the Teke who live to the north of Brazzaville with 17 % of the population .
Pygmies make up 2 % of Congo 's population .
A large proportion of the population is undernourished , with malnutrition being a problem in Congo-Brazzaville .
There were 20 physicians per 100,000 persons in the early 2000s -LRB- decade -RRB- .
Public expenditure of the GDP was less in 2002 -- 05 than in 1991 .
The country has universities .
Education between ages six and sixteen is compulsory .
At the university , students can obtain a bachelor 's degree in three years and a master 's after four .
Marien Ngouabi University -- which offers courses in medicine , law and several other fields -- is the country 's only public university .
The educational infrastructure has been seriously degraded as a result of political and economic crises .
There are no seats in most classrooms , forcing children to sit on the floor .
Enterprising individuals have set up private schools , but they often lack the technical knowledge and familiarity with the national curriculum to teach effectively .
Families frequently enroll their children in private schools only to find they can not make the payments .
In many systems , the prime minister selects and may dismiss other members of the cabinet , and allocates posts to members within the government .
In most systems , the prime minister is the presiding member and chairman of the cabinet .
Over time , the title became honorific and remains so in the 21st century .
The monarchs of England and the United Kingdom had ministers in whom they placed special trust and who were regarded as the head of the government .
These ministers held a variety of formal posts , but were commonly known as `` the minister '' , the `` chief minister '' , the `` first minister '' and finally the `` prime minister '' .
Although managing the parliament was among the necessary skills of holding high office , they did not depend on a parliamentary majority for their power .
Although there was a cabinet , it was appointed entirely by the monarch , and the monarch usually presided over its meetings .
Kings sometimes divided power equally between two or more ministers to prevent one minister from becoming too powerful .
It is at this point that a modern style of prime minister begins to emerge .
In these circumstances it was inevitable that the king 's first minister would become the de facto head of the government .
Walpole chaired cabinet meetings , appointed all the other ministers , dispensed the royal patronage and packed the House of Commons with his supporters .
The long tenure of the wartime prime minister William Pitt the Younger -LRB- 1783 -- 1801 -RRB- , combined with the mental illness of George III , consolidated the power of the post .
The main exceptions to this system have been the United States and the presidential republics in Latin America modelled on the U.S. system , in which the president directly exercises executive authority .
See also `` First Minister '' , `` Premier '' , `` Chief Minister '' , `` Chancellor '' , `` Taoiseach '' , `` Statsminister '' and `` Secretary of State '' : alternative titles usually equivalent in meaning to , or translated as , `` prime minister '' .
This contrasts with the presidential system , in which the president -LRB- or equivalent -RRB- is both the head of state and the head of the government .
In these systems , it is possible for the president and the prime minister to be from different political parties if the legislature is controlled by a party different from that of the president .
Canada 's constitution , being a ` mixed ' or hybrid constitution -LRB- a constitution that is partly formally codified and partly uncodified -RRB- originally did not make any reference whatsoever to a prime minister , with her or his specific duties and method of appointment instead dictated by `` convention '' .
The United Kingdom 's constitution , being uncodified and largely unwritten , makes no mention of a prime minister .
Accordingly , it is often said `` not to exist '' , indeed there are several instances of parliament declaring this to be the case .
Most prime ministers in parliamentary systems are not appointed for a specific term in office and in effect may remain in power through a number of elections and parliaments .
Some states , however , do have a term of office of the prime minister linked to the period in office of the parliament .
-LRB- Some constitutional experts have questioned whether this process is actually in keeping with the provisions of the Irish constitution , which appear to suggest that a taoiseach should remain in office , without the requirement of a renomination , unless s/he has clearly lost the general election . -RRB-
The latter in effect allows the government to appeal the opposition of parliament to the electorate .
In most modern parliamentary systems , the prime minister is the person who decides when to request a parliamentary dissolution .
Prior to then , it was the entire government that made the request .
In federations , the head of government of subnational entities such as provinces is most commonly known as the premier , chief minister , governor or minister-president .
In the case of Ireland , the head of government is occasionally referred to as the Taoiseach by English speakers .
He is referred to as `` president '' in both the Persian and English languages .
Some Prime Minister 's office do include the role of Cabinet .
In other countries , it is called the Prime Minister 's Department or the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet as for Australia .
Institute of technology -LRB- also : university of technology , polytechnic university , technikon , and technical college -RRB- is a designation employed for a wide range of learning institutions awarding different types of degrees and operating often at variable levels of the educational system .
It may be an institution of higher education and advanced engineering and scientific research or professional vocational education , specializing in science , engineering , and technology or different sorts of technical subjects .
It may also refer to a secondary education school focused in vocational training .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In some cases , polytechnics or institutes of technology are engineering schools or technical colleges .
Famous examples are the Istanbul Technical University , ETH Zurich , İYTE , Delft University of Technology and RWTH Aachen , all considered universities .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In countries like Iran , Finland , Malaysia , Portugal , Singapore or the United Kingdom , there is often a significant and confused distinction between polytechnics and universities .
In the UK a binary system of higher education emerged consisting of universities -LRB- research orientation -RRB- and Polytechnics -LRB- engineering and applied science and professional practice orientation -RRB- .
Polytechnics offered university equivalent degrees from bachelor 's , master 's and PhD that were validated and governed at the national level by the independent UK Council for National Academic Awards .
The CNAA was disbanded .
In Ireland the term institute of technology is the more favored synonym of a regional technical college though the latter is the legally correct term ; however , Dublin Institute of Technology is a university in all but name as it can confer degrees in accordance with law , Cork Institute of Technology and another of other Institutes of Technology have delegated authority from HETAC to make awards to and including master 's degree level -- Level 9 of the National Framework for Qualifications -LRB- NFQ -RRB- -- for all areas of study and Doctorate level in a number of others .
In many cases polytechnic were elite technological universities concentrating on applied science and engineering and may also be a former designation for a vocational institution , before it has been granted the exclusive right to award academic degrees and can be truly called an institute of technology .
A number of polytechnics providing higher education is simply a result of a formal upgrading from their original and historical role as intermediate technical education schools .
In some situations , former polytechnics or other non-university institutions have emerged solely through an administrative change of statutes , which often included a name change with the introduction of new designations like institute of technology , polytechnic university , university of applied sciences , or university of technology for marketing purposes .
Such emergence of so many upgraded polytechnics , former vocational education and technical schools converted into more university-like institutions has caused concern where the lack of specialized intermediate technical professionals lead to industrial skill shortages in some fields , being also associated to an increase of the graduate unemployment rate .
This is mostly the case in those countries , where the education system is not controlled by the state and everybody can grant degrees .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Evidence have also shown a decline in the general quality of teaching and graduate 's preparation for the workplace , due to the fast-paced conversion of that technical institutions to more advanced higher level institutions .
Mentz , Kotze and Van der Merwe -LRB- 2008 -RRB- argues that all the tools are in place to promote the debate on the place of technology in higher education in general and in Universities of Technology specifically .
The aspects of this debate can follow the following lines : • To what degree is technology defined as a concept ?
• What is the scope of technology discourse ?
• What is the place and relation of science with technology ?
• How useful is the Mitcham framework in thinking about technology in South Africa ?
• Can a measure of cooperation as opposed to competition be achieved amongst higher education institutions ?
• Who ultimately is responsible for vocational training and what is the role of technology in this ?
During the 1970s to early 1990s , the term was used to describe state owned and funded technical schools that offered both vocational and higher education .
In the 1990s most of these merged with existing universities , or formed new ones of their own .
AVCC report The most prominent such university in each state founded the Australian Technology Network a few years later .
These primarily offer vocational education , although some like Melbourne Polytechnic are expanding into higher education offering vocationally oriented applied bachelor degress .
This usage of the term is most prevalent historically in NSW and the ACT .
The new terminology is apt given that this category of institution are becoming very much like the institutes of the 1970s -- 1990s period .
They do not focus exclusively on technology , but may also offer courses in social science , medicine , business and design .
Hogeschool is used in Belgium and in the Netherlands .
They form associations with a university and integrate research into the curriculum , which will allow them to deliver academic master 's degrees .
A list of all hogescholen in the Netherlands , including some which might be called polytechnics , can be found here .
Institutes of Technology/Polytechnic Institutes and Universities tend to be independent institutions .
Affiliate Schools are polytechnic divisions belonging to a national university and offer select technical and engineering programs .
Colleges , Institutes of Technology/Polytechnic Institutes , and Universities tend to be independent institutions .
In Croatia there are many polytechnic institutes and colleges that offer a polytechnic education .
EPN is known for research and education in the applied science , astronomy , atmospheric physics , engineering and physical sciences .
MIT raises funds from non-governmental organizations and individuals who support the mission and objectives of the Institute .
Tigray Development Association , its supporters , and REST have provided the initial funds for the launching of the Institute .
The MIT has also been able to create linkages with some universities and colleges in the United States of America , which have provided manpower and material support to MIT .
The institute is governed by a provisional governing board .
Universities of Technology are categorised as universities , are allowed to grant B.Sc .
-LRB- Tech . -RRB-
, M.Sc .
-LRB- Tech . -RRB-
, Lic.Sc .
-LRB- Tech . -RRB-
, Ph.D. and D.Sc .
-LRB- Tech . -RRB-
In addition to universities of technology , some universities , e.g. University of Oulu and Åbo Akademi University , are allowed to grant the B.Sc .
-LRB- tech . -RRB-
, M.Sc .
-LRB- tech . -RRB-
and D.Sc .
-LRB- Tech . -RRB-
degrees .
Universities of Technology are academically similar to other -LRB- non-polytechnic -RRB- universities .
Prior to Bologna process , M.Sc .
-LRB- Tech . -RRB-
The credits between Universities of Technology and normal universities are comparable .
Since 2006 the polytechnics have offered studies leading to master 's degrees -LRB- Master of Engineering -RRB- .
The ammattikorkeakoulu has many similarities to the hogeschool in Belgium and in the Netherlands and to the Fachhochschule in the German language areas .
They include :
In addition , France 's education system includes many institutes of technology , embedded within most French universities .
Instituts universitaires de technologie provide undergraduate technology curricula .
` Polytech institutes ' , embedded as a part of eleven French universities provide both undergraduate and graduate engineering curricula .
-LRB- see below -RRB- .
Technische Universitäten normally have faculties or departements of natural sciences and often of economics but can also have units of cultural and social sciences and arts .
Saxony and Lower Saxony have the highest counts of TUs , while in Saxony three out of four universities are universities of technology .
Some universities in Germany can also be seen as institutes of technology due to comprising a wide spread of technical sciences and having a history as a technical university .
Examples are
In Greece , there are 2 `` Polytechnics '' part of the public higher education in Greece and they confer a 5-year Diplom Uni -LRB- 300E.C .
T.S -- I.S.C.E.D. 5A -RRB- , the National Technical University of Athens and the Technical University of Crete .
Also , there are Greek Higher Technological Educational Institutes -LRB- Ανώτατα Τεχνολογικά Εκπαιδευτικά Ιδρύματα -- Α.T.E.I -RRB- .
3549/2007 - N. 3685/2008 - N. 4009/2011 -RRB- the Technological Educational Institute constitute , a parallel and equivalent with universities part of the public higher education in Greece .
They confer 4-year bachelor 's degree -LRB- Diplom FH -RRB- -LRB- 240E.C .
T.S -- I.S.C.E.D. 5A -RRB- .
These polytechnics awards diplomas , higher diplomas , as well as academic degrees .
In 1762 the institute ranked up to be Academia providing Higher Education courses .
After the Treaty of Trianon the institute had to be moved to Sopron .
In addition to these there are many other Universities which offer higher technical courses .
In India there are many polytechnic institutes and collages that offer a polytechnic education .
These Institutions offer three year diploma in engineering post Tenth class .
These institutes have affiliation from state bord of technical education of respective state governments .
after which one can apply for post of junior engineer or continue higher studies by appearing for exams of AMIE to become an engineering graduate .
Other than that , there are hundreds other institute that owned by private or other institutions .
However , in Bahasa Indonesia , Politeknik carries a rather different meaning than Institut Teknologi .
The terms `` IT '' and `` IT 's '' are now widely used to describe an Institute -LRB- s -RRB- of Technology .
These institutions offer sub-degree , degree and post-graduate level studies .
Unlike the Irish university system an Institute of Technology also offers sub-degree programmes such as 2-year Higher Certificate programme in various academic fields of study .
Some institutions have `` delegated authority '' that allows them to make awards in their own name , after authorisation by the Higher Education & Training Awards Council .
In Japan , an institute of technology -LRB- 工業大学 , kōgyō daigaku ? -RRB-
The institutions provide courses for bachelor 's degree & Bachelor of Science -LRB- BSc -RRB- -LRB- offer at Premier Polytechnics for September 2013 intake & 2014 intake -RRB- , Advanced Diploma , Diploma and Special Skills Certificate .
It applies traditional and beyond traditional approaches to teaching , training , research and consultancy .
The university has been founded with the aim to play a key role in the economic and social development of Mauritius through the development of programmes of direct relevance to the country 's needs , for example in areas like technology , sustainable development science , and public sector policy and management .
Some have officially taken the title ` institute of technology ' which is a term recognized in government strategies equal to that of the term ` polytechnic ' .
These are legal names but not recognized terms like ` polytechnic ' or ` institute of technology ' .
Many if not all now grant at least bachelor-level degrees .
-LRB- The only other amalgamations have been in the colleges of education . -RRB-
University of Engineering & Technology or University of Engineering Sciences are the recognized universities that grant Bachelor 's and master 's degrees in undergraduate and graduate studies respectively .
There are some biggest Polytechnic in Poland :
The designation `` Institute of Technology '' is not applied at all , being meaningless in Portugal .
However , there are higher education educational institutions in Portugal since the 1980s , which are called polytechnics .
After 1998 they were upgraded to institutions which are allowed to confer bachelor 's degrees -LRB- the Portuguese licenciatura -RRB- .
The polytechnical higher education system provides a more practical training and is profession-oriented , while the university higher education system has a strong theoretical basis and is highly research-oriented .
Polytechnics in Singapore provides industry oriented education equivalent to a junior college or sixth form college in the UK .
Singapore retains a system similar but not the same as in the United Kingdom from 1970 -- 1992 , distinguishing between polytechnics and universities .
Unlike the British Polytechnic -LRB- United Kingdom -RRB- system Singapore Polytechnics do not offer bachelors , masters or PhD degrees .
Polytechnic graduates may be granted transfer credits when they apply to local and overseas universities , depending on the overall performance in their grades , as well as the university 's policies on transfer credits .
A few secondary schools are now offering six-year program which leads directly to university entrance .
They are namely :
Later the department of Mathematics , Mechanics and Hydraulics and department of Forestry were settled .
University has launched the first book of electrotechnics in the world .
South Africa has completed a process of transforming its `` higher education landscape '' .
Technology/Technical colleges in Thailand is associated with bitter rivalries which erupts into frequent off-campus brawls and assassinations of students in public locations that has been going on for nearly a decade , with innocent bystanders also commonly among the injured and the military under martial law still unable to stop them from occurring .
In Turkey and the Ottoman Empire , the oldest technical university is Istanbul Technical University .
Its graduates contributed to a wide variety of activities in scientific research and development .
In recent years , Yildiz University is reorganized as Yildiz Technical University and 2 institutes of technology were founded in Kocaeli and Izmir .
Polytechnics were tertiary education teaching institutions in England , Wales and Northern Ireland .
They particularly excelled in engineering and applied science degree courses similar to technological universities in the USA and continental Europe .
The London Polytechnic led a mass movement to create numerous Polytechnic institutes across the UK in the late 19th Century .
Most Polytechnic institutes were established at the centre of major metropolitan cities and their focus was on engineering , applied science and technology education .
In 1956 , some colleges of technology received the designation College of Advanced Technology .
These institutions are sometimes referred to as post-1992 universities .
Polytechnic Institutes are technological universities , many dating back to the mid-19th century .
A handful of world-renowned Elite American universities include the phrases `` Institute of Technology '' , `` Polytechnic Institute '' , `` Polytechnic University '' , or similar phrasing in their names ; these are generally research-intensive universities with a focus on engineering , science and technology .
Conversely , schools dubbed `` technical colleges '' or `` technical institutes '' generally provide post-secondary training in technical and mechanical fields , focusing on training vocational skills primarily at a community college level -- parallel and sometimes equivalent to the first two years at a bachelor 's degree-granting institution .
Most of these institutes award diplomas after three or three and a half years of education .
This IUT is the first and only one in Venezuela having French equivalent degrees accepted , implementing this system and observing the high-level degrees some other IUT 's were created in Venezuela , regardless of this the term IUT was not used appropriately resulting in some institutions with mediocre quality and no equivalent degree in France .
Later , some private institutions sprang up using IUT in their names , but they are not regulated by the original French system and award lower quality degrees .
Sites can also be captured on the fly by visitors who are offered a link to do so .
The intent is to capture and archive content that otherwise would be lost whenever a site is changed or closed down .
To overcome inconsistencies in partially cached web sites , Archive-It .
org was developed in 2005 by the Internet Archive as a means of allowing institutions and content creators to voluntarily harvest and preserve collections of digital content , and create digital archives .
Sometimes there are intervals of several weeks or years between snapshots .
This became a threat of abuse by the service for hosting malicious binaries .
In an October 2004 case , Telewizja Polska USA , Inc. v. Echostar Satellite , No. 02 C 3293 , 65 Fed .
R. Evid .
Serv .
673 -LRB- N.D. Ill. .
Oct. 15 , 2004 -RRB- , a litigant attempted to use the Wayback Machine archives as a source of admissible evidence , perhaps for the first time .
Prior to the trial proceedings , EchoStar indicated that it intended to offer Wayback Machine snapshots as proof of the past content of Telewizja Polska 's web site .
Judge Guzman reasoned that the employee 's affidavit contained both hearsay and inconclusive supporting statements , and the purported web page printouts were not self-authenticating .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The Wayback Machine also retroactively respects robots.txt files , i.e. , pages that currently are blocked to robots on the live web temporarily will be made unavailable from the archives as well .
The attorneys were able to demonstrate that the claims made by the plaintiff were invalid , based on the content of their web site from several years prior .
Healthcare Advocates claimed that , since they had installed a robots.txt file on their web site , even if after the initial lawsuit was filed , the Archive should have removed all previous copies of the plaintiff web site from the Wayback Machine .
The lawsuit was settled out of court .
As a result , the Internet Archive has rendered unavailable a number of web sites that now are inaccessible through the Wayback Machine .
Currently , the Internet Archive applies robots.txt rules retroactively ; if a site blocks the Internet Archive , such as Healthcare Advocates , any previously archived pages from the domain are rendered unavailable as well .
In cases of blocked sites , only the robots.txt file is archived .
We comply with these requests . ''
In addition , the web site says : `` The Internet Archive is not interested in preserving or offering access to Web sites or other Internet documents of persons who do not want their materials in the collection . ''
org between 1999 and 2004 .
Shell responded and brought a countersuit against Internet Archive for archiving her site , which she alleges is in violation of her terms of service .
The Internet Archive did not move to dismiss copyright infringement claims Shell asserted arising out of its copying activities , which would also go forward .
The Internet Archive said it '' ... has no interest in including materials in the Wayback Machine of persons who do not wish to have their Web content archived .
We recognize that Ms. Shell has a valid and enforceable copyright in her Web site and we regret that the inclusion of her Web site in the Wayback Machine resulted in this litigation . ''
Shell said , `` I respect the historical value of Internet Archive 's goal .
I never intended to interfere with that goal nor cause it any harm . ''
Charles was succeeded by his son , King Philip II of Spain .
This was the start of the Eighty Years ' War .
However , the latter agreed to turn the United Provinces into a protectorate of England -LRB- Treaty of Nonsuch , 1585 -RRB- , and sent the Earl of Leicester as governor-general .
The Union of Utrecht is regarded as the foundation of the Republic of the Seven United Provinces , which was not recognized by the Spanish Empire until the Peace of Westphalia in 1648 .
During this period , republican forces took several major cities of the Netherlands .
After initially fleeing , the monarchist forces came back with British , Austrian , and Prussian troops and retook the Netherlands .
After the French Republic became the French Empire under Napoleon , the Batavian Republic was replaced by the Napoleonic Kingdom of Holland .
After Belgium and Luxembourg became independent , the state became unequivocally known as the Kingdom of the Netherlands , as it remains today .
The free trade spirit of the time received a strong augmentation through the development of a modern , effective stock market in the Low Countries .
While the banking system evolved in the Low Countries , it was quickly incorporated by the well-connected English , stimulating English economic output .
The provinces of the republic were , in official feudal order :
Such influence appears , however , to have been of a negative nature , as Madison describes the Dutch confederacy as exhibiting `` Imbecility in the government ; discord among the provinces ; foreign influence and indignities ; a precarious existence in peace , and peculiar calamities from war . ''
In the beginning , this was especially focused on Roman Catholics , being the religion of the enemy .
The definition of symbiosis has varied among scientists .
Some believe symbiosis should only refer to persistent mutualisms , while others believe it should apply to any type of persistent biological interaction -LRB- in other words mutualistic , commensalistic , or parasitic -RRB- .
Endosymbiosis is any symbiotic relationship in which one symbiont lives within the tissues of the other , either within the cells or extracellularly .
Mutualistic relationships may be either obligate for both species , obligate for one but facultative for the other , or facultative for both .
Many biologists restrict the definition of symbiosis to close mutualist relationships .
This gut flora is made up of cellulose-digesting protozoans or bacteria living in the herbivores ' intestines .
The territorial fish protects the anemone from anemone-eating fish , and in turn the stinging tentacles of the anemone protect the clownfish from its predators .
The shrimp digs and cleans up a burrow in the sand in which both the shrimp and the goby fish live .
The shrimp is almost blind , leaving it vulnerable to predators when outside its burrow .
When that happens both the shrimp and goby fish quickly retreat into the burrow .
Different species of gobies -LRB- Elacatinus spp . -RRB-
also exhibit mutualistic behavior through cleaning up ectoparasites in other fish .
The bryozoan colony -LRB- Acanthodesia commensale -RRB- develops a cirumrotatory growth and offers the crab -LRB- Pseudopagurus granulimanus -RRB- a helicospiral-tubular extension of its living chamber that initially was situated within a gastropod shell .
One of the most spectacular examples of obligate mutualism is between the siboglinid tube worms and symbiotic bacteria that live at hydrothermal vents and cold seeps .
The bacteria oxidize either hydrogen sulfide or methane , which the host supplies to them .
This is due to many genes being lost during the process of metabolism , and DNA repair and recombination .
While important genes participating in the DNA to RNA transcription , protein translation and DNA/RNA replication are retained .
That is , a decrease in genome size is due to loss of protein coding genes and not due to lessening of inter-genic regions or open reading frame -LRB- ORF -RRB- size .
Thus , species that are naturally evolving and contain reduced sizes of genes can be accounted for an increased number of noticeable differences between them , thereby leading to changes in their evolutionary rates .
As the endosymbiotic bacteria related with these insects are passed on to the offspring strictly via vertical genetic transmission , intracellular bacteria goes through many hurdles during the process , resulting in the decrease in effective population sizes when compared to the free living bacteria .
Muller 's ratchet phenomenon together with less effective population sizes has led to an accretion of deleterious mutations in the non-essential genes of the intracellular bacteria .
It is derived from the English word commensal used of human social interaction .
Examples of metabiosis are hermit crabs using gastropod shells to protect their bodies and spiders building their webs on plants .
This is also known as antagonistic or antipathetic symbiosis .
Parasitic symbioses take many forms , from endoparasites that live within the host 's body to ectoparasites that live on its surface .
Biotrophic parasitism is an extremely successful mode of life .
Moreover , almost all free-living animals are host to one or more parasite taxa .
This type of symbiosis is relatively uncommon in rudimentary reference texts , but is omnipresent in the natural world .
Competition is where a larger or stronger organisms deprives a smaller or weaker one from a resource .
Antibiosis occurs when one organism is damaged or killed by another through a chemical secretion .
An example of competition is a sapling growing under the shadow of a mature tree .
The mature tree can begin to rob the sapling of necessary sunlight and , if the mature tree is very large , it can take up rainwater and deplete soil nutrients .
Throughout the process the mature tree is unaffected .
Indeed , if the sapling dies , the mature tree gains nutrients from the decaying sapling .
Note that these nutrients become available because of the sapling 's decomposition , rather than from the living sapling , which would be a case of parasitism .
A clear case of amensalism is where sheep or cattle trample grass .
Whilst the presence of the grass causes negligible detrimental effects to the animal 's hoof , the grass suffers from being crushed .
Whilst the presence of the weevil has almost no influence on food availability , the presence of ibex has an enormous detrimental effect on weevil numbers , as they consume significant quantities of plant matter and incidentally ingest the weevils upon it .
An example of this is the relationship between some species of bees and victims of the bee sting .
This term is rarely used .
While historically , symbiosis has received less attention than other interactions such as predation or competition , it is increasingly recognized as an important selective force behind evolution , with many species having a long history of interdependent co-evolution .
This theory is supported by certain organelles dividing independently of the cell , and the observation that some organelles seem to have their own nucleic acid .
She considers Darwin 's notion of evolution , driven by competition , to be incomplete and claims that evolution is strongly based on co-operation , interaction , and mutual dependence among organisms .
Many plants that are pollinated by insects , bats , or birds have highly specialized flowers modified to promote pollination by a specific pollinator that is also correspondingly adapted .
The first flowering plants in the fossil record had relatively simple flowers .
Adaptive speciation quickly gave rise to many diverse groups of plants , and , at the same time , corresponding speciation occurred in certain insect groups .
This unified institution consists of sea , land , and air elements referred to as the Royal Canadian Navy -LRB- RCN -RRB- , Canadian Army , and Royal Canadian Air Force -LRB- RCAF -RRB- .
Specifically , the Canadian Armed Forces are tasked with having the capacity to :
Thereafter , the Royal Canadian Navy was formed , and , with the advent of military aviation , the Royal Canadian Air Force .
Conscription for overseas service was introduced only near the end of the war , and only 2,400 conscripts actually made it into battle .
Its roots , however , lie in colonial militia groups that served alongside garrisons of the French and British armies and navies ; a structure that remained in place until the early 20th century .
The nature of the Canadian Forces has continued to evolve .
In addition , 5000 rangers and 19,000 supplementary personnel will be serving .
These individuals serve on numerous CF bases located in all regions of the country , and are governed by the Queen 's Regulations and Orders and the National Defence Act .
More funds were also put towards recruitment , which had been dwindling throughout the 1980s and '90s , possibly because the Canadian populace had come to perceive the CAF as peacekeepers rather than as soldiers , as shown in a 2008 survey conducted for the Department of National Defence .
The poll found that nearly two thirds of Canadians agreed with the country 's participation in the invasion of Afghanistan , and that the military should be stronger , but also that the purpose of the forces should be different , such as more focused on responding to natural disasters .
Although the viability of the Canada First Defence Strategy continues to suffer setbacks from challenging and evolving fiscal and other factors , it originally aimed to :
It also provided opportunities for all persons to serve their country to the best of their abilities .
The women 's uniform is similar in design to the men 's uniform , but conforms to the female figure , and is functional and practical .
The following is the hierarchy of the Canadian Armed Forces .
The sovereign and most other members of the Canadian Royal Family also act as colonels-in-chief , honorary air commodores , air commodores-in-chief , admirals , and captains-general of Canadian Forces units , though these positions are ceremonial .
This number has been gradually reduced since the 1970s with bases either being closed or merged .
Officers will generally either directly enter the Canadian Armed Forces with a degree from a civilian university , or receive their commission upon graduation from the Royal Military College of Canada .
Specific element and trade training is conducted at a variety of institutions throughout Canada , and to a lesser extent , the world .
The fleet is augmented by various aircraft and supply vessels .
Each contains one regiment each of artillery , armour , and combat engineers , three battalions of infantry -LRB- all scaled in the British fashion -RRB- , one battalion for logistics , a squadron for headquarters/signals , and several smaller support organizations .
The 2nd , 3rd and 4th Canadian Divisions each has a Regular Force brigade group , and each division except the 1st has two to three Reserve Force brigades groups .
In total , there are ten Reserve Force brigade groups .
The 5th Canadian Division and the 2nd Canadian Division each have two Reserve Force brigade groups , while the 4th Canadian Division and the 3rd Canadian Division each have three Reserve Force brigade groups .
The commander of 2 Canadian Air Division is responsible for training and support functions .
2 Canadian Air Division operations are carried out at two wings .
For the components and sub-components of the Canadian Armed Forces Reserve Force , the order of precedence follows :
Approximately 26,000 citizen soldiers , sailors , and airmen and women , trained to the level of and interchangeable with their Regular Force counterparts , and posted to CAF operations or duties on a casual or ongoing basis , make up the Primary Reserve .
Adherents of the Sikh faith may wear uniform turbans -LRB- dastar -RRB- -LRB- or patka , when operational -RRB- and Muslim women may wear uniform tucked hijabs under their authorized headdress .
Jews may wear yarmulke under their authorized headdress and when bareheaded .
Naval personnel , however , seldom wear berets , preferring either service cap or authorized ballcaps -LRB- shipboard operational dress -RRB- , which only the Navy wear .
Air Force personnel , particularly officers , prefer the wedge cap to any other form of headdress .
There is no naval variant of the wedge cap .
The Yukon cap and tuque are worn only with winter dress , although clearance and combat divers may wear tuques year-round as a watch cap .
Soldiers in Highland , Scottish , and Irish regiments generally wear alternative headdress , including the glengarry , balmoral , tam o'shanter , and caubeen instead of the beret .
The officer cadets of both Royal Military Colleges wear gold-braided `` pillbox '' -LRB- cavalry -RRB- caps with their ceremonial dress and have a unique fur `` Astrakhan '' for winter wear .
For the 2008 -- 2009 fiscal year , the amount allocated for defence spending was CAD$ 18.9 billion .
In 2006 , a further CAD$ 5.3 billion over five years was provided to allow for 13,000 more regular force members , and 10,000 more primary reserve personnel , as well as CAD$ 17.1 billion for the purchase of new trucks for the Canadian Army , transport aircraft and helicopters for the Royal Canadian Air Force , and joint support ships for the Royal Canadian Navy .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
There is disagreement about the origin of the term , but general consensus that `` cardinalis '' from the word cardo -LRB- meaning ` pivot ' or ` hinge ' -RRB- was first used in late antiquity to designate a bishop or priest who was incorporated into a church for which he had not originally been ordained .
The name was also given to the senior priest in each of the `` title '' churches -LRB- the parish churches -RRB- of Rome and to the bishops of the seven sees surrounding the city .
They took part in the administration of the church of Rome and in the papal liturgy .
For a time this power was assigned exclusively to the cardinal bishops , but the Third Lateran Council in 1179 gave back the right to the whole body of cardinals .
This meaning of the word spread rapidly , and from the 9th century various episcopal cities had a special class among the clergy known as cardinals .
According to this historic council `` nothing is more necessary to the Church of God than that the holy Roman pontiff apply that solicitude which by the duty of his office he owes the universal Church in a very special way by associating with himself as cardinals the most select persons only , and appoint to each church most eminently upright and competent shepherds ; and this the more so , because our Lord Jesus Christ will require at his hands the blood of the sheep of Christ that perish through the evil government of shepherds who are negligent and forgetful of their office . ''
Traditions even developed entitling certain monarchs , including those of Austria , Spain , and Portugal , to nominate one of their trusted clerical subjects to be created cardinal , a so-called crown-cardinal .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In some cases , they took on powerful positions in government .
In Henry VIII 's England , his chief minister was Cardinal Wolsey .
Richelieu successor was also a cardinal , Jules Mazarin .
Guillaume Dubois and André-Hercule de Fleury complete the list of the `` four great '' cardinals to have ruled France .
He also established a maximum age of eighty years for electors .
His action deprived twenty-five living cardinals , including the three living cardinals elevated by Pope Pius XI , of the right to participate in a conclave .
Pope Paul VI also increased the number of cardinal bishops by giving that rank to patriarchs of the Eastern Catholic Churches .
The only exception is for patriarchs of Eastern Catholic Churches .
Nevertheless , cardinals possess no power of governance nor are they to intervene in any way in matters which pertain to the administration of goods , discipline , or the service of their titular churches .
They are allowed to celebrate Mass and hear confessions and lead visits and pilgrimages to their titular churches , in coordination with the staff of the church .
They often support their churches monetarily , and many Cardinals do keep in contact with the pastoral staffs of their titular churches .
Cardinals governing a particular Church retain that church .
In accordance with tradition , they sign by placing the title `` Cardinal '' -LRB- abbreviated Card . -RRB-
after their personal name and before their surname as , for instance , `` John Card -LRB- inal -RRB- Doe '' or , in Latin , `` Ioannes Card -LRB- inalis -RRB- Cognomen '' .
Some writers , such as James-Charles Noonan , hold that , in the case of cardinals , the form used for signatures should be used also when referring to them in English .
This is the rule given also in stylebooks not associated with the Catholic Church .
This style is also generally followed on the websites of the Holy See and episcopal conferences .
Though in modern times most cardinals are also bishops , the term `` cardinal bishop '' only refers to the cardinals who are titular bishops of one of the `` suburbicarian '' sees .
A cardinal -LRB- Latin : sanctae romanae ecclesiae cardinalis , literally cardinal of the Holy Roman Church -RRB- is a senior ecclesiastical leader , an ecclesiastical prince , and usually -LRB- now always for those created when still within the voting age-range -RRB- an ordained bishop of the Roman Catholic Church .
The duties of the cardinals include attending the meetings of the College and making themselves available individually or in groups to the Pope as requested .
Most have additional duties , such as leading a diocese or archdiocese or managing a department of the Roman Curia .
A cardinal 's primary duty is electing the pope when the see becomes vacant .
During the sede vacante -LRB- the period between a pope 's death or resignation and the election of his successor -RRB- , the day-to-day governance of the Holy See is in the hands of the College of Cardinals .
The right to enter the conclave of cardinals where the pope is elected is limited to those who have not reached the age of 80 years by the day the vacancy occurs .
The pope either decides the case himself or delegates the decision to a tribunal , usually one of the tribunals or congregations of the Roman Curia .
Without such delegation , no ecclesiastical court , even the Roman Rota , is competent to judge a canon law case against a cardinal .
Cardinals are , however , subject to the civil and criminal law like everybody else .
The pope chooses the image on the outside : under Pope Benedict XVI it was a modern depiction of the crucifixion of Jesus , with Mary and John to each side .
The ring includes the pope 's coat of arms on the inside .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In ecclesiastical heraldry , however , the scarlet galero is still displayed on the cardinal 's coat of arms .
Cardinals had the right to display the galero in their cathedral , and when a cardinal died , it would be suspended from the ceiling above his tomb .
Some cardinals will still have a galero made , even though it is not officially part of their apparel .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The biretta of a cardinal is distinctive not merely for its scarlet color , but also for the fact that it does not have a pompon or tassel on the top as do the birettas of other prelates .
His normal-wear cassock is black but has scarlet piping and a scarlet fascia -LRB- sash -RRB- .
Occasionally , a cardinal wears a scarlet ferraiolo which is a cape worn over the shoulders , tied at the neck in a bow by narrow strips of cloth in the front , without any ` trim ' or piping on it .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
If conditions change , so that the pope judges it safe to make the appointment public , he may do so at any time .
The cardinal in question then ranks in precedence with those raised to the cardinalate at the time of his in pectore appointment .
During the Western Schism , many cardinals were created by the contending popes .
At various times , there have been cardinals who had only received first tonsure and minor orders but not yet been ordained as deacons or priests .
Teodolfo Mertel was among the last of the lay cardinals .
When he died in 1899 he was the last surviving cardinal who was not at least ordained a priest .
Since the time of Pope John XXIII a priest who is appointed a cardinal must be consecrated a bishop , unless he obtains a dispensation .
A cardinal who is not a bishop is still entitled to wear and use the episcopal vestments and other pontificalia -LRB- episcopal regalia : mitre , crozier , zucchetto , pectoral cross and ring -RRB- .
For example , in the 16th century , Reginald Pole was a cardinal for 18 years before he was ordained a priest .
As a consequence of these two changes , canon 351 of the 1983 Code of Canon Law requires that a cardinal be at least in the order of priesthood at his appointment , and that those who are not already bishops must receive episcopal consecration .
Several cardinals aged over 80 or close to it when appointed have obtained dispensation from the rule of having to be a bishop .
These were all appointed cardinal-deacons , but one of them , Roberto Tucci , lived long enough to exercise the right of option and be promoted to the rank of cardinal-priest .
The Cardinal Camerlengo of the Holy Roman Church , assisted by the Vice-Camerlengo and the other prelates of the office known as the Apostolic Camera , has functions that in essence are limited to a period of sede vacante of the papacy .
In the past , during papal coronations , the proto-deacon also had the honor of bestowing the pallium on the new pope and crowning him with the papal tiara .
As a result , the Cardinal protodeacon 's privilege of crowning a new pope has effectively ceased although it could be revived if a future Pope were to restore a coronation ceremony .
However , the proto-deacon still has the privilege of bestowing the pallium on a new pope at his papal inauguration .
`` Acting in the place of the Roman Pontiff , he also confers the pallium upon metropolitan bishops or gives the pallium to their proxies . ''
The current cardinal proto-deacon is Renato Raffaele Martino .
They may on such elevation take a vacant `` title '' -LRB- a church allotted to a cardinal priest as the church in Rome with which he is associated -RRB- or their diaconal church may be temporarily elevated to a cardinal priest 's `` title '' for that occasion .
When elevated to cardinal priests , they take their precedence according to the day they were first made cardinal deacons -LRB- thus ranking above cardinal priests who were elevated to the college after them , regardless of order -RRB- .
Cardinals elevated to the diaconal order are mainly officials of the Roman Curia holding various posts in the church administration .
Their number and influence has varied through the years .
While historically predominantly Italian the group has become much more internationally diverse in later years .
Their influence in the election of the Pope has been considered important , they are better informed and connected than the dislocated cardinals but their level of unity has been varied .
Under the 1587 decree of Pope Sixtus V , which fixed the maximum size of the College of Cardinals , there were 14 cardinal deacons .
Later the number increased .
As late as 1939 almost half of the cardinals were members of the curia .
Pius XII reduced this percentage to 24 percent .
John XXIII brought it back up to 37 percent but Paul VI brought it down to 27 percent where John Paul II has maintained this ratio .
Cardinal deacons are given title to one of these deaconries .
Cardinals elevated to the diaconal order are either officials of the Roman Curia or priests elevated after their 80th birthday .
Bishops with diocesan responsibilities , however , are created cardinal priests .
He had certain ceremonial duties in the conclave that have effectively ceased because he would generally have already reached age 80 , at which cardinals are barred from the conclave .
Formerly the position of dean belonged by right to the longest-serving of the cardinal bishops .
In 1965 , Pope Paul VI decreed in his motu proprio Ad Purpuratorum Patrum that patriarchs of the Eastern Catholic Churches who were named cardinals -LRB- i.e. , patriarch cardinals -RRB- would also be part of the episcopal order , ranking after the six cardinal bishops of the suburbicarian sees -LRB- who had been relieved of direct responsibilities for those sees by Pope John XXIII three years earlier -RRB- .
There are currently three Eastern Patriarchs who are cardinal bishops :
Those who are named cardinal priests today are generally bishops of important dioceses throughout the world , though some hold Curial positions .
In modern times , the name `` cardinal priest '' is interpreted as meaning a cardinal who is of the order of priests .
Certain clerics in many dioceses at the time , not just that of Rome , were said to be the key personnel -- the term gradually became exclusive to Rome to indicate those entrusted with electing the bishop of Rome , the pope .
Pope Paul VI abolished all administrative rights cardinals had with regard to their titular churches , though the cardinal 's name and coat of arms are still posted in the church , and they are expected to celebrate mass and preach there if convenient when they are in Rome .
While the number of cardinals was small from the times of the Roman Empire to the Renaissance , and frequently smaller than the number of recognized churches entitled to a cardinal priest , in the 16th century the College expanded markedly .
This limit was respected until 1958 , and the list of titular churches modified only on rare occasions , generally when a building fell into disrepair .
Today there are close to 150 titular churches , out of over 300 churches in Rome .
The speakers of Iranian languages are known as Iranian peoples .
Of the Old Iranian languages , the better understood and recorded ones are Old Persian -LRB- a language of Achaemenid Iran -RRB- and Avestan -LRB- the language of the Avesta -RRB- .
As of 2008 , there were an estimated 150 -- 200 million native speakers of Iranian languages .
Some recent scholarship , primarily in German , has revived this convention .
In turn , and together with Proto-Indo-Aryan and the Nuristani languages , Proto-Iranian descends from a common ancestor Proto-Indo-Iranian .
It was situated precisely in the western part of Central Asia that borders present-day Russia -LRB- and present-day Kazakhstan -RRB- .
These are :
Old Persian is the Old Iranian dialect as it was spoken in south-western Iran by the inhabitants of Parsa , who also gave their name to their region and language .
The language of the Avesta is subdivided into two dialects , conventionally known as `` Old -LRB- or ` Gathic ' -RRB- Avestan '' , and `` Younger Avestan '' .
These terms , which date to the 19th century , are slightly misleading since ` Younger Avestan ' is not only much younger than ` Old Avestan ' , but also from a different geographic region .
Unlike Old Persian , which has Middle Persian as its known successor , Avestan has no clearly identifiable Middle Iranian stage -LRB- the effect of Middle Iranian is indistinguishable from effects due to other causes -RRB- .
In addition to Old Persian and Avestan , which are the only directly attested Old Iranian languages , all Middle Iranian languages must have had a predecessor `` Old Iranian '' form of that language , and thus can all be said to have had an -LRB- at least hypothetical -RRB- `` Old '' form .
Additionally , the existence of unattested languages can sometimes be inferred from the impact they had on neighbouring languages .
Such transfer is known to have occurred for Old Persian , which has -LRB- what is called -RRB- a `` Median '' substrate in some of its vocabulary .
Conventionally , Iranian languages are grouped in `` western '' and `` eastern '' branches .
The geographic terms also have little meaning when applied to Younger Avestan since it is n't known where that dialect -LRB- or dialects -RRB- was spoken either .
Confusing the issue is the introduction of a western Iranian substrate in later Avestan compositions and redactions undertaken at the centers of imperial power in western Iran -LRB- either in the south-west in Persia , or in the north-west in Nisa/Parthia and Ecbatana/Media -RRB- .
Two of the earliest dialectal divisions among Iranian indeed happen to not follow the later division into Western and Eastern blocks .
As a common intermediate stage , it is possible to reconstruct depalatalized affricates : * c , * dz .
The two languages of the Western group were linguistically very close to each other , but quite distinct from their eastern counterparts .
The script used for Middle Persian in this era underwent significant maturity .
The name Dari comes from the word darbâr -LRB- دربار -RRB- , which refers to the royal court , where many of the poets , protagonists , and patrons of the literature flourished .
Dari may have been heavily influenced by regional dialects of eastern Iran , whereas the earlier Pahlavi standard was based more on western dialects .
This new prestige dialect became the basis of Standard New Persian .
They also noted that the unofficial language of the royalty itself was yet another dialect , `` Khuzi '' , associated with the western province of Khuzestan .
All three were adapted to the writing by the addition of a few letters .
The Arabic script remains in use in contemporary modern Persian .
The geographical regions in which Iranian languages were spoken were pushed back in several areas by newly neighbouring languages .
This resulted in the displacement and extinction of the once predominant Scythian languages of the region .
Various small Iranian languages in the Pamirs survive that are derived from Eastern Iranian .
Lighting can also be an intrinsic component of landscape projects .
Forms of lighting include alcove lighting , which like most other uplighting is indirect .
It is a form of backlighting .
These downlights can use narrow beam spotlights , or wider-angle floodlights , both of which are bulbs having their own reflectors .
There are also downlights with internal reflectors designed to accept common ` A ' lamps -LRB- light bulbs -RRB- which are generally less costly than reflector lamps .
Downlights can be incandescent , fluorescent , HID -LRB- high intensity discharge -RRB- or LED .
Prehistoric people used primitive oil lamps to illuminate surroundings .
These lamps were made from naturally occurring materials such as rocks , shells , horns and stones , were filled with grease , and had a fiber wick .
Lamps typically used animal or vegetable fats as fuel .
Fireflies have been used as lighting sources .
Candles and glass and pottery lamps were also invented .
Chandeliers were an early form of `` light fixture '' .
Major reductions in the cost of lighting occurred with the discovery of whale oil and kerosene .
The gas mantle boosted the luminosity of utility lighting and of kerosene lanterns .
Over time , electric lighting became ubiquitous in developed countries .
Some are very plain and functional , while some are pieces of art in themselves .
Nearly any material can be used , so long as it can tolerate the excess heat and is in keeping with safety codes .
A fixture using replaceable light sources can also have its efficiency quoted as the percentage of light passed from the `` bulb '' to the surroundings .
The more transparent the lighting fixture is , the higher efficacy .
Shading the light will normally decrease efficacy but increase the directionality and the visual comfort probability .
Color temperature for white light sources also affects their use for certain applications .
The color temperature of a white light source is the temperature in Kelvin of a theoretical black body emitter that most closely matches the spectral characteristics of the lamp .
For critical inspection or color matching tasks , or for retail displays of food and clothing , the color temperature of the lamps will be selected for the best overall lighting effect .
It has regained some popularity recently in low-voltage tracks , which often look nothing like their predecessors because they do not have the safety issues that line-voltage systems have , and are therefore less bulky and more ornamental in themselves .
There are traditional spots and floods , as well as other small hanging fixtures .
A sconce is a wall-mounted fixture , particularly one that shines up and sometimes down as well .
It is typically a floor lamp but may be wall-mounted like a sconce .
Magnifier lamps are also task lighting .
This uses diffuser panels hung like a suspended ceiling below fluorescent lights , and is considered general lighting .
Other forms include neon , which is not usually intended to illuminate anything else , but to actually be an artwork in itself .
The most common type of floodlights are metal halide and high pressure sodium lights .
These are extremely bright lights used to deter crime .
Security lights may include floodlights .
These lights are installed for safety , security , and for decoration .
Vehicles typically include headlamps and tail lights .
Many manufactures are turning to LED headlights as an energy-efficient alternative to traditional headlamps .
While lamps have traditionally been rated and marketed primarily in terms of their power consumption , expressed in watts , proliferation of lighting technology beyond the incandescent light bulb has eliminated the correspondence of wattage to the amount of light produced .
For example , a 60 W incandescent light bulb produces about the same amount of light as a 13 W compact fluorescent lamp .
Each of these technologies has a different efficacy in converting electrical energy to visible light .
Visible light output is typically measured in lumens .
This unit only quantifies the visible radiation , and excludes invisible infrared and ultraviolet light .
Rating and marketing emphasis is shifting away from wattage and towards lumen output , to give the purchaser a directly applicable basis upon which to select a lamp .
Lighting of structures considers aesthetic elements as well as practical considerations of quantity of light required , occupants of the structure , energy efficiency and cost .
In addition to paint , reflective surfaces also have an effect on lighting design .
This enables architects , lighting designers , and engineers to determine whether a proposed lighting setup will deliver the amount of light intended .
They will also be able to determine the contrast ratio between light and dark areas .
In many cases these studies are referenced against IESNA or CIBSE recommended lighting practices for the type of application .
Depending on the type of area , different design aspects may be emphasized for safety or practicality -LRB- i.e. such as maintaining uniform light levels , avoiding glare or highlighting certain areas -RRB- .
Specialized software is often used to create these , which typically combine the use of two-dimensional digital CAD drawings and lighting calculation software -LRB- i.e. AGi32or Dialux -RRB- .
Lighting illuminates the performers and artists in a live theatre , dance , or musical performance , and is selected and arranged to create dramatic effects .
Stage lighting uses general illumination technology in devices configured for easy adjustment of their output characteristics .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The setup of stage lighting is tailored for each scene of each production .
Dimmers , colored filters , reflectors , lenses , motorized or manually aimed lamps , and different kinds of flood and spot lights are among the tools used by a stage lighting designer to produce the desired effects .
Especially in the early days of these industries , very high light levels were required and heat produced by lighting equipment presented substantial challenges .
Modern cameras require less light , and modern light sources emit less heat .
Measurement of light or photometry is generally concerned with the amount of useful light falling on a surface and the amount of light emerging from a lamp or other source , along with the colors that can be rendered by this light .
The human eye responds differently to light from different parts of the visible spectrum , therefore photometric measurements must take the luminosity function into account when measuring the amount of useful light .
Luminance for instance is a measure of the density of luminous intensity in a given direction .
It describes the amount of light that passes through or is emitted from a particular area , and falls within a given solid angle .
It is used in photometry as a measure of the intensity , as perceived by the human eye , of light that hits or passes through a surface .
In English , `` lux '' is used in both singular and plural .
Several measurement methods have been developed to control glare resulting from indoor lighting design .
In addition to these new methods , four main factors influence the degree of discomfort glare ; the luminance of the glare source , the solid angle of the glare source , the background luminance , and the position of the glare source in the field of view must all be taken into account .
GAI represents the relative separation of object colors illuminated by a light source ; the greater the GAI , the greater the apparent saturation or vividness of the object colors .
As a result , light sources which balance both CRI and GAI are generally preferred over ones that have only high CRI or only high GAI .
Typical measurements of light have used a Dosimeter .
This is the first device created to accurately measure and characterize light -LRB- intensity , spectrum , timing , and duration -RRB- entering the eye that affects the human body 's clock .
The device measures activity and light together at regular time intervals and electronically stores and logs its operating temperature .
Clearly , much less light is required to illuminate a hallway compared to that needed for a word processing work station .
Generally speaking , the energy expended is proportional to the design illumination level .
For example , a lighting level of 400 lux might be chosen for a work environment involving meeting rooms and conferences , whereas a level of 80 lux could be selected for building hallways .
If the hallway standard simply emulates the conference room needs , then much more energy will be consumed than is needed .
Unfortunately , most of the lighting standards even today have been specified by industrial groups who manufacture and sell lighting , so that a historical commercial bias exists in designing most building lighting , especially for office and industrial settings .
Lighting control systems typically incorporate the use of time schedules , occupancy control , and photocell control -LRB- i.e.daylight harvesting -RRB- .
Some systems also support demand response and will automatically dim or turn off lights to take advantage of utility incentives .
Lighting control systems are sometimes incorporated into larger building automation systems .
The control must have an unobstructed view of the building area being scanned .
Doors , partitions , stairways , etc. will block motion detection and reduce its effectiveness .
The best applications for passive infrared occupancy sensors are open spaces with a clear view of the area being scanned .
A break in the pattern caused by any motion in the area triggers the control .
Ultrasonic sensors can see around obstructions and are best for areas with cabinets and shelving , restrooms , and open areas requiring 360-degree coverage .
Some occupancy sensors utilize both passive infrared and ultrasonic technology , but are usually more expensive .
They can be used to control one lamp , one fixture or many fixtures .
Daylighting is simply designing a space to use as much natural light as possible .
This decreases energy consumption and costs , and requires less heating and cooling from the building .
Daylighting has also been proven to have positive effects on patients in hospitals as well as work and school performance .
In addition , glare or excess light can decrease worker efficiency .
Analysis of lighting quality particularly emphasizes use of natural lighting , but also considers spectral content if artificial light is to be used .
Not only will greater reliance on natural light reduce energy consumption , but will favorably impact human health and performance .
New studies have shown that the performance of students is influenced by the time and duration of daylight in their regular schedules .
Designing school facilities to incorporate the right types of light at the right time of day for the right duration may improve student performance and well-being .
Circadian disruption may lead to numerous health problems including breast cancer , seasonal affective disorder , delayed sleep phase syndrome , and other ailments .
This study suggests that due to the nature of the scenery and daylight exposure was indeed healthier for patients as opposed to those exposed to little light from the brick wall .
In addition to increased work performance , proper usage of windows and daylighting crosses the boundaries between pure aesthetics and overall health .
The researchers asked participants to rate a number of things such as : the spiciness of chicken-wing sauce , the aggressiveness of a fictional character , how attractive someone was , their feelings about specific words , and the taste of two juices -- all under different lighting conditions .
In their study , they found that both positive and negative human emotions are felt more intensely in bright light .
Professor Xu stated , `` we found that on sunny days depression-prone people actually become more depressed . ''
They also found that dim light makes people make more rational decisions and settle negotiations easier .
In the dark , emotions are slightly suppressed .
However , emotions are intensified in the bright light .
Gesner 's kerosene was cheap , easy to produce , could be burned in existing lamps , and did not produce an offensive odor as did most whale oil .
It could be stored indefinitely , unlike whale oil , which would eventually spoil .
The American petroleum boom began in the 1850s .
By the end of the decade there were 30 kerosene plants operating in the United States .
The cheaper , more efficient fuel began to drive whale oil out of the market .
John D. Rockefeller was most responsible for the commercial success of kerosene .
He set up a network of kerosene distilleries which would later become Standard Oil , thus completely abolishing the need for whale-oil lamps .
These types of lamps may catch fire or emit carbon-monoxide and sometimes are odorous making them problematic for asthmatic people .
Due to the ability to reduce electric consumption , many organizations have undertaken measures to encourage the adoption of CFLs .
Some electric utilities and local governments have subsidized CFLs or provided them free to customers as a means of reducing electric demand .
For a given light output , CFLs use between one fifth and one quarter of the power of an equivalent incandescent lamp .
One of the simplest and quickest ways for a household or business to become more energy efficient is to adopt CFLs as the main lamp source , as suggested by the Alliance for Climate Protection .
Unlike incandescent lamps CFL 's need a little time to ` warm up ' and reach full brightness .
LED lamps have been advocated as the newest and best environmental lighting method .
A downside is still the initial cost , which is higher than that of compact fluorescent lamps .
Polluting light is often wasted light involving unnecessary energy costs and carbon dioxide emissions .
Light pollution is described as artificial light that is excessive or intrudes where it is not wanted .
Well-designed lighting sends light only where it is needed without scattering it elsewhere .
Poorly designed lighting can also compromise safety .
Shadows are good places to hide , while bright areas are more exposed .
It is often beneficial to fight with the Sun or other light source behind you , giving your enemy disturbing visual glare and partially hiding your own movements in backlight .
Publishing widely used standard metrics such as various CIE color spaces and the color rendering index .
This data is typically expressed in standardized form defined by the IESNA .
Those fully independent designers who meet the requirements for professional membership in the association typically append the abbreviation IALD to their name .
They publish a monthly newsletter and organise different events throughout the world .
Its members include manufacturers and distributors of stage and entertainment lighting , sound , rigging and similar products and services , and affiliated professionals in the area .
They lobby for and represent the interests of the industry at various levels , interacting with government and regulating bodies and presenting the case for the entertainment industry .
Each of the three branches would have defined abilities to check the powers of the other branches .
The executive branch acted in the name of the King -LRB- `` His Majesty 's Government '' -RRB- , as did the judiciary .
The King 's Ministers were in most cases members of one of the two Houses of Parliament , and the Government needed to sustain the support of a majority in the House of Commons .
One minister , the Lord Chancellor , was at the same time the sole judge in the Court of Chancery and the presiding officer in the House of Lords .
Therefore , it may be seen that the three branches of British government often violated the strict principle of separation of powers , even though there were many occasions when the different branches of the government disagreed with each other .
Some U.S. states did not observe a strict separation of powers in the 18th century .
In New Jersey , the Governor also functioned as a member of the state 's highest court and as the presiding officer of one house of the New Jersey Legislature .
In both Delaware and Pennsylvania , members of the executive council served at the same time as judges .
On the other hand , many southern states explicitly required separation of powers .
Where Congress does not make great and sweeping delegations of its authority , the Supreme Court has been less stringent .
Marshall wrote that `` a general provision may be made , and power given to those who are to act under such general provisions , to fill up the details . ''
Marshall 's words and future court decisions gave Congress much latitude in delegating powers .
It was held that Congress must set some standards governing the actions of executive officers .
The Court , however , has deemed that phrases such as `` just and reasonable , '' `` public interest '' and `` public convenience '' suffice .
By law -LRB- Section 2 . -RRB-
By using these words , the Constitution does not require the president to personally enforce the law ; rather , officers subordinate to the president may perform such duties .
This procedure is an integral part of the constitutional design for the separation of powers .
Further rulings clarified the case ; even both Houses acting together can not override Executive vetos without a 2⁄3 majority .
Legislation may always prescribe regulations governing executive officers .
If a court 's judges do not have such attributes , the court may not exercise the judicial power of the United States .
In Murray 's Lessee v. Hoboken Land & Improvement Co. -LRB- 1856 -RRB- , the Supreme Court held that a legislative court may not decide `` a suit at the common law , or in equity , or admiralty , '' as such a suit is inherently judicial .
Legislative courts may only adjudicate `` public rights '' questions -LRB- cases between the government and an individual and political determinations -RRB- .
When the two houses of Congress can not agree on a date for adjournment , the president may settle the dispute .
Either house or both houses may be called into emergency session by the president .
He also has the power to issue pardons and reprieves .
Such pardons are not subject to confirmation by either the House of Representatives or the Senate , or even to acceptance by the recipient .
He has the authority to command them to take appropriate military action in the event of a sudden crisis .
This concept is not written into the Constitution , but was envisioned by many of the Constitution 's Framers -LRB- for example , The Federalist Papers mention it -RRB- .
There were protests by some at this decision , born chiefly of political expediency , but political realities in the particular case paradoxically restrained opposing views from asserting themselves .
For this reason , precedent alone established the principle that a court may strike down a law it deems unconstitutional .
But only Supreme Court decisions are binding across the nation .
Decisions of a Court of Appeals , for instance , are binding only in the circuit over which the court has jurisdiction .
The rules of the Senate , however , generally do not grant much authority to the presiding officer .
Thus , the Chief Justice 's role in this regard is a limited one .
The Constitution does not explicitly indicate the pre-eminence of any particular branch of government .
In republican government , the legislative authority necessarily predominates . ''
Both have had periods of great power and weakness such as immediately after the Civil War when republicans had a majority in Congress and were able to pass major legislation and shoot down most of the president 's vetoes .
They also passed acts to essentially make the president subordinate to Congress , such as the Tenure of Office Act .
Johnson 's later impeachment also cost the presidency much political power .
However the president has also exercised greater power largely during the 20th century .
Both Roosevelts greatly expanded the powers of the president and wielded great power during their terms .
James Madison , a firm believer in a strong executive , vetoed seven bills .
None of the first six Presidents , however , used the veto to direct national policy .
Furthermore , he defied the Supreme Court in enforcing the policy of ethnically cleansing Native American tribes -LRB- `` Indian Removal '' -RRB- ; he stated -LRB- perhaps apocryphally -RRB- , `` John Marshall has made his decision .
Now let him enforce it ! ''
Some of Jackson 's successors made no use of the veto power , while others used it intermittently .
It was only after the Civil War that presidents began to use the power to truly counterbalance Congress .
Andrew Johnson , a Democrat , vetoed several Reconstruction bills passed by the `` Radical Republicans . ''
The Act required Senate approval for the dismissal of senior Cabinet officials .
When Johnson deliberately violated the Act , which he felt was unconstitutional -LRB- Supreme Court decisions later vindicated such a position -RRB- , the House of Representatives impeached him ; he was acquitted in the Senate by one vote .
Johnson 's impeachment was perceived to have done great damage to the presidency , which came to be almost subordinate to Congress .
Some believed that the president would become a mere figurehead , with the Speaker of the House of Representatives becoming a de facto Prime Minister .
During his first term , he vetoed over four hundred bills -- twice as many bills as his twenty-one predecessors combined .
He also began to suspend bureaucrats who were appointed as a result of the patronage system , replacing them with more `` deserving '' individuals .
The Senate , however , refused to confirm many new nominations , instead demanding that Cleveland turn over the confidential records relating to the suspensions .
Cleveland steadfastly refused , asserting , `` These suspensions are my executive acts ... I am not responsible to the Senate , and I am unwilling to submit my actions to them for judgment . ''
Cleveland 's popular support forced the Senate to back down and confirm the nominees .
Furthermore , Congress finally repealed the controversial Tenure of Office Act that had been passed during the Johnson Administration .
Overall , this meant that Cleveland 's Administration marked the end of presidential subordination .
Several twentieth-century presidents have attempted to greatly expand the power of the presidency .
Theodore Roosevelt , for instance , claimed that the president was permitted to do whatever was not explicitly prohibited by the law -- in direct contrast to his immediate successor , William Howard Taft .
Franklin Delano Roosevelt held considerable power during the Great Depression .
The aforementioned Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States , another separation of powers case , was also decided during Franklin Roosevelt 's presidency .
In response to many unfavorable Supreme Court decisions , Roosevelt introduced a `` Court Packing '' plan , under which more seats would be added to the Supreme Court for the president to fill .
Such a plan -LRB- which was defeated in Congress -RRB- would have seriously undermined the judiciary 's independence and power .
He asserted , for example , that `` the inherent power of the President to safeguard the security of the nation '' authorized him to order a wiretap without a judge 's warrant .
Nixon also asserted that `` executive privilege '' shielded him from all legislative oversight ; furthermore , he impounded federal funds -LRB- that is to say , he refused to spend money that Congress had appropriated for government programs -RRB- .
In the specific cases aforementioned , however , the Supreme Court ruled against Nixon .
This was also because of an ongoing criminal investigation into the Watergate tapes , even though they acknowledged the general need for executive privilege .
Since then , Nixon 's successors have sometimes asserted that they may act in the interests of national security or that executive privilege shields them from Congressional oversight .
Though such claims have in general been more limited than Nixon 's , one may still conclude that the presidency 's power has been greatly augmented since the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries .
It is said -LSB- by whom ? -RSB-
on one side of this debate that separation of powers means that powers are shared among different branches ; no one branch may act unilaterally on issues -LRB- other than perhaps minor questions -RRB- , but must obtain some form of agreement across branches .
An example of the first view is the regulation of attorneys and judges , and the establishment of rules for the conduct of the courts , by the Congress and in the states the legislatures .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The State of New Hampshire also follows this system .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
An equivalent in modern English would be :
The most important aspect of beauty was therefore an inherent part of an object , rather than something applied superficially ; and was based on universal , recognisable truths .
Ingenuity is at work .
The architecture of different parts of Asia developed along different lines from that of Europe ; Buddhist , Hindu and Sikh architecture each having different characteristics .
Examples can be found throughout the Middle East , North Africa , Spain and the Indian Sub-continent .
Buildings were ascribed to specific architects -- Brunelleschi , Alberti , Michelangelo , Palladio -- and the cult of the individual had begun .
It requires the creative manipulation and coordination of materials and technology , and of light and shadow .
Often , conflicting requirements must be resolved .
Documentation produced by architects , typically drawings , plans and technical specifications , defines the structure and/or behavior of a building or other kind of system that is to be or has been constructed .
Vernacular architecture became increasingly ornamental .
The rise of the profession of industrial design is usually placed here .
Buildings displayed their functional and structural elements , exposing steel beams and concrete surfaces instead of hiding them behind decorative forms .
Postmodernism produced a style that combined contemporary building technology and cheap materials , with the aesthetics of older pre-modern and non-modern styles , from high classical architecture to popular or vernacular regional building styles .
In addition , there has been an increased separation of the ` design ' architect -LSB- Notes 1 -RSB- from the ` project ' architect who ensures that the project meets the required standards and deals with matters of liability .
-LSB- Notes 2 -RSB- The preparatory processes for the design of any large building have become increasingly complicated , and require preliminary studies of such matters as durability , sustainability , quality , money , and compliance with local laws .
Many developers , those who support the financing of buildings , have become educated to encourage the facilitation of environmentally sustainable design , rather than solutions based primarily on immediate cost .
Major examples of this can be found in Passive solar building design , greener roof designs , biodegradable materials , and more attention to a structure 's energy usage .
There has been an acceleration in the number of buildings which seek to meet green building sustainable design principles .
Sustainable practices that were at the core of vernacular architecture increasingly provide inspiration for environmentally and socially sustainable contemporary techniques .
The origins of the HDI are found in the annual Development Reports of the United Nations Development Programme -LRB- UNDP -RRB- .
To produce the Human Development Reports , Mahbub ul Haq formed a group of development economists including Paul Streeten , Frances Stewart , Gustav Ranis , Keith Griffin , Sudhir Anand , and Meghnad Desai .
Haq was sure that a simple composite measure of human development was needed in order to convince the public , academics , and politicians that they can and should evaluate development not only by economic advances but also improvements in human well-being .
Sen initially opposed this idea , but he soon went on to help Haq develop the Index .
Sen was worried that it was going to be difficult to capture the full complexity of human capabilities in a single index , but Haq persuaded him that only a single number would shift the immediate attention of politicians from economic to human well-being .
In general , to transform a raw variable , say , into a unit-free index between 0 and 1 -LRB- which allows different indices to be added together -RRB- , the following formula is used :
Below is the list of the `` very high human development '' countries :
Below is the list of the `` very high human development '' countries :
Below is the list of the `` very high human development '' countries :
Below is the list of the `` very high human development '' countries -LRB- equal to the top quartile -RRB- :
Below is the list of the `` very high human development '' countries :
Below is a list of countries in the top quartile by IHDI :
The following United Nations Member States were not included in the 2010 report .
The UNDP explained that Cuba had been excluded due to the lack of an `` internationally reported figure for Cuba 's Gross National Income adjusted for Purchasing Power Parity '' .
All other indicators for Cuba were available , and reported by the UNDP , but the lack of one indicator meant that no ranking could be attributed to the country .
They are :
Besides the states with limited recognition , the following states were also not included .
A new index was released on December 18 , 2008 .
The update is relevant due to newly released estimates of purchasing power parities -LRB- PPP -RRB- , implying substantial adjustments for many countries , resulting in changes in HDI values and , in many cases , HDI ranks .
Not all UN member states choose to or are able to provide the necessary statistics .
The report showed a small increase in world HDI in comparison with last year 's report .
This rise was fueled by a general improvement in the developing world , especially of the least developed countries group .
Nine countries departed from this category this year and joined the `` medium development '' group .
This includes all developed countries , such as those in North America , Western Europe , Oceania , and Eastern Asia , as well as some developing countries in Eastern Europe , Central and South America , Southeast Asia , the Caribbean , and the oil-rich Arabian Peninsula .
They are followed by the number of spaces they moved .
The list below displays the top-ranked country from each year of the Human Development Index .
Economists Hendrik Wolff , Howard Chong and Maximilian Auffhammer discuss the HDI from the perspective of data error in the underlying health , education and income statistics used to construct the HDI .
The authors suggest that the United Nations should discontinue the practice of classifying countries into development bins because - they claim - the cut-off values seem arbitrary , can provide incentives for strategic behavior in reporting official statistics , and have the potential to misguide politicians , investors , charity donors and the public who use the HDI at large .
The Human Development Report Office states that they undertook a systematic revision of the methods used for the calculation of the HDI and that the new methodology directly addresses the critique by Wolff et al. in that it generates a system for continuous updating of the human development categories whenever formula or data revisions take place .
Southern Europe 's most emblematic climate is that of the Mediterranean climate , which has become a typically known characteristic of the area .
The Mediterranean and Submediterranean climate regions in Europe are found in much of Southern Europe , mainly in Southern Portugal , most of Spain , the southern coast of France , Italy , the Croatian coast , much of Bosnia , Montenegro , Albania , Macedonia , Greece , and the Mediterranean islands .
The Roman Empire came to dominate the entire Mediterranean basin in a vast empire based on Roman law and Roman legions .
It promoted trade , tolerance , and Greek culture .
Several Crusader states were founded in the eastern Mediterranean .
These were all short-lived .
The Crusaders would have a profound impact on many parts of Europe .
Though it would later be re-established , it would never recover its former glory .
Dynastic struggles and wars of conquest kept many of the states of Europe at war for much of the period .
An unprecedented series of major wars and political revolutions took place around Europe and indeed the world in the period between 1610 and 1700 .
Observers at the time , and many historians since , have argued that wars caused the revolutions .
Leonardo da Vinci painted the most famous work in the world .
Italy unified into a nation state .
Following the Allied victory in the Second World War , Europe was divided by the Iron Curtain .
The countries in Southeastern Europe were dominated by the Soviet Union and became communist states .
The major non-communist Southern European countries joined a US-led military alliance -LRB- NATO -RRB- and formed the European Economic Community amongst themselves .
Yugoslavia was neutal .
Italy became a major industrialized country again , due to its post-war economic miracle .
-LRB- See the Latin Arch . -RRB-
Additionally , other varieties of Greek are spoken in small communities in parts of other European counties .
Several South Slavic languages are spoken by millions of people in Southern Europe .
There are other language groupings in Southern Europe .
Due to the historical break of the Christian Church into the western half based in Rome and the eastern half based in Constantinople , different branches of Christianity are prodominent in different parts of Europe .
Countries which belong to the Southern/Mediterranean Europe are :
The services are funded by a television licence .
The BBC operates several television networks , television stations -LRB- although there is generally very little distinction between the two terms in the UK -RRB- , and related programming services in the United Kingdom .
This system used a vertically-scanned image of 30 lines -- just enough resolution for a close-up of one person , and with a bandwidth low enough to use existing radio transmitters .
By late 1930 , 30 minutes of morning programmes were broadcast Monday to Friday , and 30 minutes at midnight on Tuesdays and Fridays , after BBC radio went off the air .
Regularly scheduled electronically scanned television began from Alexandra Palace in London on 2 November 1936 , to just a few hundred viewers in the immediate area .
The VHF broadcasts would have provided an ideal radio beacon for German bombers homing in on London , and the engineers and technicians of the service would be needed for the war effort , in particular the radar programme .
How are you ?
Do you remember me , Jasmine Bligh ? '
.
-LSB- unreliable source ? -RSB-
-LSB- original research ? -RSB-
-LSB- original research ? -RSB-
A videotape made on the opening night was rediscovered in 2003 by a BBC technician .
BBC2 was the first British channel to use UHF and 625-line pictures , giving higher definition than the existing VHF 405-line system .
National and regional variations also occur within the BBC One and BBC Two schedules .
BBC One and BBC Two schedules in the other UK nations can vary immensely from BBC One and BBC Two in England .
.
BBC Wales also produces a large amount of Welsh language programming for S4C , particularly news , sport and other programmes , especially the soap opera Pobol y Cwm -LRB- ` People of the Valley ' -RRB- .
The BBC is also renowned for its production of costume dramas , such as Jane Austen 's Pride and Prejudice and contemporary social dramas such as Boys from the Blackstuff and Our Friends in the North .
Because of the availability of programmes in English , few programmes need use sub-titles or dubbing unlike much European television .
This service allows BBC viewers to view textual information such as the latest news on their television .
Later , when rights contracts were renewed , this problem was resolved .
A special edition of Radio Times was also produced , as well as a special section of the BBC News Online website .
Little Angels was the first reality parenting show and its most famous episode saw Welsh actress Jynine James try to cope with the tantrums of her six-year-old son .
This includes viewers who watch real-time streams of the BBC 's channels online or via their mobile phone .
It ceased operations after its Japanese distributor folded .
Schwarzenegger has remained a prominent presence in bodybuilding and has written many books and articles on the sport .
He is widely considered to be among the greatest bodybuilders of all times as well as its biggest icon .
Schwarzenegger gained worldwide fame as a Hollywood action film icon .
In 1984 , he appeared in James Cameron 's science-fiction thriller film The Terminator , which was a massive critical and box-office success .
Schwarzenegger subsequently reprised the Terminator character in the franchise 's later installments in 1991 , 2003 , and 2015 .
He appeared in a number of successful films , such as Commando -LRB- 1985 -RRB- , The Running Man -LRB- 1987 -RRB- , Predator -LRB- 1987 -RRB- , Twins -LRB- 1988 -RRB- , Total Recall -LRB- 1990 -RRB- , Kindergarten Cop -LRB- 1990 -RRB- and True Lies -LRB- 1994 -RRB- .
Schwarzenegger was sworn in on November 17 , to serve the remainder of Davis 's term .
Schwarzenegger was then re-elected on November 7 , 2006 , in California 's 2006 gubernatorial election , to serve a full term as governor , defeating Democrat Phil Angelides , who was California State Treasurer at the time .
He married Arnold 's mother on October 20 , 1945 ; -- he was 38 , and she was 23 years old .
According to Schwarzenegger , both of his parents were very strict : `` Back then in Austria it was a very different world , if we did something bad or we disobeyed our parents , the rod was not spared . ''
He grew up in a Roman Catholic family who attended Mass every Sunday .
His favoritism was `` strong and blatant , '' which stemmed from unfounded suspicion that Arnold was not his biological child .
Schwarzenegger has said his father had `` no patience for listening or understanding your problems . ''
Schwarzenegger had a good relationship with his mother and kept in touch with her until her death .
In later life , Schwarzenegger commissioned the Simon Wiesenthal Center to research his father 's wartime record , which came up with no evidence of Gustav 's being involved in atrocities , despite Gustav 's membership in the Nazi Party and SA .
Schwarzenegger 's father 's background received wide press attention during the 2003 California recall campaign .
At school , Schwarzenegger was apparently in the middle but stood out for his `` cheerful , good-humored and exuberant '' character .
As a boy , Schwarzenegger played several sports , heavily influenced by his father .
At the age of 14 , he chose bodybuilding over soccer as a career .
Schwarzenegger has responded to a question asking if he was 13 when he started weightlifting : `` I actually started weight training when I was 15 , but I 'd been participating in sports , like soccer , for years , so I felt that although I was slim , I was well-developed , at least enough so that I could start going to the gym and start Olympic lifting . ''
However , his official website biography claims : `` At 14 , he started an intensive training program with Dan Farmer , studied psychology at 15 -LRB- to learn more about the power of mind over body -RRB- and at 17 , officially started his competitive career . ''
During a speech in 2001 , he said , `` My own plan formed when I was 14 years old .
My mother wanted me to go to trade school . ''
When Reeves died in 2000 , Schwarzenegger fondly remembered him : `` As a teenager , I grew up with Steve Reeves .
His remarkable accomplishments allowed me a sense of what was possible , when others around me did n't always understand my dreams .
Steve Reeves has been part of everything I 've ever been fortunate enough to achieve . ''
In 1961 , Schwarzenegger met former Mr. Austria Kurt Marnul , who invited him to train at the gym in Graz .
He was so dedicated as a youngster that he broke into the local gym on weekends , when it was usually closed , so that he could train .
`` It would make me sick to miss a workout ... I knew I could n't look at myself in the mirror the next morning if I did n't do it . ''
When Schwarzenegger was asked about his first movie experience as a boy , he replied : `` I was very young , but I remember my father taking me to the Austrian theaters and seeing some newsreels .
Meinhard had been drinking and was killed instantly .
Schwarzenegger did not attend his funeral .
Schwarzenegger would pay for Patrick 's education and help him to emigrate to the United States .
In Pumping Iron , Schwarzenegger claimed that he did not attend his father 's funeral because he was training for a bodybuilding contest .
Later , he and the film 's producer said this story was taken from another bodybuilder for the purpose of showing the extremes that some would go to for their sport and to make Schwarzenegger 's image more cold and machine-like in order to fan controversy for the film .
Over time , he has given at least three versions of why he was absent from his father 's funeral .
I was hit with belts .
So was the kid next door .
It was just the way it was .
Many of the children I 've seen were broken by their parents , which was the German-Austrian mentality .
They did n't want to create an individual .
It was all about conforming .
I was one who did not conform , and whose will could not be broken .
Therefore , I became a rebel .
Every time I got hit , and every time someone said , ` you ca n't do this , ' I said , ` this is not going to be for much longer , because I 'm going to move out of here .
I want to be rich .
I want to be somebody . ' ''
Schwarzenegger served in the Austrian Army in 1965 to fulfill the one year of service required at the time of all 18-year-old Austrian males .
He went AWOL during basic training so he could take part in the competition and spent a week in military prison : `` Participating in the competition meant so much to me that I did n't carefully think through the consequences . ''
He won another bodybuilding contest in Graz , at Steirer Hof Hotel -LRB- where he had placed second -RRB- .
He was voted best built man of Europe , which made him famous .
He would come in second in the Mr. Universe competition , not having the muscle definition of American winner Chester Yorton .
Charles `` Wag '' Bennett , one of the judges at the 1966 competition , was impressed with Schwarzenegger and he offered to coach him .
As Schwarzenegger had little money , Bennett invited him to stay in his crowded family home above one of his two gyms in Forest Gate , London , England .
Staying in the East End of London helped Schwarzenegger improve his rudimentary grasp of the English language .
The training paid off and , in 1967 , Schwarzenegger won the title for the first time , becoming the youngest ever Mr. Universe at the age of 20 .
He would go on to win the title a further three times .
He frequently told Roger C. Field , his English coach and friend in Munich at that time , `` I 'm going to become the greatest actor ! ''
There he trained at Gold 's Gym in Venice , Los Angeles , California , under Joe Weider .
Schwarzenegger also became good friends with professional wrestler Superstar Billy Graham .
Immigration law firm Siskind & Susser have stated that Schwarzenegger may have been an illegal immigrant at some point in the late 1960s or early 1970s because of violations in the terms of his visa .
Schwarzenegger has remained a prominent face in the bodybuilding sport long after his retirement , in part because of his ownership of gyms and fitness magazines .
He has presided over numerous contests and awards shows .
When the deal , including the contract that gave Schwarzenegger at least $ 1 million a year , was made public in 2005 , many criticized it as being a conflict of interest since the governor 's office made decisions concerning regulation of dietary supplements in California .
Consequently , Schwarzenegger relinquished the executive editor role in 2005 .
American Media Inc. , which owns Muscle & Fitness and Flex , announced in March 2013 that Schwarzenegger had accepted their renewed offer to be executive editor of the magazines .
He won Mr. Europe the following year , at age 19 .
He would go on to compete in , and win , many bodybuilding contests .
Schwarzenegger continues to work out even today .
is lifted between the legs while standing on two foot rests .
Schwarzenegger 's goal was to become the greatest bodybuilder in the world , which meant becoming Mr. Olympia .
He continued his winning streak in the 1971 -- 74 competitions .
Lou Ferrigno proved not to be a threat , and a lighter-than-usual Schwarzenegger convincingly won the 1975 Mr. Olympia .
Schwarzenegger came out of retirement , however , to compete in the 1980 Mr. Olympia .
He kept this plan a secret , in the event that a training accident would prevent his entry and cause him to lose face .
Schwarzenegger had been hired to provide color commentary for network television , when he announced at the eleventh hour that while he was there : `` Why not compete ? ''
After being declared Mr. Olympia for a seventh time , Schwarzenegger then officially retired from competition .
I did not use them for muscle growth , but rather for muscle maintenance when cutting up . ''
He has called the drugs `` tissue building . ''
Schwarzenegger has discussed his early struggles in developing his acting career .
You name it , and they told me I had to change it .
Basically , everywhere I turned , I was told that I had no chance . ''
In 1977 , he also appeared in an episode of the ABC situation comedy The San Pedro Beach Bums .
Later , Lou Ferrigno got the part of Dr. David Banner 's alter ego .
Schwarzenegger 's breakthrough film was the sword-and-sorcery epic Conan the Barbarian in 1982 , which was a box-office hit .
In 1983 , Schwarzenegger starred in the promotional video , Carnival in Rio .
Following this , Schwarzenegger made Red Sonja in 1985 .
Schwarzenegger 's roles reflected his sense of humor , separating him from more serious action hero films , such as the alternative universe poster for Terminator 2 : Judgment Day starring Stallone in the comedy thriller Last Action Hero .
A science fiction script , the film was based on the Philip K. Dick short story `` We Can Remember It for You Wholesale '' .
Kindergarten Cop -LRB- 1990 -RRB- reunited him with director Ivan Reitman , who directed him in Twins .
He has not directed since .
His next film project , the 1993 self-aware action comedy spoof Last Action Hero , was released opposite Jurassic Park , and did not do well at the box office .
This film brought him his second Golden Globe nomination , this time for Best Actor -- Musical or Comedy .
It was followed by the action thriller Eraser -LRB- 1996 -RRB- , the Christmas comedy Jingle All The Way -LRB- 1996 -RRB- , and the comic book-based Batman & Robin -LRB- 1997 -RRB- , in which he played the villain Mr. Freeze .
This was his final film before taking time to recuperate from a back injury .
Following the critical failure of Batman & Robin , his film career and box office prominence went into decline .
He returned with the supernatural thriller End of Days -LRB- 1999 -RRB- , later followed by the action films The 6th Day -LRB- 2000 -RRB- and Collateral Damage -LRB- 2002 -RRB- , both of which failed to do well at the box office .
Schwarzenegger reportedly said he was flattered , but thought the money would be better spent on social projects and the Special Olympics .
His film appearances after becoming Governor of California included a three-second cameo appearance in The Rundown , and the 2004 remake of Around the World in 80 Days .
He voiced Baron von Steuben in the Liberty 's Kids episode `` Valley Forge '' .
He had been rumored to be appearing in Terminator Salvation as the original T-800 ; he denied his involvement , but he ultimately did appear briefly via his image being inserted into the movie from stock footage of the first Terminator movie .
Schwarzenegger appeared in Sylvester Stallone 's The Expendables , where he made a cameo appearance .
On March 6 , 2011 , at the Arnold Seminar of the Arnold Classic , Schwarzenegger revealed that he was being considered for several films , including sequels to The Terminator and remakes of Predator and The Running Man , and that he was `` packaging '' a comic book character .
Schwarzenegger would have voiced the Governator .
On July 11 , 2011 , it was announced that Schwarzenegger was considering a comeback film despite his legal problems .
He starred in Sabotage , released in March 2014 , and appeared in The Expendables 3 , released in August 2014 .
Schwarzenegger has been a registered Republican for many years .
As an actor , his political views were always well known as they contrasted with those of many other prominent Hollywood stars , who are generally considered to be a liberal and Democratic-leaning community .
Schwarzenegger 's first political appointment was as chairman of the President 's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports , on which he served from 1990 to 1993 .
He later served as Chairman for the California Governor 's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports under Governor Pete Wilson .
He replied , `` I think about it many times .
The possibility is there , because I feel it inside . ''
Following his initial comments , Schwarzenegger said , `` I 'm in show business -- I am in the middle of my career .
Why would I go away from that and jump into something else ? ''
Schwarzenegger had the most name recognition in a crowded field of candidates , but he had never held public office and his political views were unknown to most Californians .
Schwarzenegger declined to participate in several debates with other recall replacement candidates , and appeared in only one debate on September 24 , 2003 .
Schwarzenegger was elected Governor of California under the second question on the ballot with 48.6 % of the vote to choose a successor to Davis .
Under the regulations of the California Constitution , no runoff election was required .
Schwarzenegger was equally entrenched in what he considered to be his mandate in cleaning up gridlock .
Schwarzenegger 's early victories included repealing an unpopular increase in the vehicle registration fee as well as preventing driver 's licenses being given out to illegal immigrants , but later he began to feel the backlash when powerful state unions began to oppose his various initiatives .
Schwarzenegger accepted personal responsibility for the defeats and vowed to continue to seek consensus for the people of California .
He would later comment that `` no one could win if the opposition raised 160 million dollars to defeat you '' .
The U.S. Supreme Court later found the public employee unions ' use of compulsory fundraising during the campaign had been illegal in Knox v. Service Employees International Union , Local 1000 .
Schwarzenegger gradually moved towards a more politically moderate position , determined to build a winning legacy with only a short time to go until the next gubernatorial election .
Despite a poor year nationally for the Republican party , Schwarzenegger won re-election with 56.0 % of the vote compared with 38.9 % for Angelides , a margin of well over one million votes .
In recent years , many commentators have seen Schwarzenegger as moving away from the right and towards the center of the political spectrum .
I would say center-left '' .
This turned out to be false .
Leigh portrays Schwarzenegger as obsessed with power and quotes him as saying , `` I wanted to be part of the small percentage of people who were leaders , not the large mass of followers .
I think it is because I saw leaders use 100 % of their potential -- I was always fascinated by people in control of other people . ''
Schwarzenegger has said that it was never his intention to enter politics , but he says , `` I married into a political family .
You get together with them and you hear about policy , about reaching out to help people .
Eunice Kennedy Shriver was sister of John F. Kennedy , and mother-in-law to Schwarzenegger ; Sargent Shriver is husband to Eunice and father-in-law to Schwarzenegger .
He can not run for president as he is not a natural born citizen of the United States .
Being Austrian and thus European , he was able to win the 2007 European Voice campaigner of the year award for taking action against climate change with the California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 and plans to introduce an emissions trading scheme with other US states and possibly with the EU .
Giuliani dropped out of the presidential race on January 30 , 2008 , largely because of a poor showing in Florida , and endorsed McCain .
Later that night , Schwarzenegger was in the audience at a Republican debate at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in California .
The following day , he endorsed McCain , joking , `` It 's Rudy 's fault ! ''
-LRB- in reference to his friendships with both candidates and that he could not make up his mind -RRB- .
Three of the women claimed he had grabbed their breasts , a fourth said he placed his hand under her skirt on her buttock .
Schwarzenegger admitted that he has `` behaved badly sometimes '' and apologized , but also stated that `` a lot of -LSB- what -RSB- you see in the stories is not true '' .
Schwarzenegger is shown smoking a marijuana joint after winning Mr. Olympia in the 1975 documentary film Pumping Iron .
It 's a leaf .
My drug was pumping iron , trust me . ''
His spokesperson later said the comment was meant to be a joke .
A joint statement read : `` The parties are content to put this matter behind them and are pleased that this legal dispute has now been settled . ''
Schwarzenegger became a naturalized U.S. citizen on September 17 , 1983 .
Shortly before he gained his citizenship , he asked the Austrian authorities for the right to keep his Austrian citizenship , as Austria does not usually allow dual citizenship .
His request was granted , and he retained his Austrian citizenship .
This demand was based on Article 33 of the Austrian Citizenship Act that states : `` A citizen , who is in the public service of a foreign country , shall be deprived of his citizenship , if he heavily damages the reputation or the interests of the Austrian Republic . ''
Pilz claimed that Schwarzenegger 's actions in support of the death penalty -LRB- prohibited in Austria under Protocol 13 of the European Convention on Human Rights -RRB- had indeed done damage to Austria 's reputation .
Schwarzenegger explained his actions by referring to the fact that his only duty as Governor of California was to prevent an error in the judicial system .
Schwarzenegger also signed a second global warming bill that prohibits large utilities and corporations in California from making long-term contracts with suppliers who do not meet the state 's greenhouse gas emission standards .
In 2005 , Schwarzenegger issued an executive order calling to reduce greenhouse gases to 80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050 .
Any power plants that exceed emissions for the amount of carbon credits will have to purchase more credits to cover the difference .
In addition to using his political power to fight global warming , the governor has taken steps at his home to reduce his personal carbon footprint .
Schwarzenegger has adapted one of his Hummers to run on hydrogen and another to run on biofuels .
He has reportedly been lobbying legislators about a possible constitutional change , or filing a legal challenge to the provision .
Schwarzenegger has had a highly successful business career .
His financial independence came from his success as a budding entrepreneur with a series of successful business ventures and investments .
Schwarzenegger and Columbu used profits from their bricklaying venture to start a mail order business , selling bodybuilding and fitness-related equipment and instructional tapes .
He would later go on to invest in a number of real estate holding companies .
Schwarzenegger said the company had not had the success he had hoped for , claiming he wanted to focus his attention on `` new US global business ventures '' and his movie career .
He has talked about some of those who have helped him over the years in business : `` I could n't have learned about business without a parade of teachers guiding me ... from Milton Friedman to Donald Trump ... and now , Les Wexner and Warren Buffett .
I even learned a thing or two from Planet Hollywood , such as when to get out !
And I did ! ''
Schwarzenegger is also the owner of Arnold 's Sports Festival , which he started in 1989 and is held annually in Columbus , Ohio .
It is a festival that hosts thousands of international health and fitness professionals which has also expanded into a three-day expo .
Schwarzenegger 's net worth had been conservatively estimated at $ 100 -- $ 200 million .
Over the years as an investor , he invested his bodybuilding and movie earnings in an array of stocks , bonds , privately controlled companies , and real estate holdings worldwide , making his net worth as an accurate estimation difficult to calculate , particularly in light of declining real estate values owing to economic recessions in the U.S. and Europe since the late 2000s .
Schwarzenegger once said of his fortune , `` Money does n't make you happy .
I now have $ 50 million , but I was just as happy when I had $ 48 million . ''
He has also stated , `` I 've made many millions as a businessman many times over . ''
In 1969 , Schwarzenegger met Barbara Outland -LRB- later Barbara Outland Baker -RRB- , an English teacher he lived with until 1974 .
Schwarzenegger talked about Barbara in his memoir in 1977 : `` Basically it came down to this : she was a well-balanced woman who wanted an ordinary , solid life , and I was not a well-balanced man , and hated the very idea of ordinary life . ''
Baker has described Schwarzenegger as '' -LSB- a -RSB- joyful personality , totally charismatic , adventurous , and athletic '' but claims towards the end of the relationship he became `` insufferable -- classically conceited -- the world revolved around him '' .
Although Baker , at times , painted an unflattering portrait of her former lover , Schwarzenegger actually contributed to the tell-all book with a foreword , and also met with Baker for three hours .
Baker claims , for example , that she only learned of his being unfaithful after they split , and talks of a turbulent and passionate love life .
Schwarzenegger has made it clear that their respective recollection of events can differ .
They shared an apartment in Santa Monica for three and a half years , and having little money , would visit the beach all day , or have barbecues in the back yard .
He just had this huge determination to prove himself , and that was very attractive ... I 'll go to my grave knowing Arnold loved me . ''
According to Moray , the couple led an open relationship : `` We were faithful when we were both in LA ... but when he was out of town , we were free to do whatever we wanted . ''
The Rev. John Baptist Riordan performed the ceremony at St. Francis Xavier Catholic Church .
Schwarzenegger lives in a 11,000-square-foot -LRB- 1,000 m2 -RRB- home in Brentwood .
The divorcing couple currently own vacation homes in Sun Valley , Idaho and Hyannis Port , Massachusetts .
They attended St. Monica 's Catholic Church .
`` After leaving the governor 's office I told my wife about this event , which occurred over a decade ago , '' Schwarzenegger said in a statement issued to The Times .
In the statement , Schwarzenegger did not mention that he had confessed to his wife only after Shriver had confronted him with the information , which she had done after confirming with the housekeeper what she had suspected about the child .
The pregnant Baena was working in the home while Shriver was pregnant with the youngest of the couple 's four children .
Schwarzenegger says it took seven or eight years before he found out that he had fathered a child with his housekeeper .
It was n't until the boy `` started looking like me , that 's when I kind of got it .
I put things together , '' the action star and former California governor , told 60 Minutes .
Schwarzenegger has taken financial responsibility for the child `` from the start and continued to provide support . ''
Baena separated from her husband , Rogelio , in 1997 , a few months after Joseph 's birth , and filed for divorce in 2008 .
Baena 's ex-husband says that the child 's birth certificate was falsified and that he plans to sue Schwarzenegger for engaging in conspiracy to falsify a public document , a serious crime in California .
Kaufman has earlier handled divorce cases for celebrities such as Jennifer Aniston and Reese Witherspoon .
Schwarzenegger will keep the Brentwood home as part of their divorce settlement and Shriver has purchased a new home nearby so that the children may travel easily between their parents ' homes .
They will share custody of the two minor children .
However , he claims this was not intentional and that he signed the initial documents without having properly read them .
Schwarzenegger has filed amended divorce papers remedying this .
When asked in 2014 `` Of all the things you are famous for ... which are you least proud of ? ''
, Schwarzenegger replied `` I 'm least proud of the mistakes I made that caused my family pain and split us up '' .
Schwarzenegger apparently opted against a mechanical valve , the only permanent solution available at the time of his surgery , because it would have sharply limited his physical activity and capacity to exercise .
While his son and the other driver were unharmed , the governor sustained a minor injury to his lip , requiring 15 stitches .
`` No citations were issued '' , said Officer Jason Lee , a Los Angeles Police Department spokesman .
Schwarzenegger did not obtain his motorcycle license until July 3 , 2006 .
On December 26 , 2006 , he underwent a 90-minute operation in which cables and screws were used to wire the broken bone back together .
He was released from the St. John 's Health Center on December 30 , 2006 .
No one was harmed in the incident .
In his bodybuilding days in the late 1960s , he was measured to be 6 ' 1.5 '' -LRB- 1.87 m -RRB- , a height confirmed by his fellow bodybuilders .
However , in 1988 both the Daily Mail and Time Out magazine mentioned that Schwarzenegger appeared noticeably shorter .
Prior to running for Governor , Schwarzenegger 's height was once again questioned in an article by the Chicago Reader .
At one point , Wesson made an unsuccessful attempt to , in his own words , `` settle this once and for all and find out how tall he is '' by using a tailor 's tape measure on the Governor .
Schwarzenegger retaliated by placing a pillow stitched with the words `` Need a lift ? ''
on the five-foot-five inch -LRB- 165 cm -RRB- Wesson 's chair before a negotiating session in his office .
In 1999 , Men 's Health magazine stated his height was 5 ' 10 '' .
The majority of his book is about his successes in the three major chapters in his life : bodybuilder , actor , and Governor of California .
Schwarzenegger was the first civilian to purchase a Humvee .
He was in the news in 2014 for buying a rare Bugatti Veyron Grand Sport Vitesse .
Schwarzenegger 's Bugatti has its interior adorned in dark brown leather .
During the gubernatorial recall campaign he announced that he would convert one of his Hummers to burn hydrogen .
California took delivery of the first H2H -LRB- Hydrogen Hummer -RRB- in October 2004 .
Arnold Schwarzenegger has been involved with the Special Olympics for many years after they were founded by his ex-mother-in-law , Eunice Kennedy Shriver .
Schwarzenegger believes that quality school opportunities should be made available to children who might not normally be able to access them .
He has also been involved with After-School All-Stars , and founded the Los Angeles branch in 2002 .
ASAS is an after school program provider , educating youth about health , fitness and nutrition .
The Institute 's mission is to '' -LSB- advance -RSB- post-partisanship , where leaders put people over political parties and work together to find the best ideas and solutions to benefit the people they serve , '' and to `` seek to influence public policy and public debate in finding solutions to the serious challenges we face . ''
See Plympton for the derivation of the name Plym .
In the late fifteenth century a ` castle quadrate ' was constructed close to the area now known as The Barbican ; it included four round towers , one at each corner , as featured on the city coat of arms .
Defences on St Nicholas Island also date from this time , and a string of six artillery blockhouses were built , including one on Fishers Nose at the south-eastern corner of the Hoe .
During the 16th century locally produced wool was the major export commodity .
Construction of the Royal Citadel began in 1665 , after the Restoration ; it was armed with cannon facing both out to sea and into the town , rumoured to be a reminder to residents not to oppose the Crown .
Mount Batten tower also dates from around this time .
Further docks were built here in 1727 , 1762 and 1793 .
The settlement that developed here was called `` Dock '' or `` Plymouth Dock '' at the time , and a new town , separate from Plymouth , grew up .
In the 1860s , a ring of Palmerston forts was constructed around the outskirts of Devonport , to protect the dockyard from attack from any direction .
During the First World War , Plymouth was the port of entry for many troops from around the Empire and also developed as a facility for the manufacture of munitions .
It was an important embarkation point for US troops for D-Day .
This was largely due to Plymouth 's status as a major port Charles Church was hit by incendiary bombs and partially destroyed in 1941 during the Blitz , but has not been demolished , as it is now an official permanent monument to the bombing of Plymouth during World War II .
Most of the city centre shops had been destroyed and those that remained were cleared to enable a zoned reconstruction according to his plan .
From Saxon times , it was in the hundred of Roborough .
Between 1439 and 1934 , Plymouth had a Mayor .
In 1914 the county boroughs of Plymouth and Devonport , and the urban district of East Stonehouse merged to form a single county borough of Plymouth .
Collectively they were referred to as `` The Three Towns '' .
Taking over office from her husband Waldorf Astor , Lady Astor was a vibrantly active campaigner for her resident constituents .
The total electorate for Plymouth was 188,924 in April 2015 .
The local election of 7 May 2015 resulted in a political composition of 28 Labour councillors , 26 Conservative and 3 UKIP resulting in a Labour administration .
Local limestone may be seen in numerous buildings , walls and pavements throughout Plymouth .
In suburban areas , post-War prefabs had already begun to appear by 1946 , and over 1,000 permanent council houses were built each year from 1951 -- 57 according to the Modernist zoned low-density garden city model advocated by Abercrombie .
By 1964 over 20,000 new homes had been built , more than 13,500 of them permanent council homes and 853 built by the Admiralty .
Its largest park is Central Park , with other sizeable green spaces including Victoria Park , Freedom Fields Park , Alexandra Park , Devonport Park and the Hoe .
This means a wide range of exotic plants can be grown .
Due to the modifying effect of the sea the seasonal range is less than in most other parts of the UK .
Another period of notable snow occurred from 17 -- 19 December 2010 when up to 8 inches -LRB- 20 cm -RRB- of snow fell through the period -- though only 2 inches -LRB- 5.1 cm -RRB- would lie at any one time due to melt .
Over the 1961 -- 1990 period , annual snowfall accumulation averaged less than 7 cm -LRB- 3 in -RRB- per year .
The predominant wind direction is from the south-west .
Typically , 18.6 nights of the year will register an air frost .
It has courses in maritime business , marine engineering , marine biology and Earth , ocean and environmental sciences , surf science , shipping and logistics .
The university formed a joint venture with the fellow Devonian University of Exeter in 2000 , establishing the Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry .
The college is ranked 8th out of 30 universities in the UK in 2011 for medicine .
Its dental school was established in 2006 , which also provides free dental care in an attempt to improve access to dental care in the South West .
The Plymouth Marine Laboratory is an offshoot of the MBA .
The Plymouth Marine Laboratory , which focuses on global issues of climate change and sustainability .
It monitors the effects of ocean acidity on corals and shellfish and reports the results to the UK government .
It also cultivates algae that could be used to make biofuels or in the treatment of waste water by using technology such as photo-bioreactors .
It works alongside the Boots Group to investigate the use of algae in skin care protects , taking advantage of the chemicals they contain that adapt to protect themselves from the sun .
The Plymouth urban area had a population of 260,203 in 2011 -LRB- the urban sprawl which extends outside the authority 's boundaries -RRB- .
The white Irish ethnic group saw the largest decline in its share of the population since the 2001 Census -LRB- -24 % -RRB- , while the Other Asian and Black African had the largest increases -LRB- 360 % and 351 % respectively -RRB- .
This excludes the two new ethnic groups added to the 2011 census of Gypsy or Irish Traveller and Arab .
The population rose rapidly during the second half of the 19th century , but declined by over 1.6 % from 1931 to 1951 .
Since the 1980s , employment in the defence sector has decreased substantially and the public sector is now prominent particularly in administration , health , education , medicine and engineering .
Plymouth has a post-war shopping area in the city centre with substantial pedestrianisation .
Plymouth was one of the first ten British cities to trial the new Business Improvement District initiative .
Millbay is being regenerated with mixed residential , retail and office space alongside the ferry port .
The A38 dual-carriageway runs from east to west across the north of the city .
There is also a pedestrian ferry from the Mayflower Steps to Mount Batten , and an alternative to using the Tamar Bridge via the Torpoint Ferry -LRB- vehicle and pedestrian -RRB- across the River Tamar .
The airport was home to the local airline Air Southwest , which operated flights across the United Kingdom and Ireland .
In June 2003 , a report by the South West RDA was published looking at the future of aviation in the south-west and the possible closure of airports .
It concluded that the best option for the south-west was to close Plymouth City Airport and expand Exeter International Airport and Newquay Cornwall Airport , although it did conclude that this was not the best option for Plymouth .
In April 2011 , it was announced that the airport would close , which it did on 23 December .
First Great Western have come under fire recently , due to widespread rail service cuts across the south-west , which affect Plymouth greatly .
The Exeter to Plymouth railway of the LSWR needs to be reopened to connect Cornwall and Plymouth to the rest of the UK railway system on an all weather basis .
There are proposals to reopen the line from Tavistock to Bere Alston for a through service to Plymouth .
The line was closed .
In the wake of widespread disruption caused by damage to the mainline track at Dawlish by coastal storms in February 2014 , Network Rail are considering reopening the Tavistock to Okehampton and Exeter section of the line as an alternative to the coastal route .
In 1831 the first Brethren assembly in England , a movement of conservative non-denominational Evangelical Christians , was established in the city , so that Brethren are often called Plymouth Brethren , although the movement did not begin locally .
There are also places of worship for Islam , Bahá ' í , Buddhism , Unitarianism , Chinese beliefs and Humanism .
7.1 % did not state their religious belief .
Since the 2001 Census , the number of Christians and Jews has decreased -LRB- -16 % and -7 % respectively -RRB- , while all other religions have increased and non-religious people have almost doubled in number .
It is now the late-night hub of Plymouth 's entertainment strip , but has a reputation for trouble at closing hours .
The Plymouth Pavilions has multiple uses for the city staging music concerts , basketball matches and stand-up comedy .
There are also three cinemas : Reel Cinema at Derrys Cross , Plymouth Arts Centre at Looe Street and a Vue cinema at the Barbican Leisure Park .
The Plymouth Athenaeum , which includes a local interest library , is a society dedicated to the promotion of learning in the fields of science , technology , literature and art .
All four clubs play in the South West Peninsula League .
They play at the Brickfields .
Plymouth Raiders play in the British Basketball League -- the top tier of British basketball .
Plymouth cricket club was formed in 1843 , the current 1st XI play in the Devon Premier League .
Plymouth Devils are a speedway team in the British Premier League .
Plymouth was home to an American football club , the Plymouth Admirals until 2010 .
Plymouth is also home to Plymouth Marjons Hockey Club , with their 1st XI playing in the National League last season .
Plymouth is an important centre for watersports , especially scuba diving and sailing .
Before the 19th century two leats were built in order to provide drinking water for the town .
They carried water from Dartmoor to Plymouth .
The Devonport Leat was constructed to carry fresh drinking water to the expanding town of Devonport and its ever growing dockyard .
It was fed by three Dartmoor rivers : The West Dart , Cowsic and Blackabrook .
It was originally designed to carry water to Devonport town , but has since been shortened and now carries water to Burrator Reservoir , which feeds most of the water supply of Plymouth .
Burrator Reservoir is located about 5 miles -LRB- 8 km -RRB- north of the city and was constructed in 1898 and expanded in 1928 .
Her Majesty 's Courts Service provide a Magistrates ' Court and a Combined Crown and County Court in the city .
The city has one of the Devon and Cornwall Area Crown Prosecution Service Divisional offices .
Guided tours are available in the summer months .
It is open to the public and has views over the Plymouth Sound and the city from the lantern room .
It has been consistently considered one of the UK 's most beautiful university buildings .
In 2002 a mission to recover his body and bring it to Plymouth was allowed by the Ministry of Defence .
His cousin and contemporary John Hawkins was a Plymouth man .
William Cookworthy born in Kingsbridge set up his successful porcelain business in the city and was a close friend of John Smeaton designer of the Eddystone Lighthouse .
On 26 January 1786 , Benjamin Robert Haydon , an English painter who specialised in grand historical pictures , was born here .
The naturalist Dr William Elford Leach FRS , who did much to pave the way in Britain for Charles Darwin , was born at Hoe Gate in 1791 .
Antarctic explorers Robert Falcon Scott and Frank Bickerton both lived in the city .
The musician and film director Cosmo Jarvis has lived in several towns in South Devon and has filmed videos in and around Plymouth .
In addition , actors Sir Donald Sinden and Judi Trott .
