Heresy is distinct from both apostasy , which is the explicit renunciation of one 's religion , principles or cause , and blasphemy , which is an impious utterance or action concerning God or sacred things .
The term is usually used to refer to violations of important religious teachings , but is used also of views strongly opposed to any generally accepted ideas .
The Greek for the phrase `` divisive person '' became a technical term in the early Church for a type of `` heretic '' who promoted dissension .
Saint Peter of Antioch referred to Christians that refused to venerate religious images as having `` Jewish minds '' .
By this edict the state 's authority and that of the Church became somewhat overlapping .
The number of people executed as heretics under the authority of the various `` ecclesiastical authorities '' -LSB- note 1 -RSB- is not known .
But they will become greatly defiled and they will fall into the name of error and into the hands of an evil cunning man and a manifold dogma , and they will be ruled heretically '' .
The first one was that of Bogomils in modern day Bosnia , a sort of sanctuary between Eastern and Western Christianity .
He was required to `` abjure , curse and detest '' those opinions .
He labeled all heresy as `` Jewish '' , claiming that Judaism would `` pollute -LSB- Catholics and -RSB- deceive them with sacrilegious seduction . ''
Under Mary , around two hundred and ninety people were burned at the stake between 1555 and 1558 after the restoration of papal jurisdiction .
When Elizabeth I came to the throne , the concept of heresy was retained in theory but severely restricted by the 1559 Act of Supremacy and the one hundred and eighty or so Catholics who were executed in the forty-five years of her reign were put to death because they were considered members of '' ... a subversive fifth column . ''
Although the charge was technically one of `` blasphemy '' there was one later execution in Scotland -LRB- still at that date an entirely independent kingdom -RRB- when in 1697 Thomas Aikenhead was accused , among other things , of denying the doctrine of the Trinity .
As such , most of Orthodox Judaism considers Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism heretical movements , and regards most of Conservative Judaism as heretical .
mentioning religious , political , socioeconomic and scientific heresies .
Characteristics were ascribed to both and examples of both kinds were offered .
He acknowledged by examples that heresy has repeatedly become orthodoxy .
`` I have enormous respect for dinosaur paleontologists past and present .
page 27 `` Most taxonomists , however , have viewed such new terminology as dangerously destabilizing to the traditional and well-known scheme ... '' page 462 .
These expanded metaphoric senses allude to both the difference between the person 's views and the mainstream and the boldness of such a person in propounding these views .
The Warsaw Pact was the military complement to the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance -LRB- CoMEcon -RRB- , the regional economic organization for the communist states of Central and Eastern Europe .
Instead , the conflict was fought on an ideological basis .
Both NATO and the Warsaw Pact led to the expansion of military forces and their integration into the respective blocs .
The USSR itself was dissolved in December 1991 .
The Warsaw Treaty 's organization was two-fold : the Political Consultative Committee handled political matters , and the Combined Command of Pact Armed Forces controlled the assigned multi-national forces , with headquarters in Warsaw , Poland .
Therefore , although ostensibly an international collective security alliance , the USSR dominated the Warsaw Treaty armed forces .
The strategy behind the formation of the Warsaw Pact was driven by the desire of the Soviet Union to dominate Central and Eastern Europe .
This policy was driven by ideological and geostrategic reasons .
Before creation of Warsaw Pact , fearing Germany rearmed , Czechoslovak leadership sought to create security pact with East Germany and Poland .
The Warsaw Pact was primarily put in place as a consequence of the rearming of West Germany inside NATO .
Soviet leaders , as many European countries in both western and eastern side , feared Germany being once again a military power as a direct threat and German militarism remained a fresh memory among Soviets and Eastern Europeans .
As Soviet Union had already bilateral treaties with all of its eastern satellites , the Pact has been long considered ` superfluous ' , and because of the rushed way in which it was conceived , NATO officials labeled it as a ` cardboard castle ' .
The Soviet request to join NATO arose in the aftermath of the Berlin Conference of January -- February 1954 .
James Dunn -LRB- USA -RRB- , who met in Paris with Eden , Adenauer and Robert Schuman -LRB- France -RRB- , affirmed that `` the object should be to avoid discussion with the Russians and to press on the European Defense Community '' .
According to John Gaddis `` there was little inclination in Western capitals to explore this offer '' from USSR .
While historian Rolf Steininger asserts that Adenauer 's conviction that `` neutralization means sovietization '' was the main factor in the rejection of the soviet proposals , Adenauer also feared that unification might have resulted in the end of the CDU 's dominance in the Bundestag .
The Soviets then decided to make a new proposal to the governments of the USA , UK and France stating to accept the participation of the USA in the proposed General European Agreement .
And considering that another argument deployed against the Soviet proposal was that it was perceived by western powers as `` directed against the North Atlantic Pact and its liquidation '' , the Soviets decided to declare their `` readiness to examine jointly with other interested parties the question of the participation of the USSR in the North Atlantic bloc '' , specifying that `` the admittance of the USA into the General European Agreement should not be conditional on the three western powers agreeing to the USSR joining the North Atlantic Pact '' .
Again all proposals , including the request to join NATO , were rejected by UK , US , and French governments shortly after .
Ratification of EDC was delaying but the US representatives made it clear to Adenauer that EDC would have to become a part of NATO .
On 30 August 1954 French Parliament rejected the EDC , thus ensuring its failure and blocking a major objective of US policy towards Europe : to associate Germany militarily with the West .
The US Department of State started to elaborate alternatives : Germany would be invited to join NATO or , in the case of French obstructionism , strategies to circumvent a French veto would be implemented in order to obtain a German rearmament outside NATO .
In November 1954 , the USSR requested a new European Security Treaty , in order to make a final attempt to not have a remilitarized West Germany potentially opposed to the Soviet Union , with no success .
Relations among the treaty signatories were based upon mutual non-intervention in the internal affairs of the member countries , respect for national sovereignty , and political independence .
However , almost all governments of those member states were indirectly controlled by the Soviet Union .
For this purpose a special protocol should have been taken since the text of the treaty applied only to Europe .
Due to the emerging Sino-Soviet split , Mongolia remained on observer status .
Soviet forces crushed the nationwide revolt , leading to the death of an estimated 2,500 Hungarian citizens .
All member countries , with the exception of the Socialist Republic of Romania and the People 's Republic of Albania participated in the invasion .
The USSR disestablished itself in December 1991 .
Yet the Polish government reserved publication of 100 documents , pending their military declassification .
Doctrinally , as a Soviet-style -LRB- offensive -RRB- battle plan , Seven Days to the River Rhine gave commanders few defensive-war strategies for fighting NATO in Warsaw Treaty territory .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Thus the term `` physicalism '' is preferred over `` materialism '' by some , while others use the terms as if they are synonymous .
As such , it is different from ontological theories based on dualism or pluralism .
For singular explanations of the phenomenal reality , materialism would be in contrast to idealism , neutral monism , and spiritualism .
Despite the large number of philosophical schools and subtle nuances between many , all philosophies are said to fall into one of two primary categories , which are defined in contrast to each other : Idealism , and materialism .
To materialists , matter is primary , and mind or spirit or ideas are secondary , the product of matter acting upon matter .
In practice , it is frequently assimilated to one variety of physicalism or another .
During the 19th century , Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels extended the concept of materialism to elaborate a materialist conception of history centered on the roughly empirical world of human activity -LRB- practice , including labor -RRB- and the institutions created , reproduced , or destroyed by that activity -LRB- see materialist conception of history -RRB- .
Kanada became one of the early proponents of atomism .
Buddhist atomism and the Jaina school continued the atomic tradition .
Non-reductive materialism explicitly rejects this notion , however , taking the material constitution of all particulars to be consistent with the existence of real objects , properties , or phenomena not explicable in the terms canonically used for the basic material constituents .
Jerry Fodor influentially argues this view , according to which empirical laws and explanations in `` special sciences '' like psychology or geology are invisible from the perspective of basic physics .
A lot of vigorous literature has grown up around the relation between these views .
Ancient Greek philosophers like Thales , Anaxagoras -LRB- ca. 500 BC -- 428 BC -RRB- , Epicurus and Democritus prefigure later materialists .
According to this view , all that exists is matter and void , and all phenomena result from different motions and conglomerations of base material particles called `` atoms '' -LRB- literally : `` indivisibles '' -RRB- .
Famous principles like `` nothing can touch body but body '' first appeared in the works of Lucretius .
Democritus and Epicurus however did not hold to a monist ontology since they held to the ontological separation of matter and space i.e. space being `` another kind '' of being , indicating that the definition of `` materialism '' is wider than given scope for in this article .
He claimed that an observing subject can only know material objects through the mediation of the brain and its particular organization .
Is there a single kind of matter -LRB- hyle -RRB- which everything is made of , or multiple kinds ?
Is matter a continuous substance capable of expressing multiple forms -LRB- hylomorphism -RRB- , or a number of discrete , unchanging constituents -LRB- atomism -RRB- ?
Does it have intrinsic properties -LRB- substance theory -RRB- , or is it lacking them -LRB- prima materia -RRB- ?
One challenge to the traditional concept of matter as tangible `` stuff '' came with the rise of field physics in the 19th century .
This enables the ontological view that energy is prima materia and matter is one of its forms .
On the other hand , the Standard Model of Particle physics uses quantum field theory to describe all interactions .
On this view it could be said that fields are prima materia and the energy is a property of the field .
With the advent of quantum physics , some scientists believed the concept of matter had merely changed , while others believed the conventional position could no longer be maintained .
For instance Werner Heisenberg said `` The ontology of materialism rested upon the illusion that the kind of existence , the direct ` actuality ' of the world around us , can be extrapolated into the atomic range .
Likewise , some philosophers -LSB- which ? -RSB-
feel that these dichotomies necessitate a switch from materialism to physicalism .
Others use the terms `` materialism '' and `` physicalism '' interchangeably .
Their objections were also shared by some founders of quantum theory , such as Max Planck , who wrote :
According to the Catholic Encyclopedia of 1907-1912 , materialism , defined as `` a philosophical system which regards matter as the only reality in the world -LSB- ... -RSB- denies the existence of God and the soul '' .
In such a context one can conflate materialism with atheism .
Most of Hinduism and transcendentalism regards all matter as an illusion called Maya , blinding humans from knowing `` the truth '' .
Maya is the limited , purely physical and mental reality in which our everyday consciousness has become entangled .
Maya gets destroyed for a person when s/he perceives Brahman with transcendental knowledge .
In contrast , Joseph Smith , the founder of the Latter Day Saint movement , taught : `` There is no such thing as immaterial matter .
All spirit is matter , but it is more fine or pure , and can only be discerned by purer eyes ; We can not see it ; but when our bodies are purified we shall see that it is all matter . ''
This spirit element has always existed ; it is co-eternal with God .
It is also called `` intelligence '' or `` the light of truth '' , which like all observable matter `` was not created or made , neither indeed can be '' .
Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints view the revelations of Joseph Smith as a restoration of original Christian doctrine , which they believe post-apostolic theologians began to corrupt in the centuries after Christ .
Matter can be argued to be redundant , as in bundle theory , and mind-independent properties can in turn be reduced to subjective percepts .
Berkeley presents an example of the latter by pointing out that it is impossible to gather direct evidence of matter , as there is no direct experience of matter ; all that is experienced is perception , whether internal or external .
As such , the existence of matter can only be assumed from the apparent -LRB- perceived -RRB- stability of perceptions ; it finds absolutely no evidence in direct experience .
If matter and energy are seen as necessary to explain the physical world , but incapable of explaining mind , dualism results .
Some critics object to materialism as part of an overly skeptical , narrow or reductivist approach to theorizing , rather than to the ontological claim that matter is the only substance .
Particle physicist and Anglican theologian John Polkinghorne objects to what he calls promissory materialism -- claims that materialistic science will eventually succeed in explaining phenomena it has not so far been able to explain .
The technological superiority required for such supremacy was seen as necessary for national security , and symbolic of ideological superiority .
The Space Race spawned pioneering efforts to launch artificial satellites , unmanned space probes of the Moon , Venus , and Mars , and human spaceflight in low Earth orbit and to the Moon .
The USSR tried but failed manned lunar missions , and eventually cancelled them and concentrated on Earth orbital space stations .
A period of détente followed with the April 1972 agreement on a co-operative Apollo -- Soyuz Test Project , resulting in the July 1975 rendezvous in Earth orbit of a US astronaut crew with a Soviet cosmonaut crew .
The head of the German Army 's Ballistics and Munitions Branch , Lieutenant Colonel Karl Emil Becker , gathered a small team of engineers that included Walter Dornberger and Leo Zanssen , to figure out how to use rockets as long-range artillery in order to get around the Treaty of Versailles ' ban on research and development of long-range cannons .
Von Braun had dreams about conquering outer space with rockets , and did not initially see the military value in missile technology .
By 1943 , Germany began mass-producing the A-4 as the Vergeltungswaffe 2 -LRB- `` Vengeance Weapon '' 2 , or more commonly , V2 -RRB- , a ballistic missile with a 320 kilometers -LRB- 200 mi -RRB- range carrying a 1,130 kilograms -LRB- 2,490 lb -RRB- warhead at 4,000 kilometers per hour -LRB- 2,500 mph -RRB- .
Its supersonic speed meant there was no defense against it , and radar detection provided little warning .
Germany used the weapon to bombard southern England and parts of Allied-liberated western Europe from 1944 until 1945 .
After the war , the V-2 became the basis of early American and Soviet rocket designs .
On Stalin 's orders , the Soviet Union sent its best rocket engineers to this region to see what they could salvage for future weapons systems .
After almost a year in the area around Peenemünde , Soviet officials moved most of the captured German rocket specialists to Gorodomlya Island on Lake Seliger , about 240 kilometers -LRB- 150 mi -RRB- northwest of Moscow .
They were not allowed to participate in Soviet missile design , but were used as problem-solving consultants to the Soviet engineers .
They helped in the following areas : the creation of a Soviet version of the A-4 ; work on `` organizational schemes '' ; research in improving the A-4 main engine ; development of a 100-ton engine ; assistance in the `` layout '' of plant production rooms ; and preparation of rocket assembly using German components .
Later , he developed his own distinct designs , though many of these designs were influenced by the Groettrup Group 's G4-R10 design from 1949 .
The Germans were eventually repatriated in 1951 -- 53 .
Von Braun , himself inspired by Goddard 's work , was bemused by this when debriefed by his American handlers , asking them , `` Why did n't you just ask Dr. Goddard ? ''
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
They set about assembling the captured V2s and began a program of launching them and instructing American engineers in their operation .
From here , von Braun and his team would develop the Army 's first operational medium-range ballistic missile , the Redstone rocket , that would , in slightly modified versions , launch both America 's first satellite , and the first piloted Mercury space missions .
It became the basis for both the Jupiter and Saturn family of rockets .
In simple terms , the Cold War could be viewed as an expression of the ideological struggle between communism and capitalism .
American intelligence agencies discovered that the Soviet Union had exploded its first atomic bomb , with the consequence that the United States potentially could face a future nuclear war that , for the first time , might devastate its cities .
With communism spreading in China , Korea , and Eastern Europe , Americans came to feel so threatened that popular and political culture condoned extensive `` witch-hunts '' to expose communist spies .
SAC employed intercontinental strategic bombers , as well as medium-bombers based close to Soviet airspace -LRB- in western Europe and in Turkey -RRB- that were capable of delivering nuclear payloads .
For its part , the Soviet Union harbored fears of invasion .
The United States had used these weapons operationally during World War II , and it could use them again against the Soviet Union , laying waste its cities and military centers .
It would later be used to launch the first satellite into space , and derivatives would launch all piloted Soviet spacecraft .
The United States had multiple rocket programs divided among the different branches of the American armed services , which meant that each force developed its own ICBM program .
In 1951 , the Air Force began a new ICBM program called MX-1593 , and by 1955 this program was receiving top-priority funding .
Its upgraded version , the Atlas-D rocket , would later serve as an operational nuclear ICBM and as the orbital launch vehicle for Project Mercury and the remote-controlled Agena Target Vehicle used in Project Gemini .
In 1955 , with both the United States and the Soviet Union building ballistic missiles that could be utilized to launch objects into space , the `` starting line '' was drawn for the Space Race .
In separate announcements , just four days apart , both nations publicly announced that they would launch artificial Earth satellites by 1957 or 1958 .
Four days later , at the Sixth Congress of International Astronautical Federation in Copenhagen , scientist Leonid I. Sedov spoke to international reporters at the Soviet embassy , and announced his country 's intention to launch a satellite as well , in the `` near future '' .
The Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union began a policy of treating development of its space program as a classified state secret .
Initially , President Eisenhower was worried that a satellite passing above a nation at over 100 kilometers -LRB- 62 mi -RRB- , might be construed as violating that nation 's sovereign airspace .
He was concerned that the Soviet Union would accuse the Americans of an illegal overflight , thereby scoring a propaganda victory at his expense .
Eisenhower and his advisors believed that a nation 's airspace sovereignty did not extend into outer space , acknowledged as the Kármán line , and he used the 1957 -- 58 International Geophysical Year launches to establish this principle in international law .
Eisenhower also feared that he might cause an international incident and be called a `` warmonger '' if he were to use military missiles as launchers .
Therefore , he selected the untried Naval Research Laboratory 's Vanguard rocket , which was a research-only booster .
This meant that von Braun 's team was not allowed to put a satellite into orbit with their Jupiter-C rocket , because of its intended use as a future military vehicle .
It was a monumental failure , exploding a few seconds after launch , and it became an international joke .
The satellite appeared in newspapers under the names Flopnik , Stayputnik , Kaputnik , and Dudnik .
In the United Nations , the Russian delegate offered the U.S. representative aid `` under the Soviet program of technical assistance to backwards nations . ''
In Britain , the USA 's Western Cold War ally , the reaction was mixed : some members of the population celebrated the fact that the Soviets had reached space first , while others feared the destructive potential that military uses of spacecraft might bring .
The satellite Explorer 1 was 30.8 pounds -LRB- 14.0 kg -RRB- in mass .
It carried a micrometeorite gauge and a Geiger-Müller tube .
It passed in and out of the Earth-encompassing radiation belt with its 194-by-1 ,368 - nautical-mile -LRB- 360 by 2,534 km -RRB- orbit , therefore saturating the tube 's capacity and proving what Dr. James Van Allen , a space scientist at the University of Iowa , had theorized .
The belt , named the Van Allen radiation belt , is a doughnut-shaped zone of high-level radiation intensity around the Earth above the magnetic equator .
Van Allen was also the man who designed and built the satellite instrumentation of Explorer 1 .
The satellite had no memory for data storage , therefore it had to transmit continuously .
Two months later in March 1958 , a second satellite was sent into orbit with augmented cosmic ray instruments .
It also created a Civilian-Military Liaison Committee , chaired by the President , responsible for coordinating the nation 's civilian and military space programs .
On October 21 , 1959 , Eisenhower approved the transfer of the Army 's remaining space-related activities to NASA .
Development of the Saturn rocket family , which when mature , would finally give the US parity with the Soviets in terms of lifting capability , was thus transferred to NASA .
Three secret 1958 attempts to launch Luna E-1-class impactor probes failed .
The fifth attempt on June 18 also failed at launch .
The 390-kilogram -LRB- 860 lb -RRB- Luna 2 successfully impacted the Moon on September 14 , 1959 .
The Block I Ranger 1 and Ranger 2 suffered Atlas-Agena launch failures in August and November 1961 .
The 727-pound -LRB- 330 kg -RRB- Block II Ranger 3 launched successfully on January 26 , 1962 , but missed the Moon .
Ranger 5 ran out of power and missed the Moon by 725 kilometers -LRB- 391 nmi -RRB- on October 21 , 1962 .
By 1959 , American observers believed that the Soviet Union would be the first to get a human into space , because of the time needed to prepare for Mercury 's first launch .
They dubbed Gagarin the first cosmonaut , roughly translated from Russian and Greek as `` sailor of the universe '' .
Although he had the ability to take over manual control of his spacecraft in an emergency by opening an envelope he had in the cabin that contained a code that could be typed into the computer , it was flown in an automatic mode as a precaution ; medical science at that time did not know what would happen to a human in the weightlessness of space .
The Fédération Aéronautique Internationale -LRB- International Federation of Aeronautics -RRB- credited Gagarin with the world 's first human space flight , although their qualifying rules for aeronautical records at the time required pilots to take off and land with their craft .
For this reason , the Soviet Union omitted from their FAI submission the fact that Gagarin did not land with his capsule .
When the FAI filing for Gherman Titov 's second Vostok flight in August 1961 disclosed the ejection landing technique , the FAI committee decided to investigate , and concluded that the technological accomplishment of human spaceflight lay in the safe launch , orbiting , and return , rather than the manner of landing , and so revised their rules accordingly , keeping Gagarin 's and Titov 's records intact .
Gagarin became a national hero of the Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc , and a worldwide celebrity .
Moscow and other cities in the USSR held mass demonstrations , the scale of which was second only to the World War II Victory Parade of 1945 .
This program studied several different types of one-man space vehicles , settling on a ballistic re-entry capsule launched on a derivative Atlas missile , and selecting a group of nine candidate pilots .
NASA selected a new group of astronaut -LRB- from the Greek for `` star sailor '' -RRB- candidates from Navy , Air Force and Marine test pilots , and narrowed this down to a group of seven for the program .
Capsule design and astronaut training began immediately , working toward preliminary suborbital flights on the Redstone missile , followed by orbital flights on the Atlas .
Each flight series would first start unmanned , then carry a primate , then finally men .
Though he did not achieve orbit like Gagarin , he was the first person to exercise manual control over his spacecraft 's attitude and retro-rocket firing .
Gagarin 's flight changed this ; now Kennedy sensed the humiliation and fear on the part of the American public over the Soviet lead .
The two major options at the time seemed to be , either establishment of an Earth orbital space station , or a manned landing on the Moon .
Johnson in turn consulted with von Braun , who answered Kennedy 's questions based on his estimates of US and Soviet rocket lifting capability .
Based on this , Johnson responded to Kennedy , concluding that much more was needed to reach a position of leadership , and recommending that the manned Moon landing was far enough in the future that the US had a fighting chance to achieve it first .
Full text
He justified the program in terms of its importance to national security , and its focus of the nation 's energies on other scientific and social fields .
Full text
American Virgil `` Gus '' Grissom repeated Shepard 's suborbital flight in Liberty Bell 7 on July 21 , 1961 .
As the first American in orbit , Glenn became a national hero , and received a ticker-tape parade in New York City , reminiscent of that given for Charles Lindbergh .
On February 23 , 1962 , President Kennedy escorted him in a parade at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station , where he awarded Glenn with the NASA service medal .
NASA at first intended to launch one more mission , extending the spacecraft 's endurance to three days , but since this would not beat the Soviet record , it was decided instead to concentrate on developing Project Gemini .
The two spacecraft came within approximately 6.5 kilometers -LRB- 4.0 mi -RRB- of one another , close enough for radio communication .
Vostok 4 also set a record of nearly four days in space .
Though the two craft 's orbits were as nearly identical as possible given the accuracy of the launch rocket 's guidance system , slight variations still existed which drew the two craft at first as close to each other as 6.5 kilometers -LRB- 3.5 nautical miles -RRB- , then as far apart as 2,850 kilometers -LRB- 1,540 nautical miles -RRB- .
There were no maneuvering rockets on the Vostok to permit space rendezvous , required to keep two spacecraft a controlled distance apart .
Launching a woman was reportedly Korolev 's idea , and it was accomplished purely for propaganda value .
Tereshkova was one of a small corps of female cosmonauts who were amateur parachutists , but Tereshkova was the only one to fly .
The Soviets kept the details and true appearance of the Vostok capsule secret until the April 1965 Moscow Economic Exhibition , where it was first displayed without its aerodynamic nose cone concealing the spherical capsule .
A tail section with eight fins was also added , in an apparent attempt to confuse western observers .
This spurious tail section also appeared on official commemorative stamps and a documentary .
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev initially rejected Kennedy 's proposal .
During the next few weeks he reportedly concluded that both nations might realize cost benefits and technological gains from a joint venture , and decided to accept Kennedy 's offer based on a measure of rapport during their years as leaders of the world 's two superpowers , but changed his mind and dropped the idea since he did not have the same trust for Kennedy 's successor , Lyndon Johnson .
The greater advances of the Soviet space program at the time allowed their space program to achieve other significant firsts , including the first EVA `` spacewalk '' and the first mission performed by a crew in shirt-sleeves .
The USSR touted another technological achievement during this mission : it was the first space flight during which cosmonauts performed in a shirt-sleeve-environment .
However , flying without spacesuits was not due to safety improvements in the Soviet spacecraft 's environmental systems ; rather this innovation was accomplished because the craft 's limited cabin space did not allow for spacesuits .
Flying without spacesuits exposed the cosmonauts to significant risk in the event of potentially fatal cabin depressurization .
Between October 14 -- 16 , 1964 , Leonid Brezhnev and a small cadre of high-ranking Communist Party officials , deposed Khrushchev as Soviet government leader a day after Voskhod 1 landed , in what was called the `` Wednesday conspiracy '' .
The new political leaders , along with Korolev , ended the technologically troublesome Voskhod program , cancelling Voskhod 3 and 4 , which were in the planning stages , and started concentrating on the race to the Moon .
According to historian Asif Siddiqi , Korolev 's accomplishments marked `` the absolute zenith of the Soviet space program , one never , ever attained since . ''
There would be a two-year pause in Soviet piloted space flights while Voskhod 's replacement , the Soyuz spacecraft , was designed and developed .
Voskhod 2 's design modifications included the addition of an inflatable airlock to allow for extravehicular activity -LRB- EVA -RRB- , also known as a spacewalk , while keeping the cabin pressurized so that the capsule 's electronics would n't overheat .
Leonov performed the first-ever EVA as part of the mission .
A fatality was narrowly avoided when Leonov 's spacesuit expanded in the vacuum of space , preventing him from re-entering the airlock .
In order to overcome this , he had to partially depressurize his spacesuit to a potentially dangerous level .
He succeeded in safely re-entering the ship , but he and Belyayev faced further challenges when the spacecraft 's atmospheric controls flooded the cabin with 45 % pure oxygen , which had to be lowered to acceptable levels before re-entry .
The reentry involved two more challenges : an improperly timed retrorocket firing caused the Voskhod 2 to land 386 kilometers -LRB- 240 mi -RRB- off its designated target area , the town of Perm ; and the instrument compartment 's failure to detach from the descent apparatus caused the spacecraft to become unstable during reentry .
Most of the novice pilots on the early missions would command the later missions .
The Zond sacrificed habitable cabin volume for equipment , by omitting the Soyuz orbital module .
Chelomey gained favor with Khruschev by employing members of his family .
A separate lunar lander -LRB- `` Lunniy Korabl '' , LK -RRB- , would carry a single cosmonaut to the lunar surface .
Following the passing of this resolution , Kennedy commenced his communications proposing a cooperative American/Soviet space program .
In 1967 , both nations faced serious challenges that brought their programs to temporary halts .
The results proved fatal to both pioneering crews .
Crew escape was made impossible by inability to open the plug door hatch cover against the greater-than-atmospheric internal pressure .
The board also found design and construction flaws in the spacecraft , and procedural failings , including failure to appreciate the hazard of the pure-oxygen atmosphere , as well as inadequate safety procedures .
All these flaws had to be corrected over the next twenty-two months until the first piloted flight could be made .
Mercury and Gemini veteran Grissom had been a favored choice of Deke Slayton , NASA 's Director of Flight Crew Operations , to make the first piloted landing .
Meanwhile , the Soviet Union was having its own problems with Soyuz development .
Engineers reported 200 design faults to party leaders , but their concerns `` were overruled by political pressures for a series of space feats to mark the anniversary of Lenin 's birthday . ''
The mission was planned to be a three-day test , to include the first Soviet docking with an unpiloted Soyuz 2 , but the mission was plagued with problems .
Early on , Komarov 's craft lacked sufficient electrical power because only one of two solar panels had deployed .
Then the automatic attitude control system began malfunctioning and eventually failed completely , resulting in the craft spinning wildly .
Komarov was able to stop the spin with the manual system , which was only partially effective .
The flight controllers aborted his mission after only one day .
During the emergency re-entry , a fault in the landing parachute system caused the primary chute to fail , and the reserve chute became tangled with the drogue chute ; Komarov was killed on impact .
Fixing the spacecraft faults caused an eighteen-month delay before piloted Soyuz flights could resume .
The United States recovered from the Apollo 1 fire , fixing the fatal flaws in an improved version of the Block II command module .
The US proceeded with unpiloted test launches of the Saturn V launch vehicle -LRB- Apollo 4 and Apollo 6 -RRB- and the Lunar Module -LRB- Apollo 5 -RRB- during the latter half of 1967 and early 1968 .
The eleven-day mission was a total success , as the spacecraft performed a virtually flawless mission , paving the way for the United States to continue with its lunar mission schedule .
The goal was to complete Komarov 's rendezvous and docking mission with the un-piloted Soyuz 2 .
Ground controllers brought the two craft to within 200 meters -LRB- 660 ft -RRB- of each other , then cosmonaut Georgy Beregovoy took control .
He got within 40 meters -LRB- 130 ft -RRB- of his target , but was unable to dock before expending 90 percent of his maneuvering fuel , due to a piloting error that put his spacecraft into the wrong orientation and forced Soyuz 2 to automatically turn away from his approaching craft .
It was the first-ever docking of two manned spacecraft , and the first transfer of crew from one space vehicle to another .
The Soviet Zond spacecraft was not yet ready for piloted circumlunar missions in 1968 , after five unsuccessful and partially successful automated test launches : Cosmos 146 on March 10 , 1967 ; Cosmos 154 on April 8 , 1967 ; Zond 1967A September 27 , 1967 ; Zond 1967B on November 22 , 1967 .
Zond 4 was launched on March 2 , 1968 , and successfully made a circumlunar flight .
The Soviet official announcement said that Zond 4 was an automated test flight which ended with its intentional destruction , due to its recovery trajectory positioning it over the Atlantic Ocean instead of over the USSR .
This mission was in part motivated by intelligence rumors the Soviet Union might be ready for a piloted Zond flight during late 1968 .
It also scared NASA planners , as it took them several days to figure out that it was only an automated flight , not piloted , because voice recordings were transmitted from the craft en route to the Moon .
On November 10 , 1968 another automated test flight , Zond 6 was launched , but this time encountered difficulties in its Earth reentry , and depressurized and deployed its parachute too early , causing it to crash-land only 16 kilometers -LRB- 9.9 mi -RRB- from where it had been launched six days earlier .
It turned out there was no chance of a piloted Soviet circumlunar flight during 1968 , due to the unreliability of the Zonds .
They also became the first to leave low-Earth orbit and go to another celestial body , and entered lunar orbit on December 24 .
Two and a half hours after the broadcast , they fired their engine to perform the first trans-Earth injection to leave lunar orbit and return to the Earth .
With the LM proven to work well , the next step was to attempt the actual landing .
Unknown to the Americans , the Soviet Moon program was in deep trouble .
After two successive launch failures of the N1 rocket in 1969 , Soviet plans for a piloted landing suffered delay .
The rocket hit the pad after an engine shutdown , destroying itself and the launch facility .
Without the N-1 rocket , the USSR could not send a large enough payload to the Moon to land a human and return him safely .
They trained for the mission until just before the actual launch day .
After overcoming several computer overload alarms caused by an antenna switch left in the wrong position , and a slight downrange error , Armstrong took over manual flight control at about 180 meters -LRB- 590 ft -RRB- , and guided the Lunar Module to a safe landing spot at 20:18:04 UTC , July 20 , 1969 -LRB- 3:17:04 pm CDT -RRB- .
The first humans on the Moon would wait another six hours before they ventured out of their craft .
His first words when he stepped off the LM 's landing footpad were , `` That 's one small step for -LSB- a -RSB- man , one giant leap for mankind . ''
Aldrin joined him on the surface almost 20 minutes later .
Altogether , they spent just under two and one-quarter hours outside their craft .
When the spacecraft splashed down , 2,982 days had passed since Kennedy 's commitment to landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the Earth before the end of the decade ; the mission was completed with 161 days to spare .
With the safe completion of the Apollo 11 mission , the Americans won the race to the Moon .
NASA had achieved its first landing goal with enough Apollo spacecraft and Saturn V launchers left for eight follow-on lunar landings through Apollo 20 , conducting extended-endurance missions and transporting the landing crews in Lunar Roving Vehicles on the last five .
They also planned an Apollo Applications Program to develop a longer-duration Earth orbital workshop -LRB- later named Skylab -RRB- to be constructed in orbit from a spent S-IVB upper stage , using several launches of the smaller Saturn IB launch vehicle .
But planners soon decided this could be done more efficiently by using the two live stages of a Saturn V to launch the workshop pre-fabricated from an S-IVB -LRB- which was also the Saturn V third stage -RRB- , which immediately removed Apollo 20 .
Belt-tightening budget cuts soon led NASA to cut Apollo 18 and 19 as well , but keep three extended/Lunar Rover missions .
Apollo 13 encountered an in-flight spacecraft failure and had to abort its lunar landing in April 1970 , returning its crew safely but temporarily grounding the program again .
Having lost the race to the Moon , the USSR decided to concentrate on orbital space stations .
Three days later , the Soyuz 10 crew attempted to dock with it , but failed to achieve a secure enough connection to safely enter the station .
The crew became the second in-flight space fatality during their reentry on June 30 .
They were asphyxiated when their spacecraft 's cabin lost all pressure , shortly after undocking .
The disaster was blamed on a faulty cabin pressure valve , that allowed all the air to vent into space .
The crew was not wearing pressure suits and had no chance of survival once the leak occurred .
Salyut 1 's orbit was increased to prevent premature reentry , but further piloted flights were delayed while the Soyuz was redesigned to fix the new safety problem .
After the DOS-2 failure , the USSR attempted to launch four more Salyut-class stations through 1975 , with another failure due to an explosion of the final rocket stage , which punctured the station with shrapnel so that it would n't hold pressure .
While all of the Salyuts were presented to the public as non-military scientific laboratories , some of them were actually covers for the military Almaz reconnaissance stations .
Skylab was damaged during the ascent to orbit , losing one of its solar panels and a meteoroid thermal shield .
Subsequent manned missions repaired the station , and the final mission 's crew , Skylab 4 , set the Space Race endurance record with 84 days in orbit when the mission ended on February 8 , 1974 .
In the spirit of good sportsmanship , the time seemed right for cooperation rather than competition , and the notion of a continuing `` race '' began to subside .
To prepare , the US designed a docking module for the Apollo that was compatible with the Soviet docking system , which allowed any of their craft to dock with any other -LRB- e.g. Soyuz/Soyuz as well as Soyuz/Salyut -RRB- .
The module was also necessary as an airlock to allow the men to visit each other 's craft , which had incompatible cabin atmospheres .
The two craft rendezvoused and docked on July 17 at 16:19 UTC .
The three astronauts conducted joint experiments with the two cosmonauts , and the crew shook hands , exchanged gifts , and visited each other 's craft .
In the 1970s , the United States began developing a new generation of reusable orbital spacecraft known as the Space Shuttle , and launched a range of unmanned probes .
The USSR continued to develop space station technology with the Salyut program and Mir -LRB- ` Peace ' or ` World ' , depending on the context -RRB- space station , supported by Soyuz spacecraft .
They developed their own large space shuttle under the Buran program .
The United States and Russia would work together in space with the Shuttle -- Mir Program , and again with the International Space Station .
It services the International Space Station -LRB- ISS -RRB- as the launcher for both the Soyuz and Progress spacecraft .
It also ferries both Russian and American crews to and from the station .
American concerns that they had fallen behind the Soviet Union in the race to space led quickly to a push by legislators and educators for greater emphasis on mathematics and the physical sciences in American schools .
In many places , especially in villages , a pub can be the focal point of the community .
Historically , pubs have been socially and culturally distinct from cafés , bars and German beer halls .
These alehouses quickly evolved into meeting houses for the folk to socially congregate , gossip and arrange mutual help within their communities .
Herein lies the origin of the modern public house , or `` Pub '' as it is colloquially called in England .
There is however no longer a formal distinction between an inn and other kinds of establishment .
The 18th century saw a huge growth in the number of drinking establishments , primarily due to the introduction of gin .
As thousands of gin-shops sprang up all over England , brewers fought back by increasing the number of alehouses .
The drunkenness and lawlessness created by gin was seen to lead to ruination and degradation of the working classes .
It forced distillers to sell only to licensed retailers and brought gin shops under the jurisdiction of local magistrates .
At the time beer was viewed as harmless , nutritious and even healthy .
Even the evangelical church and temperance movements of the day viewed the drinking of beer very much as a secondary evil and a normal accompaniment to a meal .
Often profits were so high the owners were able to buy the house next door to live in , turning every room in their former home into bars and lounges for customers .
Because it was so easy to obtain permission and the profits could be huge compared to the low cost of gaining permission , the number of beer houses was continuing to rise and in some towns nearly every other house in a street could be a beer house .
Only then was it made harder to get a licence , and the licensing laws which operate today were formulated .
A very small number remained into the 21st century .
The sale of beers , wines or spirits required a licence for the premises from the local magistrates .
Further provisions regulated gaming , drunkenness , prostitution and undesirable conduct on licensed premises , enforceable by prosecution or more effectively by the landlord under threat of forfeiting his licence .
Licence conditions varied widely , according to local practice .
They would specify permitted hours , which might require Sunday closing , or conversely permit all-night opening near a market .
Typically they might require opening throughout the permitted hours , and the provision of food or lavatories .
Objections might be made by the police , rival landlords or anyone else on the grounds of infractions such as serving drunks , disorderly or dirty premises , or ignoring permitted hours .
These restricted opening hours led to the tradition of lock-ins .
However , closing times were increasingly disregarded in the country pubs .
That year was also the first to allow continuous opening for 36 hours from 11 am on New Year 's Eve to 11 pm on New Year 's Day .
In addition , many cities had by-laws to allow some pubs to extend opening hours to midnight or 1 am , whilst nightclubs had long been granted late licences to serve alcohol into the morning .
Critics claimed that these laws would lead to `` 24-hour drinking '' .
However nine months later many pubs had not changed their hours , although some stayed open longer at the weekend , but rarely beyond 1:00 am .
Patrons may put money behind the bar before official closing time , and redeem their drinks during the lock-in so no drinks are technically sold after closing time .
Since 1915 , the UK licensing laws had changed very little , with comparatively early closing times .
The tradition of the lock-in therefore remained .
Pub landlords had raised concerns prior to the implementation of the law that a smoking ban would have a negative impact on sales .
After two years , the impact of the ban was mixed ; some pubs suffered declining sales , while others developed their food sales .
Similar bans are applied in Australian pubs with smoking only allowed in designated areas .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Beer establishments had always provided entertainment of some sort -- singing , gaming or sport .
More common , however , was a card room or a billiard room .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The saloon was a room where for an admission fee or a higher price of drinks , singing , dancing , drama or comedy was performed and drinks would be served at the table .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- From this came the popular music hall form of entertainment -- a show consisting of a variety of acts .
This meant that the customer had spent all his money at The Eagle , and needed to pawn his `` weasel '' to get some more .
The meaning of the `` weasel '' is unclear but the two most likely definitions are : a flat iron used for finishing clothing ; or rhyming slang for a coat -LRB- weasel and stoat -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Later , the public bars gradually improved until sometimes almost the only difference was in the prices , so that customers could choose between economy and exclusivity -LRB- or youth and age , or a jukebox or dartboard -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- While the names of saloon and public bar may still be seen on the doors of pubs , the prices -LRB- and often the standard of furnishings and decoration -RRB- are the same throughout the premises , and many pubs now comprise one large room .
However the modern importance of dining in pubs encourages some establishments to maintain distinct rooms or areas .
It was not only the wealthy visitors who would use these rooms .
The snug was for patrons who preferred not to be seen in the public bar .
Ladies would often enjoy a private drink in the snug in a time when it was frowned upon for women to be in a pub .
These are on a historic interiors list in order that they can be preserved .
It was the pub that first introduced the concept of the bar counter being used to serve the beer .
It became known as the public bar -LSB- citation needed -RSB- .
The other , more private , rooms had no serving bar -- they had the beer brought to them from the public bar .
There are a number of pubs in the Midlands or the North which still retain this set up but these days the beer is fetched by the customer from the taproom or public bar .
In the Manchester district the public bar was known as the `` vault '' , other rooms being the lounge and snug as usual elsewhere .
By the early 1970s there was a tendency to change to one large drinking room and breweries were eager to invest in interior design and theming .
These island bars became popular as they also allowed staff to serve customers in several different rooms surrounding the bar .
`` Whereas their Majesties have been Graciously Pleased to grant Letters patent to John Lofting of London Merchant for a New Invented Engine for Extinguishing Fires which said Engine have found every great encouragement .
Another very common arrangement was -LRB- and is -RRB- for the landlord to own the premises -LRB- whether freehold or leasehold -RRB- independently of the brewer , but then to take a mortgage loan from a brewery , either to finance the purchase of the pub initially , or to refurbish it , and be required as a term of the loan to observe the solus tie .
A trend in the late 20th century was for breweries to run their pubs directly , using managers rather than tenants .
The landlord of a tied pub may be an employee of the brewery -- in which case he/she would be a manager of a managed house , or a self-employed tenant who has entered into a lease agreement with a brewery , a condition of which is the legal obligation -LRB- trade tie -RRB- only to purchase that brewery 's beer .
The beer selection is mainly limited to beers brewed by that particular company .
This law has now been repealed but while in force it dramatically altered the industry .
Some pubs still offer a regularly changing selection of guest beers .
Pubs within a chain will usually have items in common , such as fittings , promotions , ambience and range of food and drink on offer .
A pub chain will position itself in the marketplace for a target audience .
One company may run several pub chains aimed at different segments of the market .
Local events were often commemorated in pub signs .
Some pub signs are in the form of a pictorial pun or rebus .
Interesting origins are not confined to old or traditional names , however .
Names and their origins can be broken up into a relatively small number of categories .
Pubs often have traditional names .
A common name is the `` Marquis of Granby '' .
He showed a great concern for the welfare of his men , and on their retirement , provided funds for many of them to establish taverns , which were subsequently named after him .
Pubs hold special events , from tournaments of the aforementioned games to karaoke nights to pub quizzes .
Some pubs in the UK also have football teams composed of regular customers .
Pubs may be venues for pub songs and live music .
In South East England -LRB- especially London -RRB- it was common until recent times for vendors selling cockles , whelks , mussels , and other shellfish to sell to customers during the evening and at closing time .
Quality dropped but variety increased with the introduction of microwave ovens and freezer food .
In addition , dishes such as burgers , chicken wings , lasagne and chilli con carne are often served .
Some pubs offer elaborate hot and cold snacks free to customers at Sunday lunchtimes , to prevent them getting hungry and leaving for their lunch at home .
A gastropub concentrates on quality food .
The concept of a restaurant in a pub reinvigorated both pub culture and British dining , though has occasionally attracted criticism for potentially removing the character of traditional pubs .
There is no road access and it may only be reached by an 18-mile -LRB- 29 km -RRB- walk over mountains , or a 7-mile -LRB- 11 km -RRB- sea crossing .
Likewise , The Berney Arms in Norfolk has no road access .
It may be reached by foot or by boat , and by train as it is served by the nearby Berney Arms railway station , which likewise has no road access and serves no other settlement .
A number of pubs claim to be the oldest surviving establishment in the United Kingdom , although in several cases original buildings have been demolished and replaced on the same site .
Others are ancient buildings that saw uses other than as a pub during their history .
The Adam and Eve in Norwich was first recorded in 1249 , when it was an alehouse for the workers constructing nearby Norwich Cathedral .
Its cellars are the only surviving part of the older structure .
Various reasons are put forward for this , such as the failure of some establishments to keep up with customer requirements .
Changes in demographics may be an additional factor .
During his idiosyncratic occupancy many famous people came to stay , such as H. G. Wells .
United States president George W. Bush fulfilled his lifetime ambition of visiting a ` genuine British pub ' during his November 2003 state visit to the UK when he had lunch and a pint of non-alcoholic lager -LRB- Bush being a teetotaler -RRB- with British Prime Minister Tony Blair at the Dun Cow pub in Sedgefield , County Durham in Blair 's home constituency .
There were approximately 53,500 public houses in 2009 in the United Kingdom .
This number has been declining every year , so that nearly half of the smaller villages no longer have a local pub .
It became famous -LRB- or according to others , infamous -RRB- during a period spanning the 1920s to the mid-1950s as a meeting place for many of London 's artists , intellectuals and bohemians such as Dylan Thomas , Augustus John , and George Orwell .
It attracted many well-known patrons , such as Freddie Mercury , Kenny Everett and Rudolph Nureyev .
It was used by the serial-killer Colin Ireland to pick up victims .
The anecdote is related in Watson 's book The Double Helix .
and commemorated with a blue plaque on the outside wall .
The major soap operas on British television each feature a pub , and these pubs have become household names .
The sets of each of the three major television soap operas have been visited by some of the members of the royal family , including Queen Elizabeth II .
The centrepiece of each visit was a trip into the Rovers , the Queen Vic , or the Woolpack to be offered a drink .
The Bull in the BBC Radio 4 soap opera The Archers is an important meeting point .
Some import British cask ale , rather than beer in kegs , to provide the full British real ale experience to their customers .
Live music , either sessions of traditional Irish music or varieties of modern popular music , is frequently featured in the pubs of Ireland .
A side effect of `` The Troubles '' was that the lack of a tourist industry meant that a higher proportion of traditional bars have survived the wholesale refitting of Irish pub interiors in the ` English style ' in the 1950s and 1960s .
Most universities in Canada have campus pubs which are central to student life , as it would be bad form just to serve alcohol to students without providing some type of basic food .
The gastropub concept has caught on , as traditional British influences are to be found in many Canadian dishes .
There are now pubs in the large cities of Canada that cater to anyone interested in a `` pub '' type drinking environment .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The term `` Christian '' is also used adjectivally to describe anything associated with Christianity , or in a proverbial sense `` all that is noble , and good , and Christ-like . ''
By 2050 , the Christian population is expected to exceed 3 billion .
Today , about 37 % of all Christians live in the Americas , and about 26 % live in Europe , 24 % of total Christians live in sub-Saharan Africa , about 13 % in Asia and the Pacific , and 1 % of the world 's Christians live in the Middle east and North Africa .
Orthodox communions comprise 12 % of the world 's Christians .
Other Christian groups make up the remainder .
280 million Christian live as a minority .
In the Greek Septuagint , christos was used to translate the Hebrew מָשִׁיחַ -LRB- Mašíaḥ , messiah -RRB- , meaning '' -LSB- one who is -RSB- anointed . ''
Denominations and sects disagree on a common definition of `` Christianity '' .
For example , Timothy Beal notes the disparity of beliefs among those who identify as Christians in the United States as follows :
Adherents of Messianic Judaism are referred to in modern Hebrew as יְהוּדִים מָשִׁיחַיים -LRB- Yehudim Meshihi'im -- `` Messianic Jews '' -RRB- .
In some countries Nasrani tends to be used generically for non-Muslim Western foreigners , e.g. `` blond people . ''
The region of modern Eastern Europe and Central Eurasia -LRB- Russia , Ukraine and other countries of the ex-USSR -RRB- have a long history of Christianity and Christian communities on its lands .
In ancient times , in the first centuries after the birth of Christ , when this region was called -LSB- by whom ? -RSB-
People of that time used to denote themselves Christians -LRB- христиане , крестьяне -RRB- and Russians -LRB- русские -RRB- .
Both terms had strong Christian connotations .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- It is also interesting that in time the term '' крестьяне '' acquired the meaning `` peasants of Christian faith '' and later `` peasants '' -LRB- the main part of the population of the region -RRB- , while the term '' христиане '' retained its religious meaning and the term '' русские '' began to mean representatives of the heterogeneous Russian nation formed on the basis of common Christian faith and language , -LSB- citation needed -RSB- which strongly influenced the history and development of the region .
Also in some contexts the term `` cossack '' -LRB- козак , казак - free man by the will of God -RRB- was used -LSB- by whom ? -RSB-
to denote `` free '' Christians of steppe origin and Russian language .
As of the early 21st century , Christianity has approximately 2.4 billion adherents .
The faith represents about a third of the world 's population and is the largest religion in the world .
A 2011 Pew Research Center survey found that 76.2 % of Europeans , 73.3 % in Oceania , and about 86.0 % in the Americas -LRB- 90 % in Latin America and 77.4 % in North America -RRB- described themselves as Christians .
By 2050 , the Christian population is expected to exceed 3 billion .
While Muslims have an average of 3.1 children per woman -- the highest rate of all religious groups .
Christianity is growing in Africa , Asia , Latin America , Muslim world , and Oceania .
Overall , Protestants have won a total of 84.2 % of all the Nobel Prizes in Chemistry , 60 % in Medicine , and 58.6 % in Physics awarded to Americans between 1901 and 1972 .
Sony Music Entertainment Inc. -LRB- sometimes known as Sony Music or by the initials , SME -RRB- is an American music corporation managed and operated by Sony Corporation of America -LRB- SCA -RRB- , a subsidiary of Japanese conglomerate Sony Corporation .
The buyout led to the dissolution of BMG , which then relaunched as BMG Rights Management .
Out of the `` Big Three '' record companies , with Universal Music Group being the largest and Warner Music Group , SME is middle-sized .
The Columbia Phonograph Company had international subsidiaries and affiliates such as the Columbia Graphophone Company in the United Kingdom , but they were sold off prior to CBS acquiring American Columbia .
The renamed company made Columbia its flagship label with Okeh its subsidiary label while deemphasizing ARC 's other labels .
This allowed ARC 's leased labels Brunswick Records and Vocalion Records to revert to former owner Warner Bros. which sold the labels to Decca Records .
Columbia kept the Brunswick catalogue recorded from December 1931 onward which was reissued on the Columbia label as well as the Vocalion label material from the same time period which was reissued on the Okeh label .
Wallerstein , who was promoted at the end of 1947 from president to chairman of the record company , restored Columbia 's status as a leading record company and spearheaded the successful introduction of the long playing -LRB- LP -RRB- record before he retired as Columbia 's chairman in 1951 .
James Conkling then became head of Columbia Records .
Also in 1951 , Columbia severed its ties with the EMI-owned record label of the same name and began a UK distribution deal with Philips Records , whereas Okeh Records continued to be distributed by EMI on the Columbia label .
Records , and Goddard Lieberson began the first of two stints as head of the record company .
CBS only had the rights to the Columbia name in North America ; therefore the international arm founded in 1961 and launched in 1962 utilized the `` CBS Records '' name only , with Philips Records distributing the label in Europe .
EMI continued to distribute Epic and Okeh label material on the Columbia label in the UK until the distribution deal with EMI expired in 1968 when CBS took over distribution .
This label released the first string of hits for Peaches & Herb and scored a few minor hits from various other artists .
He was replaced first by former head Goddard Lieberson , then in 1975 by the colourful and controversial lawyer Walter Yetnikoff , who led the company until 1990 .
Kesha asked a New York City Supreme Court to free her from her contract with Sony Music but the court denied the request , prompting widespread public and media response .
Sony Music underwent a restructuring after Morris ' arrival .
Under Reid , multiple artists from the Jive half of the former RCA/Jive Label Group moved to Epic .
In the 1980s to early 1990s , there was a CBS imprint label in the US known as CBS Associated Records .
This label was a part of -LRB- Epic/Portrait/Associated -RRB- wing of sub labels at CBS which shared the same national and regional staff as the rest of Epic Records and was a part of the full CBS Records worldwide distribution system .
CBS Inc. , now CBS Corporation , retained the rights to the CBS name for music recordings but granted Sony a temporary license to use the CBS name .
Lewinter previously served as chairman and CEO of Universal Motown Republic Group .
However Sony continued to operate its Japanese music business independently from Sony BMG while BMG Japan was made part of the merger .
Sony completed its acquisition of Bertelsmann 's 50 % stake in the companies ' joint venture on October 1 , 2008 .
The company , once again named Sony Music Entertainment Inc. , became a wholly owned subsidiary of Sony Corporation through its US subsidiary SCA .
A temporary logo was unveiled beginning December 1 , 2008 .
The merger made Columbia and Epic sister labels to RCA Records , which was once owned by RCA which also owned CBS rival NBC .
Davis is still with Sony Music as Chief Creative Officer .
The CBS Associated label was renamed Epic Associated .
Also on January 1 , 1991 , to replace the CBS label , Sony reintroduced the Columbia label worldwide , which it previously held in the United States and Canada only , after it acquired the international rights to the trademark from EMI in 1990 .
Thus , until this day , Sony Music Entertainment Japan does not use the Columbia trademark for Columbia label recordings from outside Japan which are issued in Japan .
The Columbia Records trademark 's rightsholder in Spain was Bertelsmann Music Group , Germany , which Sony Music subsequently subsumed via a 2004 merger , followed by a 2008 buyout .
The county seat of Oklahoma County , the city ranks 27th among United States cities in population .
The population grew following the 2010 Census , with the population estimated to have increased to 620,602 as of July 2014 .
Oklahoma City 's city limits extend into Canadian , Cleveland , and Pottawatomie counties , though much of those areas outside of the core Oklahoma County area are suburban or rural -LRB- watershed -RRB- .
The city ranks as the eighth-largest city in the United States by land area -LRB- including consolidated city-counties ; it is the largest city in the United States by land area whose government is not consolidated with that of a county or borough -RRB- .
Oil , natural gas , petroleum products and related industries are the largest sector of the local economy .
The city is situated in the middle of an active oil field and oil derricks dot the capitol grounds .
Located in the Frontier Country region of the state , the city 's northeast section lies in an ecological region known as the Cross Timbers .
It was the deadliest terror attack in the history of the United States until the attacks of September 11 , 2001 , and remains the deadliest act of domestic terrorism in U.S. history .
Some 10,000 homesteaders settled the area that would become the capital of Oklahoma .
The town grew quickly ; the population doubled between 1890 and 1900 .
Soon after , the capital was moved from Guthrie to Oklahoma City .
Before World War II , Oklahoma City developed major stockyards , attracting jobs and revenue formerly in Chicago and Omaha , Nebraska .
It was also aided by federal development of Tinker Air Force Base .
Latting was also the first woman to serve as mayor of a U.S. city with over 350,000 residents .
Water taxis transport passengers within the district , adding color and activity along the canal .
As a result of MAPS , the population living in downtown housing has exponentially increased , together with demand for additional residential and retail amenities , such as grocery , services , and shops .
Since the MAPS projects ' completion , the downtown area has seen continued development .
Several downtown buildings are undergoing renovation/restoration .
The famed First National Center is being renovated .
Residents of Oklahoma City suffered substantial losses on April 19 , 1995 when Timothy McVeigh detonated a bomb in front of the Murrah building .
The building was destroyed -LRB- the remnants of which had to be imploded in a controlled demolition later that year -RRB- , more than 100 nearby buildings suffered severe damage , and 168 people were killed .
Every year on April 19 , survivors , families and friends return to the memorial to read the names of each person lost .
This also allows the central portion of the city to expand south and connect with the shore of the Oklahoma River .
The total area is 3.09 percent water .
The northeastern part of the city and its eastern suburbs fall into an ecological region known as the Cross Timbers .
The North Canadian once had sufficient flow to flood every year , wreaking destruction on surrounding areas , including the central business district and the original Oklahoma City Zoo .
The city has three large lakes : Lake Hefner and Lake Overholser , in the northwestern quarter of the city ; and the largest , Lake Stanley Draper , in the sparsely populated far southeast portion of the city .
The population density normally reported for Oklahoma City using the area of its city limits can be a bit misleading .
The two halves of the city were actually founded and plotted as separate cities , but soon grew together .
The north side is characterized by very diverse and fashionable urban neighborhoods near the city center and sprawling suburbs further north .
South Oklahoma City is generally more blue collar working class and significantly more industrial , having grown up around the Stockyards and meat packing plants at the turn of the century , and is currently the center of the city 's rapidly growing Latino community .
Downtown Oklahoma City , which has 7,600 residents , is currently seeing an influx of new private investment and large scale public works projects , which have helped to resuscitate a central business district left almost deserted by the Oil Bust of the early 1980s .
In the next few years a massive new central park will link the gardens near the CBD and the new convention center to be built just south of it to the North Canadian River , as part of a massive works project known as Core to Shore ; the new park is part of MAPS3 , a collection of civic projects funded by a 1-cent temporary -LRB- seven-year -RRB- sales tax increase .
Prolonged and severe droughts -LRB- sometimes leading to wildfires in the vicinity -RRB- as well as very heavy rainfall leading to flash flooding and flooding occur with some regularity .
Consistent winds , usually from the south or south-southeast during the summer , help temper the hotter weather .
Consistent northerly winds during the winter can intensify cold periods .
Severe ice storms and snowstorms happen sporadically during the winter .
The average temperature is 61.4 °F -LRB- 16.3 °C -RRB- , with the monthly daily average ranging from 39.2 °F -LRB- 4.0 °C -RRB- in January to 83.0 °F -LRB- 28.3 °C -RRB- in July .
Extremes range from − 17 °F -LRB- − 27 °C -RRB- on February 12 , 1899 to 113 °F -LRB- 45 °C -RRB- on August 11 , 1936 and August 3 , 2012 ; the last sub-zero -LRB- °F -RRB- reading was − 5 °F -LRB- − 21 °C -RRB- on February 10 , 2011 .
Temperatures reach 100 °F -LRB- 38 °C -RRB- on 10.4 days of the year , 90 °F -LRB- 32 °C -RRB- on nearly 70 days , and fail to rise above freezing on 8.3 days .
Being in the center of what is colloquially referred to as Tornado Alley , it is prone to especially frequent and severe tornadoes , as well as very severe hailstorms and occasional derechoes .
Tornadoes have occurred in every month of the year and a secondary smaller peak also occurs during autumn , especially October .
Since the time weather records have been kept , Oklahoma City has been struck by thirteen violent tornadoes , eleven F/EF4s and two F/EF5 .
On May 3 , 1999 parts of southern Oklahoma City and nearby suburban communities suffered from one of the most powerful tornadoes on record , an F5 on the Fujita scale , with wind speeds estimated by radar at 318 mph -LRB- 510 km/h -RRB- .
On May 20 , 2013 , far southwest Oklahoma City , along with Newcastle and Moore , was hit again by a EF5 tornado ; it was 0.5 to 1.3 miles -LRB- 0.80 to 2.09 km -RRB- wide and killed 23 people .
Across Oklahoma and Texas generally , there was record flooding in the latter part of the month
One person households account for 30.5 % of all households and 8.7 % of all households had someone living alone who is 65 years of age or older .
In the 2000 Census Oklahoma City 's age composition was 25.5 % under the age of 18 , 10.7 % from 18 to 24 , 30.8 % from 25 to 44 , 21.5 % from 45 to 64 , and 11.5 % who were 65 years of age or older .
For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 92.7 males .
Since the official Census in 2000 , Oklahoma City had grown 21 percent -LRB- a 114,470 raw increase -RRB- according to the Bureau estimates .
The 2014 estimate of 620,602 is the largest population Oklahoma City has ever recorded .
It is the first city in the state to record a population greater than 600,000 residents and the largest municipal population of the Great Plains region -LRB- OK , KS , NE , SD , ND -RRB- .
There are many rival gangs in Oklahoma City , one whose headquarters has been established in the city , the Southside Locos , traditionally known as Sureños .
Oklahoma City also has its share of very brutal crimes , particularly in the 1970s .
An intensive investigation followed , and the three individuals involved , who also killed three others in Purcell , Oklahoma , were identified .
One , Harold Stafford , died in a motorcycle accident in Tulsa not long after the restaurant murders .
Another , Verna Stafford , was sentenced to life without parole after being granted a new trial after she had previously been sentenced to death .
The Oklahoma City Police Department , has a uniformed force of 1,169 officers and 300 + civilian employees .
It was the deadliest single domestic terrorist attack in US history , prior to 9/11 .
According to the Oklahoma City Chamber of Commerce , the metropolitan area 's economic output grew by 33 percent between 2001 and 2005 due chiefly to economic diversification .
The magazine reported that the city had falling unemployment , one of the strongest housing markets in the country and solid growth in energy , agriculture and manufacturing .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Other theaters include Lyric Theatre , Jewel Box Theatre , Kirkpatrick Auditorium , the Poteet Theatre , the Oklahoma City Community College Bruce Owen Theater and the 488-seat Petree Recital Hall , at the Oklahoma City University campus .
The museum formerly housed the International Photography Hall of Fame -LRB- IPHF -RRB- that exhibits photographs and artifacts from a large collection of cameras and other artifacts preserving the history of photography .
Focusing on the form and function of the skeletal system , this 7,000 sq ft -LRB- 650 m2 -RRB- museum displays hundreds of skulls and skeletons from all corners of the world .
Exhibits include adaptation , locomotion , classification and diversity of the vertebrate kingdom .
The Museum of Osteology is the only one of its kind in America .
The National Cowboy & Western Heritage Museum has galleries of western art and is home to the Hall of Great Western Performers .
The outdoor Symbolic Memorial can be visited 24 hours a day for free , and the adjacent Memorial Museum , located in the former Journal Record building damaged by the bombing , can be entered for a small fee .
An interpretive exhibits tells the evolution of the banjo from its humble roots in American slavery , to bluegrass , to folk and world music .
The Oklahoma History Center is the history museum of the state of Oklahoma .
It preserves the history of Oklahoma from the prehistoric to the present day .
The Thunder is the city 's second `` permanent '' major professional sports franchise after the now-defunct AFL Oklahoma Wranglers and is the third major-league team to call the city home when considering the temporary hosting of the New Orleans/Oklahoma City Hornets for the 2005 -- 06 and 2006 -- 07 NBA seasons .
`` The Brick '' , as it is locally known , is considered one of the finest minor league parks in the nation .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The city has held the 2005 NCAA Men 's Basketball First and Second round and hosted the Big 12 Men 's and Women 's Basketball Tournaments in 2007 and 2009 .
The major universities in the area -- University of Oklahoma , Oklahoma City University , and Oklahoma State University -- often schedule major basketball games and other sporting events at Chesapeake Energy Arena and Chickasaw Bricktown Ballpark , although most home games are played at their campus stadiums .
There are numerous golf courses and country clubs spread around the city .
The state of Oklahoma hosts a highly competitive high school football culture , with many teams in the Oklahoma City metropolitan area .
Beginning with the largest , the classes are : 6A , 5A , 4A , 3A , 2A , A , B , and C. Class 6A is broken into two divisions .
Oklahoma City area schools in this division include : Edmond North , Mustang , Moore , Yukon , Edmond Memorial , Edmond Santa Fe , Norman North , Westmoore , Southmoore , Putnam City North , Norman , Putnam City , Putnam City West , U.S. Grant , Midwest City .
The Thunder plays home games at the Chesapeake Energy Arena in downtown Oklahoma City , known affectionately in the national media as ` the Peake ' and ` Loud City ' .
In 2013 the Thunder reached the Western Conference semifinals without All-Star guard Russell Westbrook , who was injured in their first round series against the Houston Rockets , only to lose to the Memphis Grizzlies .
The Oklahoma City Thunder has been regarded by sports analysts as one of the elite franchises of the NBA 's Western Conference and that of a media darling as the future of the league .
The team became the first NBA franchise to play regular-season games in the state of Oklahoma .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The team was known as the New Orleans/Oklahoma City Hornets while playing in Oklahoma City .
The team ultimately returned to New Orleans full-time for the 2007 -- 08 season .
One of the more prominent landmarks downtown is the Crystal Bridge at the Myriad Botanical Gardens , a large downtown urban park .
In 2007 , following a renovation of the stage , Oklahoma Shakespeare in the Park relocated to the Myriad Gardens .
The Myriad Gardens will undergo a massive renovation in conjunction with the recently built Devon Tower directly north of it .
The Oklahoma City Zoo and Botanical Garden is home to numerous natural habitats , WPA era architecture and landscaping , and hosts major touring concerts during the summer at its amphitheater .
Frontier City is an ` Old West ' - themed amusement park .
The park also features a recreation of a western gunfight at the ` OK Corral ' and many shops that line the `` Western '' town 's main street .
Frontier City also hosts a national concert circuit at its amphitheater during the summer .
Walking trails line Lake Hefner and Lake Overholser in the northwest part of the city and downtown at the canal and the Oklahoma River .
The majority of the east shore area is taken up by parks and trails , including a new leashless dog park and the postwar-era Stars and Stripes Park .
Oklahoma City has a major park in each quadrant of the city , going back to the first parks masterplan .
Martin Park Nature Center is a natural habitat in far northwest Oklahoma City .
Will Rogers Park is home to the Lycan Conservatory , the Rose Garden , and Butterfly Garden , all built in the WPA era .
Concerts and lectures are also held there .
The City of Oklahoma City has operated under a council-manager form of city government since 1927 .
Eight councilpersons represent each of the eight wards of Oklahoma City .
Couch previously served as assistant city manager , Metropolitan Area Projects Plan -LRB- MAPS -RRB- director and utilities director prior to his service as city manager .
The city is home to several colleges and universities .
OCU has its main campus in the north-central section of the city , near the city 's chinatown area .
OCU Law is located in the Midtown district near downtown , in the old Central High School building .
The OU Medicine hosting the state 's only Level-One trauma center .
OU is one of only four major universities in the nation to operate six medical schools .
-LSB- clarification needed -RSB-
Rose State College is located east of Oklahoma City in suburban Midwest City .
Northeast of the city is Langston University , the state 's historically black college -LRB- HBCU -RRB- .
Langston also has an urban campus in the eastside section of the city .
Its FAA Academy is accredited by the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools .
Its Civil Aerospace Medical Institute -LRB- CAMI -RRB- has a medical education division responsible for aeromedical education in general as well as the education of aviation medical examiners in the U.S. and 93 other countries .
In addition , The National Academy of Science offers Research Associateship Programs for fellowship and other grants for CAMI research .
The district 's Classen School of Advanced Studies and Harding Charter Preparatory High School rank high among public schools nationally according to a formula that looks at the number of Advanced Placement , International Baccalaureate and/or Cambridge tests taken by the school 's students divided by the number of graduating seniors .
In addition , OKCPS 's Belle Isle Enterprise Middle School was named the top middle school in the state according to the Academic Performance Index , and recently received the Blue Ribbon School Award , in 2004 and again in 2011 .
Private career and technology education schools in Oklahoma City include Oklahoma Technology Institute , Platt College , Vatterott College , and Heritage College .
Gay publications include The Gayly Oklahoman .
It contains local commentary and human interest pieces direct-mailed to over 50,000 Edmond residents .
Oklahoma City was home to several pioneers in radio and television broadcasting .
In mid-2002 , WKY radio was purchased outright by Citadel Broadcasting , who was bought out by Cumulus Broadcasting in 2011 .
The market is also home to several religious stations including TBN owned-and-operated station KTBO-TV -LRB- channel 14 -RRB- and Norman-based Daystar owned-and-operated station KOCM -LRB- channel 46 -RRB- .
The OKCFD also operates a fire apparatus fleet of 36 engines -LRB- including 30 paramedic engines -RRB- , 13 ladders , 16 brush patrol units , six water tankers , two hazardous materials units , one Technical Rescue Unit , one Air Supply Unit , six Arson Investigation Units , and one Rehabilitation Unit .
Each engine is staffed with a driver , an officer , and one to two firefighters , while each ladder company is staffed with a driver , an officer , and one firefighter .
Minimum staffing per shift is 213 personnel .
Interstate 240 connects Interstate 40 and Interstate 44 in south Oklahoma City , while Interstate 235 spurs from Interstate 44 in north-central Oklahoma City into downtown .
Lake Hefner Parkway runs through northwest Oklahoma City , while Airport Road runs through southwest Oklahoma City and leads to Will Rogers World Airport .
The Kilpatrick Turnpike loops around north and west Oklahoma City .
Oklahoma City also has several major national and state highways within its city limits .
Northwest Expressway -LRB- Oklahoma State Highway 3 -RRB- runs from North Classen Boulevard in north-central Oklahoma City to the northwestern suburbs .
The main transfer terminal is located downtown at NW 5th Street and Hudson Avenue .
METRO Transit maintains limited coverage of the city 's main street grid using a hub-and-spoke system from the main terminal , making many journeys impractical due to the rather small number of bus routes offered and that most trips require a transfer downtown .
This study identified several potential commuter transit routes from the suburbs into downtown OKC as well as feeder-line bus and/or rail routes throughout the city .
Oklahoma City and the surrounding metropolitan area are home to a number of health care facilities and specialty hospitals .
OU Medicine , an academic medical institution located on the campus of The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center , is home to OU Medical Center .
Other medical facilities operated by OU Medicine include OU Physicians and OU Children 's Physicians , the OU College of Medicine , the Oklahoma Cancer Center and OU Medical Center Edmond , the latter being located in the northern suburb of Edmond .
INTEGRIS Health operates hospitals , rehabilitation centers , physician clinics , mental health facilities , independent living centers and home health agencies located throughout much of Oklahoma .
INTEGRIS Baptist Medical Center ranks high-performing in the following categories : Cardiology and Heart Surgery ; Diabetes and Endocrinology ; Ear , Nose and Throat ; Gastroenterology ; Geriatrics ; Nephrology ; Orthopedics ; Pulmonology and Urology .
The ACSM 's report , published as part of its American Fitness Index program , cited , among other things , the poor diet of residents , low levels of physical fitness , higher incidences of obesity , diabetes , and cardiovascular disease than the national average , low access to recreational facilities like swimming pools and baseball diamonds , the paucity of parks and low investment by the city in their development , the high percentage of households below the poverty level , and the lack of state-mandated physical education curriculum as contributing factors .
Early humans in the Lower Paleolithic lived in forests and woodlands , which allowed them to collect seafood , eggs , nuts , and fruits besides scavenging .
This specialization of work also involved creating specialized tools , like fishing nets and hooks and bone harpoons .
The transition into the subsequent Neolithic period is chiefly defined by the unprecedented development of nascent agricultural practices .
Forest gardening was also being used as a food production system in various parts of the world over this period .
Eventually superior foreign species were selected and incorporated into the gardens .
Many groups continued their hunter-gatherer ways of life , although their numbers have continually declined , partly as a result of pressure from growing agricultural and pastoral communities .
In the resulting competition for land use , hunter-gatherer societies either adopted these practices or moved to other areas .
-LSB- by whom ? -RSB-
So great is the contrast with human hunter-gatherers that it is widely argued by palaeoanthropologists that resistance to being dominated was a key factor driving the evolutionary emergence of human consciousness , language , kinship and social organization .
In addition to social and economic equality in hunter-gatherer societies , there is often , though not always , sexual parity as well .
Hunter-gatherers are often grouped together based on kinship and band -LRB- or tribe -RRB- membership .
Young mothers can enjoy childcare support from their own mothers , who continue living nearby in the same camp .
However , according to some observers , hunter-gatherer women would not understand this interpretation .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- In all hunter-gatherer societies , women appreciate the meat brought back to camp by men .
An illustrative account is Megan Biesele 's study of the southern African Ju / ` hoan , ` Women Like Meat ' .
Recent archaeological research suggests that the sexual division of labor was the fundamental organisational innovation that gave Homo sapiens the edge over the Neanderthals , allowing our ancestors to migrate from Africa and spread across the globe .
However , it is true that in a small minority of cases , women hunt the same kind of quarry as men , sometimes doing so alongside men .
The best-known example are the Aeta people of the Philippines .
Their rates are even better when they combine forces with men : mixed hunting groups have a full 41 % success rate among the Aeta . ''
Among the Ju ' / hoansi people of Namibia , women help men track down quarry .
Women in the Australian Martu also primarily hunt small animals like lizards to feed their children and maintain relations with other women .
Therefore , no surplus of resources can be accumulated by any single member .
According to Sahlins , ethnographic data indicated that hunter-gatherers worked far fewer hours and enjoyed more leisure than typical members of industrial society , and they still ate well .
Their `` affluence '' came from the idea that they were satisfied with very little in the material sense .
The first of these studies looked at 102 time-allocation studies , and the second one analyzed 207 energy-expenditure studies .
Archaeologists examine hunter-gatherer tool kits to measure variability across different groups .
One way to divide hunter-gatherer groups is by their return systems .
Immediate return foragers consume their food within a day or two after they procure it .
Delayed return foragers store the surplus food -LRB- Kelly , 31 -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- This anthropological view has remained unchanged since the 1960s .
-LSB- clarification needed -RSB- -LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The result of their effort has been the general acknowledgement that there has been complex interaction between hunter-gatherers and non-hunter-gatherers for millennia .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- -LSB- dubious -- discuss -RSB-
There are nevertheless a number of contemporary hunter-gatherer peoples who , after contact with other societies , continue their ways of life with very little external influence .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Evidence suggests big-game hunter gatherers crossed the Bering Strait from Asia -LRB- Eurasia -RRB- into North America over a land bridge -LRB- Beringia -RRB- , that existed between 47,000 -- 14,000 years ago .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- American hunter-gatherers were spread over a wide geographical area , thus there were regional variations in lifestyles .
These goals are designed to eliminate poverty , discrimination , abuse and preventable deaths , address environmental destruction , and usher in an era of development for all people , everywhere .
`` We located the family planning offices , and in that family planning office , we located the UNFPA office , and we confirmed from family planning officials there that there is no distinction between what the UNFPA does and what the Chinese Family Planning Office does , '' said Scott Weinberg , a spokesman for PRI .
In response , the EU decided to fill the gap left behind by the US under the Sandbaek report .
The European Commission donated further $ 36 M .
The Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic -LRB- Russian SFSR or RSFSR ; Russian : Российская Советская Федеративная Социалистическая Республика , tr .
Russians formed the largest ethnic group .
Within the USSR , it bordered the Baltic republics -LRB- Lithuania , Latvia and Estonia -RRB- , the Byelorussian SSR and the Ukrainian SSR to the west .
To the south it bordered the Georgian , Azerbaijan and Kazakh SSRs .
A network of territorially-organized public-health services provided health care .
After 1985 , the restructuring policies of the Gorbachev administration relatively liberalised the economy , which had become stagnant since the late 1970s , with the introduction of non-state owned enterprises such as cooperatives .
The effects of market policies led to the failure of many enterprises and total instability by 1990 .
By 1918 , during the Russian Civil War , several states within the former Russian Empire seceded , reducing the size of the country even more .
Under his rule , the Russian SFSR and the rest of the Soviet Union went through an era of stagnation .
However , based on the historical community of peoples , relations between them , given the bilateral treaties , the desire for a democratic rule of law , the intention to develop their relations based on mutual recognition and respect for state sovereignty , the parties agreed to the formation of the Commonwealth of Independent States .
On the same day , the Supreme Soviet of the Russian SFSR denounced the Treaty on the Creation of the USSR and recalled all Russian deputies from the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union .
The legality of this act is the subject of discussions because , according to the 1978 Constitution -LRB- Basic Law -RRB- of the Russian SFSR , the Russian Supreme Soviet had no right to do so .
However , by this time the Soviet government had been rendered more or less impotent , and was in no position to object .
Although the December 12 vote is sometimes reckoned as the moment that the RSFSR seceded from the collapsing Soviet Union , this is not the case .
It appears that the RSFSR took the line that it was not possible to secede from an entity that no longer existed .
Thus , Russia is considered to be an original member of the UN -LRB- since October 24 , 1945 -RRB- along with Ukraine -LRB- Ukrainian SSR -RRB- and Belarus -LRB- Byelorussian SSR -RRB- .
According to law , during 1992 , it was allowed to use the old name of the RSFSR for official business -LRB- forms , seals and stamps -RRB- .
The Russian Federation 's Constitution -LRB- Fundamental Law -RRB- of 1978 , though with the 1991 -- 1992 Amendements , remained in effect until the 1993 Russian constitutional crisis .
Universal Studios is a member of the Motion Picture Association of America -LRB- MPAA -RRB- .
Universal Studios was founded by Carl Laemmle , Mark Dintenfass , Charles O. Baumann , Adam Kessel , Pat Powers , William Swanson , David Horsley , Robert H. Cochrane -LSB- a -RSB- and Jules Brulatour .
One story has Laemmle watching a box office for hours , counting patrons and calculating the day 's takings .
Soon , Laemmle and other disgruntled nickelodeon owners decided to avoid paying Edison by producing their own pictures .
Laemmle broke with Edison 's custom of refusing to give billing and screen credits to performers .
By naming the movie stars , he attracted many of the leading players of the time , contributing to the creation of the star system .
Studio management became the third facet of Universal 's operations , with the studio incorporated as a distinct subsidiary organization .
Unlike other movie moguls , Laemmle opened his studio to tourists .
Universal became the largest studio in Hollywood , and remained so for a decade .
However , it sought an audience mostly in small towns , producing mostly inexpensive melodramas , westerns and serials .
Despite Laemmle 's role as an innovator , he was an extremely cautious studio chief .
Unlike rivals Adolph Zukor , William Fox , and Marcus Loew , Laemmle chose not to develop a theater chain .
He also financed all of his own films , refusing to take on debt .
Thalberg had been Laemmle 's personal secretary , and Laemmle was impressed by his cogent observations of how efficiently the studio could be operated .
Promoted to studio chief , Thalberg was giving Universal 's product a touch of class , but MGM 's head of production Louis B. Mayer lured Thalberg away from Universal with a promise of better pay .
Without his guidance Universal became a second-tier studio , and would remain so for several decades .
With the advent of sound , these productions were made in the German language or , occasionally , Hungarian or Polish .
In the U.S. , Universal Pictures did not distribute any of this subsidiary 's films , but at least some of them were exhibited through other , independent , foreign-language film distributors based in New York , without benefit of English subtitles .
Nazi persecution and a change in ownership for the parent Universal Pictures organization resulted in the dissolution of this subsidiary .
This moment effectively launched Walt Disney Studios ' foothold , while Universal became a minor player in film animation .
Universal subsequently severed its link to Mintz and formed its own in-house animation studio to produce Oswald cartoons headed by Walter Lantz .
He bought and built theaters , converted the studio to sound production , and made several forays into high-quality production .
Laemmle , Jr. created a niche for the studio , beginning a series of horror films which extended into the 1940s , affectionately dubbed Universal Horror .
Universal 's forays into high-quality production spelled the end of the Laemmle era at the studio .
Taking on the task of modernizing and upgrading a film conglomerate in the depths of the depression was risky , and for a time Universal slipped into receivership .
The new film featured several stars from the Broadway stage version , which began production in late 1935 , and unlike the 1929 film was based on the Broadway musical rather than the novel .
Carl , Jr. 's spending habits alarmed company stockholders .
They would not allow production to start on Show Boat unless the Laemmles obtained a loan .
It was the first time Universal had borrowed money for a production in its 26-year history .
They were unceremoniously removed from the company they had founded .
Because the Laemmles personally oversaw production , Show Boat was released -LRB- despite the takeover -RRB- with Carl Laemmle and Carl Laemmle Jr. 's names on the credits and in the advertising campaign of the film .
The film was a box-office hit and reputedly restored the studio 's solvency .
The success of the film led Universal to offer her a contract , which for the first five years of her career produced her most successful pictures .
By the early 1940s , the company was concentrating on lower-budget productions that were the company 's main staple : westerns , melodramas , serials and sequels to the studio 's horror pictures , the latter now solely B pictures .
Universal could seldom afford its own stable of stars , and often borrowed talent from other studios , or hired freelance actors .
In addition to Stewart and Dietrich , Margaret Sullavan , and Bing Crosby were two of the major names that made a couple of pictures for Universal during this period .
Universal 's core audience base was still found in the neighborhood movie theaters , and the studio continued to please the public with low - to medium-budget films .
As Universal 's main product had always been low-budget film , it was one of the last major studios to have a contract with Technicolor .
With the success of their first two pictures , a regular schedule of high-budget , Technicolor films followed .
Rank and International remained interested in Universal , however , culminating in the studio 's reorganization as Universal-International .
He stopped the studio 's low-budget production of B movies , serials and curtailed Universal 's horror and `` Arabian Nights '' cycles .
Distribution and copyright control remained under the name of Universal Pictures Company Inc. .
Goetz set out an ambitious schedule .
For three decades , Castle would offer `` highlights '' reels from the Universal film library to home-movie enthusiasts and collectors .
The production arm of the studio still struggled .
By the late 1940s , Goetz was out , and the studio returned to low-budget films .
Besides Abbott and Costello , the studio retained the Walter Lantz cartoon studio , whose product was released with Universal-International 's films .
Among Universal-International 's stable of stars were Rock Hudson , Tony Curtis , Jeff Chandler , Audie Murphy , and John Gavin .
Wasserman 's deal gave Stewart a share in the profits of three pictures in lieu of a large salary .
When one of those films , Winchester ' 73 , proved to be a hit , the arrangement would become the rule for many future productions at Universal , and eventually at other studios as well .
By the late 1950s , the motion picture business was again changing .
The combination of the studio/theater-chain break-up and the rise of television saw the reduced audience size for cinema productions .
MCA owned the studio lot , but not Universal Pictures , yet was increasingly influential on Universal 's product .
The studio lot was upgraded and modernized , while MCA clients like Doris Day , Lana Turner , Cary Grant , and director Alfred Hitchcock were signed to Universal Pictures contracts .
The company reverted in name to Universal Pictures .
As a final gesture before leaving the talent agency business , virtually every MCA client was signed to a Universal contract .
And so , with MCA in charge , Universal became a full-blown , A-film movie studio , with leading actors and directors under contract ; offering slick , commercial films ; and a studio tour subsidiary launched in 1964 .
An innovation during this period championed by Universal was the made-for-television movie .
Rooster Cogburn co-starred John Wayne , reprising his Oscar-winning role from the earlier film , and Katharine Hepburn , their only film together .
The film was only a moderate success .
However , with future film productions from both names being released through the MGM/UA Entertainment plate , CIC decided to merge UA 's international units with MGM and reformed as United International Pictures .
There would be other film hits like E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial -LRB- 1982 -RRB- , Back to the Future -LRB- 1985 -RRB- , Field of Dreams -LRB- 1989 -RRB- , and Jurassic Park -LRB- 1993 -RRB- , but the film business was financially unpredictable .
In 2001 , MGM dropped out of the UIP venture , and went with 20th Century Fox 's international arm to handle distribution of their titles to this day .
Meanwhile , around this time , the production subsidiary was renamed Universal Studios Inc. , and -LRB- in 1990 -RRB- MCA created MCA/Universal Home Video Inc. for the VHS video cassette -LRB- later DVD -RRB- sales industry .
In late 2000 , the New York Film Academy was permitted to use the Universal Studios backlot for student film projects in an unofficial partnership .
The resulting media super-conglomerate was renamed NBCUniversal , while Universal Studios Inc. remained the name of the production subsidiary .
Comcast merged the former GE subsidiary with its own cable-television programming assets , creating the current NBCUniversal .
Following Federal Communications Commission -LRB- FCC -RRB- approval , the Comcast-GE deal was closed on Jan 29 , 2011 .
Snider was replaced by then-Vice Chairman Marc Shmuger and Focus Features head David Linde .
In September 2013 , Adam Fogelson was ousted as co-chairman of Universal Pictures , promoting Donna Langley to sole-chairman .
In addition , NBCUniversal International Chairman , Jeff Shell , would be appointed as Chairman of the newly created Filmed Entertainment Group .
Longtime studio head Ron Meyer would give up oversight of the film studio and appointed Vice Chairman of NBCUniversal , providing consultation to CEO Steve Burke on all of the company 's operations .
Meyers still retains oversight of Universal Parks and Resorts .
In June 2014 , Universal Partnerships took over licensing consumer products for NBC and Sprout with expectation that all licensing would eventually be centralized within NBCUniversal .
It was only involved in approximately 20 French film productions .
In the early 1970s , the unit was incorporated into the French Cinema International Corporation arm .
-LSB- N 4 -RSB- Bell considered his most famous invention an intrusion on his real work as a scientist and refused to have a telephone in his study .
-LSB- N 5 -RSB-
His father was Professor Alexander Melville Bell , a phonetician , and his mother was Eliza Grace -LRB- née Symonds -RRB- .
-LSB- N 6 -RSB- For his 11th birthday , his father acquiesced and allowed him to adopt the name `` Graham '' , chosen out of respect for Alexander Graham , a Canadian being treated by his father who had become a family friend .
Young Bell asked what needed to be done at the mill .
Despite being normally quiet and introspective , he reveled in mimicry and `` voice tricks '' akin to ventriloquism that continually entertained family guests during their occasional visits .
In this treatise , his father explains his methods of how to instruct deaf-mutes -LRB- as they were then known -RRB- to articulate words and read other people 's lip movements to decipher meaning .
Bell 's father taught him and his brothers not only to write Visible Speech but to identify any symbol and its accompanying sound .
Bell became so proficient that he became a part of his father 's public demonstrations and astounded audiences with his abilities .
His school record was undistinguished , marked by absenteeism and lacklustre grades .
Upon leaving school , Bell travelled to London to live with his grandfather , Alexander Bell .
During the year he spent with his grandfather , a love of learning was born , with long hours spent in serious discussion and study .
The elder Bell took great efforts to have his young pupil learn to speak clearly and with conviction , the attributes that his pupil would need to become a teacher himself .
Although he was enrolled as a student in Latin and Greek , he instructed classes himself in return for board and # 10 per session .
The following year , he attended the University of Edinburgh ; joining his older brother Melville who had enrolled there the previous year .
In 1868 , not long before he departed for Canada with his family , Bell completed his matriculation exams and was accepted for admission to the University of London .
Their father , highly interested in their project , offered to pay for any supplies and spurred the boys on with the enticement of a `` big prize '' if they were successful .
His efforts resulted in a remarkably lifelike head that could `` speak '' , albeit only a few words .
The boys would carefully adjust the `` lips '' and when a bellows forced air through the windpipe , a very recognizable `` Mama '' ensued , to the delight of neighbors who came to see the Bell invention .
More indicative of his playful nature , his experiments convinced onlookers that they saw a `` talking dog '' .
It was a valuable blunder ... If I had been able to read German in those days , I might never have commenced my experiments ! ''
-LSB- N 7 -RSB-
His younger brother , Edward `` Ted , '' was similarly bed-ridden , suffering from tuberculosis .
Edward would never recover .
Upon his brother 's death , Bell returned home in 1867 .
His older brother Melville had married and moved out .
With aspirations to obtain a degree at University College London , Bell considered his next years as preparation for the degree examinations , devoting his spare time at his family 's residence to studying .
His first two pupils were `` deaf mute '' girls who made remarkable progress under his tutelage .
While his older brother seemed to achieve success on many fronts including opening his own elocution school , applying for a patent on an invention , and starting a family , Bell continued as a teacher .
Bell 's parents embarked upon a long-planned move when they realized that their remaining son was also sickly .
Reluctantly , Bell also had to conclude a relationship with Marie Eccleston , who , as he had surmised , was not prepared to leave England with him .
The property consisted of an orchard , large farm house , stable , pigsty , hen-house , and a carriage house , which bordered the Grand River .
-LSB- N 9 -RSB-
Despite his frail condition upon arriving in Canada , Bell found the climate and environs to his liking , and rapidly improved .
-LSB- N 11 -RSB-
After setting up his workshop , Bell continued experiments based on Helmholtz 's work with electricity and sound .
His father helped him set up his private practice by contacting Gardiner Greene Hubbard , the president of the Clarke School for the Deaf for a recommendation .
She was later to say that Bell dedicated his life to the penetration of that `` inhuman silence which separates and estranges . ''
In 1893 , Keller performed the sod-breaking ceremony for the construction of the new Bell 's new Volta Bureau , dedicated to `` the increase and diffusion of knowledge relating to the deaf '' .
During this period , he alternated between Boston and Brantford , spending summers in his Canadian home .
At Boston University , Bell was `` swept up '' by the excitement engendered by the many scientists and inventors residing in the city .
While days and evenings were occupied by his teaching and private classes , Bell began to stay awake late into the night , running experiment after experiment in rented facilities at his boarding house .
Keeping `` night owl '' hours , he worried that his work would be discovered and took great pains to lock up his notebooks and laboratory equipment .
Bell had a specially made table where he could place his notes and equipment inside a locking cover .
Each pupil would play an important role in the next developments .
Although the offer was made by George 's mother and followed the year-long arrangement in 1872 where her son and his nurse had moved to quarters next to Bell 's boarding house , it was clear that Mr. Sanders was backing the proposal .
The arrangement was for teacher and student to continue their work together , with free room and board thrown in .
Mabel was a bright , attractive girl who was ten years Bell 's junior , but became the object of his affection .
Bell thought it might be possible to generate undulating electrical currents that corresponded to sound waves .
But he had no working model to demonstrate the feasibility of these ideas .
When Bell mentioned to Gardiner Hubbard and Thomas Sanders that he was working on a method of sending multiple tones on a telegraph wire using a multi-reed device , the two wealthy patrons began to financially support Bell 's experiments .
Patent matters would be handled by Hubbard 's patent attorney , Anthony Pollok .
Henry replied that Bell had `` the germ of a great invention '' .
That declaration greatly encouraged Bell to keep trying , even though he did not have the equipment needed to continue his experiments , nor the ability to create a working model of his ideas .
That demonstrated to Bell that only one reed or armature was necessary , not multiple reeds .
That same morning , Bell 's lawyer filed Bell 's application with the patent office .
There is considerable debate about who arrived first and Gray later challenged the primacy of Bell 's patent .
He told Bell that his claim for the variable resistance feature was also described in Gray 's caveat .
In addition , Gray abandoned his caveat , and because he did not contest Bell 's priority , the examiner approved Bell 's patent on March 3 , 1876 .
Gray had reinvented the variable resistance telephone , but Bell was the first to write down the idea and the first to test it in a telephone .
He claimed he showed Gray 's patent caveat to Bailey .
Bell denied in an affidavit that he ever gave Wilber any money .
Continuing his experiments in Brantford , Bell brought home a working model of his telephone .
With curious onlookers packed into the office as witnesses , faint voices were heard replying .
These experiments clearly proved that the telephone could work over long distances .
By then , the Bell company no longer wanted to sell the patent .
Bell 's investors would become millionaires , while he fared well from residuals and at one point had assets of nearly one million dollars .
Bell began a series of public demonstrations and lectures to introduce the new invention to the scientific community as well as the general public .
She called the demonstration `` most extraordinary '' .
The enthusiasm surrounding Bell 's public displays laid the groundwork for universal acceptance of the revolutionary device .
Bell Company engineers made numerous other improvements to the telephone , which emerged as one of the most successful products ever .
This made the telephone practical for longer distances , and it was no longer necessary to shout to be heard at the receiving telephone .
The New York Times reported :
As is sometimes common in scientific discoveries , simultaneous developments can occur , as evidenced by a number of inventors who were at work on the telephone .
Bell 's laboratory notes and family letters were the key to establishing a long lineage to his experiments .
In personal correspondence to Bell , both Gray and Dolbear had acknowledged his prior work , which considerably weakened their later claims .
In 1886 , in the first of three cases in which he was involved , Meucci took the stand as a witness in the hopes of establishing his invention 's priority .
However , due to the efforts of Congressman Vito Fossella , the U.S. House of Representatives on June 11 , 2002 stated that Meucci 's `` work in the invention of the telephone should be acknowledged '' , even though this did not put an end to a still contentious issue .
-LSB- N 17 -RSB- Some modern scholars do not agree with the claims that Bell 's work on the telephone was influenced by Meucci 's inventions .
-LSB- N 18 -RSB-
The value of the Bell patent was acknowledged throughout the world , and patent applications were made in most major countries , but when Bell had delayed the German patent application , the electrical firm of Siemens & Halske -LRB- S&H -RRB- managed to set up a rival manufacturer of Bell telephones under their own patent .
The strain put on Bell by his constant appearances in court , necessitated by the legal battles , eventually resulted in his resignation from the company .
-LSB- N 19 -RSB-
During that excursion , Bell took a handmade model of his telephone with him , making it a `` working holiday '' .
The courtship had begun years earlier ; however , Bell waited until he was more financially secure before marrying .
One unusual request exacted by his fiancée was that he use `` Alec '' rather than the family 's earlier familiar name of `` Aleck '' .
From 1876 , he would sign his name `` Alec Bell '' .
They had four children :
Despite this declaration , Bell has been proudly claimed as a `` native son '' by all three countries he resided in : the United States , Canada , and the United Kingdom .
By 1885 , a new summer retreat was contemplated .
An enthusiastic boater , Bell and his family sailed or rowed a long series of vessels on Bras d'Or Lake , ordering additional vessels from the H.W. Embree and Sons boatyard in Port Hawkesbury , Nova Scotia .
In his final , and some of his most productive years , Bell split his residency between Washington , D.C. , where he and his family initially resided for most of the year , and at Beinn Bhreagh where they spent increasing amounts of time .
Although Alexander Graham Bell is most often associated with the invention of the telephone , his interests were extremely varied .
These included 14 for the telephone and telegraph , four for the photophone , one for the phonograph , five for aerial vehicles , four for `` hydroairplanes '' and two for selenium cells .
Bell 's inventions spanned a wide range of interests and included a metal jacket to assist in breathing , the audiometer to detect minor hearing problems , a device to locate icebergs , investigations on how to separate salt from seawater , and work on finding alternative fuels .
Bell worked extensively in medical research and invented techniques for teaching speech to the deaf .
Although the trio briefly experimented with the concept , they could not develop a workable prototype .
He also anticipated modern concerns with fuel shortages and industrial pollution .
The president 's surgeons , who were skeptical of the device , ignored Bell 's requests to move the president to a bed not fitted with metal springs .
Upon obtaining a duplicate , the mattress was found to consist of a sort of net of woven steel wires , with large meshes .
The extent of the -LSB- area that produced a response from the detector -RSB- having been so small , as compared with the area of the bed , it seemed reasonable to conclude that the steel mattress had produced no detrimental effect . ''
Bell considered the invention of the hydroplane as a very significant achievement .
This led him and Bell to the development of practical hydrofoil watercraft .
They had rides in the Forlanini hydrofoil boat over Lake Maggiore .
On returning to Baddeck , a number of initial concepts were built as experimental models , including the Dhonnas Beag , the first self-propelled Bell-Baldwin hydrofoil .
A top speed of 54 miles per hour -LRB- 87 km/h -RRB- was achieved , with the hydrofoil exhibiting rapid acceleration , good stability and steering along with the ability to take waves without difficulty .
In 1913 , Dr. Bell hired Walter Pinaud , a Sydney yacht designer and builder as well as the proprietor of Pinaud 's Yacht Yard in Westmount , Nova Scotia to work on the pontoons of the HD-4 .
Pinaud soon took over the boatyard at Bell Laboratories on Beinn Bhreagh , Bell 's estate near Baddeck , Nova Scotia .
Pinaud 's experience in boat-building enabled him to make useful design changes to the HD-4 .
After the First World War , work began again on the HD-4 .
Bell 's report to the U.S. Navy permitted him to obtain two 350 horsepower -LRB- 260 kilowatts -RRB- engines in July 1919 .
On September 9 , 1919 , the HD-4 set a world marine speed record of 70.86 miles per hour -LRB- 114.04 kilometres per hour -RRB- , a record which stood for ten years .
-LSB- N 24 -RSB- -LSB- N 25 -RSB- The innovations that were incorporated into this design included a cockpit enclosure and tail rudder -LRB- later variations on the original design would add ailerons as a means of control -RRB- .
One of the AEA 's inventions , a practical wingtip form of the aileron , was to become a standard component on all aircraft .
However , the AEA had depleted its initial reserves and only a $ 15,000 grant from Mrs. Bell allowed it to continue with experiments .
Bell was connected with the eugenics movement in the United States .
The committee unequivocally extended the principle to man .
From 1912 until 1918 he was the chairman of the board of scientific advisers to the Eugenics Record Office associated with Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York , and regularly attended meetings .
Organisations such as these advocated passing laws -LRB- with success in some states -RRB- that established the compulsory sterilization of people deemed to be , as Bell called them , a `` defective variety of the human race . ''
By the late 1930s , about half the states in the U.S. had eugenics laws , and California 's compulsory sterilization law was used as a model for that of Nazi Germany .
Since Bell was becoming increasingly affluent , he used his prize money to create endowment funds -LRB- the ` Volta Fund ' -RRB- and institutions in and around the United States capital of Washington , D.C. .
The laboratory was also the site where he and his associate invented his `` proudest achievement '' , `` the photophone '' , the `` optical telephone '' which presaged fibre optical telecommunications , while the Volta Bureau would later evolve into the Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing -LRB- the AG Bell -RRB- , a leading center for the research and pedagogy of deafness .
he also became a Regent of the Smithsonian Institution -LRB- 1898 -- 1922 -RRB- .
He was one of the founders of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers in 1884 , and served as its president from 1891 -- 92 .
Bell was later awarded the AIEE 's Edison Medal in 1914 `` For meritorious achievement in the invention of the telephone '' .
Honors and tributes flowed to Bell in increasing numbers as his most famous invention became ubiquitous and his personal fame grew .
During his life he also received dozens of major awards , medals and other tributes .
The Bell stamp became very popular and sold out in little time .
The stamp became , and remains to this day , the most valuable one of the series .
The 150th anniversary of Bell 's birth in 1997 was marked by a special issue of commemorative # 1 banknotes from the Royal Bank of Scotland .
That first flight was made by an airplane designed under Dr. Bell 's tutelage , named the Silver Dart .
Bell 's image , and also those of his many inventions have graced paper money , coinage and postal stamps in numerous countries worldwide for many dozens of years .
Bell 's name is still widely known and used as part of the names of dozens of educational institutes , corporate namesakes , street and place names around the world .
Bell had also been afflicted with pernicious anemia .
By way of reply , Bell traced the sign for `` no '' in the air -- and then he died .
On 15 May 2014 , the FCC decided to consider two options regarding Internet services : first , permit fast and slow broadband lanes , thereby compromising net neutrality ; and second , reclassify broadband as a telecommunication service , thereby preserving net neutrality .
On 16 January 2015 , Republicans presented legislation , in the form of a U.S. Congress H.R. discussion draft bill , that makes concessions to net neutrality but prohibits the FCC from accomplishing the goal or enacting any further regulation affecting Internet service providers .
Adoption of this notion would reclassify internet service from one of information to one of the telecommunications and , according to Tom Wheeler , chairman of the FCC , ensure net neutrality .
The FCC is expected to enforce net neutrality in its vote , according to the New York Times .
They both stand for the same concept . ''
On 12 March 2015 , the FCC released the specific details of the net neutrality rules .
Other services include virtual server , cloud services , or physical server operation .
In reality , the situation is often more complex .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Internet service providers in many countries are legally required -LRB- e.g. , via Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act -LRB- CALEA -RRB- in the U.S. -RRB- to allow law enforcement agencies to monitor some or all of the information transmitted by the ISP .
Comics are a medium used to express ideas by images , often combined with text or other visual information .
Comics frequently takes the form of juxtaposed sequences of panels of images .
Common forms of comics include comic strips , editorial and gag cartoons , and comic books .
The history of comics has followed different paths in different cultures .
Scholars have posited a pre-history as far back as the Lascaux cave paintings .
By the mid-20th century , comics flourished particularly in the United States , western Europe -LRB- especially in France and Belgium -RRB- , and Japan .
Modern comic strips emerged in Japan in the early 20th century , and the output of comics magazines and books rapidly expanded in the post-World War II era with the popularity of cartoonists such as Osamu Tezuka .
Comics has had a lowbrow reputation for much of its history , but towards the end of the 20th century began to find greater acceptance with the public and in academia .
Though the term derives from the humorous -LRB- or comic -RRB- work that predominated in early American newspaper comic strips , it has become standard also for non-humorous works .
The increasing cross-pollination of concepts from different comics cultures and eras has further made definition difficult .
The European , American , and Japanese comics traditions have followed different paths .
The ukiyo-e artist Hokusai popularized the Japanese term for comics and cartooning , manga , in the early 19th century .
In the post-war era modern Japanese comics began to flourish when Osamu Tezuka produced a prolific body of work .
Towards the close of the 20th century , these three traditions converged in a trend towards book-length comics : the comics album in Europe , the tankōbon -LSB- a -RSB- in Japan , and the graphic novel in the English-speaking countries .
-LSB- b -RSB-
American comics developed out of such magazines as Puck , Judge , and Life .
Early Sunday strips were full-page and often in colour .
Between 1896 and 1901 cartoonists experimented with sequentiality , movement , and speech balloons .
Thin periodicals called comic books appeared in the 1930s , at first reprinting newspaper comic strips ; by the end of the decade , original content began to dominate .
The popularity of superhero comic books declined following World War II , while comic book sales continued to increase as other genres proliferated , such as romance , westerns , crime , horror , and humour .
The Code has been blamed for stunting the growth of American comics and maintaining its low status in American society for much of the remainder of the century .
Underground comix challenged the Code and readers with adult , countercultural content in the late 1960s and early 1970s .
Since the 1990s , mergers resulted in fewer large publishers , while smaller publishers proliferated .
The kibyōshi contained examples of sequential images , movement lines , and sound effects .
Genres and audiences diversified over the following decades .
At the turn of the 20th and 21st centuries , nearly a quarter of all printed material in Japan was comics .
translations became extremely popular in foreign markets -- in some cases equaling or surpassing the sales of domestic comics .
In the US , daily strips have normally occupied a single tier , while Sunday strips have been given multiple tiers .
In the early 20th century , daily strips were typically in black-and-white and Sundays were usually in colour and often occupied a full page .
Specialized comics periodicals formats vary greatly in different cultures .
Comic books , primarily an American format , are thin periodicals usually published in colour .
Book-length comics take different forms in different cultures .
European comics albums are most commonly printed in A4-size colour volumes .
Gag and editorial cartoons usually consist of a single panel , often incorporating a caption or speech balloon .
Definitions of comics which emphasize sequence usually exclude gag , editorial , and other single-panel cartoons ; they can be included in definitions that emphasize the combination of word and image .
In the latter half of the 20th century , popular culture won greater acceptance , and the lines between high and low culture began to blur .
Comics nevertheless continued to be stigmatized , as the medium was seen as entertainment for children and illiterates .
-LSB- d -RSB-
From 1960 , the satirical and taboo-breaking Hara-Kiri defied censorship laws in the countercultural spirit that led to the May 1968 events .
Historical narratives of manga tend to focus either on its recent , post-WWII history , or on attempts to demonstrates deep roots in the past , such as to the Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga picture scroll of the 12th and 13th centuries , or the early 19th-century Hokusai Manga .
Early post-war Japanese criticism was mostly of a left-wing political nature until the 1986 publication for Tomofusa Kure 's Modern Manga : The Complete Picture , -LSB- j -RSB- which de-emphasized politics in favour of formal aspects , such as structure and a `` grammar '' of comics .
The field of manga studies increased rapidly , with numerous books on the subject appearing in the 1990s .
Formal theories of manga have focused on developing a `` manga expression theory '' , -LSB- k -RSB- with emphasis on spatial relationships in the structure of images on the page , distinguishing the medium from film or literature , in which the flow of time is the basic organizing element .
Manga !
The World of Japanese Comics in 1983 led to the spread of use of the word manga outside Japan to mean `` Japanese comics '' or `` Japanese-style comics '' .
Prominent American attempts at definitions of comics include Eisner 's , McCloud 's , and Harvey 's .
Eisner described what he called `` sequential art '' as `` the arrangement of pictures or images and words to narrate a story or dramatize an idea '' ; Scott McCloud defined comics `` juxtaposed pictorial and other images in deliberate sequence , intended to convey information and/or to produce an aesthetic response in the viewer '' , a strictly formal definition which detached comics from its historical and cultural trappings .
R. C. Harvey defined comics as `` pictorial narratives or expositions in which words -LRB- often lettered into the picture area within speech balloons -RRB- usually contribute to the meaning of the pictures and vice versa '' .
Each definition has had its detractors .
Harvey saw McCloud 's definition as excluding single-panel cartoons , and objected to McCloud 's de-emphasizing verbal elements , insisting `` the essential characteristic of comics is the incorporation of verbal content '' .
Aaron Meskin saw McCloud 's theories as an artificial attempt to legitimize the place of comics in art history .
Cross-cultural study of comics is complicated by the great difference in meaning and scope of the words for `` comics '' in different languages .
Some consider storyboards and wordless novels to be comics .
Other critics , such as Thierry Groensteen and Scott McCloud , have emphasized the primacy of sequences of images .
No further progress was made until the 1970s .
By the 1990s , theorists such as Benoît Peeters and Thierry Groensteen turned attention to artists ' poïetic creative choices .
Thierry Smolderen and Harry Morgan have held relativistic views of the definition of comics , a medium that has taken various , equally valid forms over its history .
Morgan sees comics as a subset of `` les littératures dessinées '' -LRB- or `` drawn literatures '' -RRB- .
French theory has come to give special attention to the page , in distinction from American theories such as McCloud 's which focus on panel-to-panel transitions .
This work has argued that sequential images and page layouts both use separate rule-bound `` grammars '' to be understood that extend beyond panel-to-panel transitions and categorical distinctions of types of layouts , and that the brain 's comprehension of comics is similar to comprehending other domains , such as language and music .
There may be separate writers and artists , and artists may specialize in parts of the artwork such as characters or backgrounds , as is common in Japan .
Captions can give voice to a narrator , convey characters ' dialogue or thoughts , or indicate place or time .
Speech balloons themselves are strongly associated with comics , such that the addition of one to an image is sufficient to turn the image into comics .
It is part of the British Overseas Territory of Saint Helena , Ascension and Tristan da Cunha .
One of the most remote islands in the world , it was for centuries an important stopover for ships sailing to Europe from Asia and South Africa .
Another theory holds that the island found by da Nova was actually Tristan da Cunha , 2,430 kilometres -LRB- 1,510 mi -RRB- to the south , and that Saint Helena was discovered by some of the ships attached to the squadron of Estêvão da Gama expedition on 30 July 1503 -LRB- as reported in the account of clerk Thomé Lopes -RRB- .
However , a paper published in 2015 reviewed the discovery date and dismissed the 18 August as too late for da Nova to make a discovery and then return to Lisbon by 11 September 1502 , whether he sailed from St Helena or Tristan da Cunha .
It demonstrates the 21 May is probably a Protestant rather than Catholic or Orthodox feast-day , first quoted in 1596 by Jan Huyghen van Linschoten , who was probably mistaken because the island was discovered several decades before the Reformation and start of Protestantism .
The alternative discovery date of 3 May , the Catholic feast-day for the finding of the True Cross by Saint Helena in Jerusalem , quoted by Odoardo Duarte Lopes and Sir Thomas Herbert is suggested as being historically more credible .
A fort and houses were built .
After the Restoration of the English monarchy in 1660 , the East India Company received a royal charter giving it the sole right to fortify and colonise the island .
The fort was renamed James Fort and the town Jamestown , in honour of the Duke of York , later James II of England .
Between January and May 1673 , the Dutch East India Company forcibly took the island , before English reinforcements restored English East India Company control .
18th century governors tried to tackle the island 's problems by implementing tree plantation , improving fortifications , eliminating corruption , building a hospital , tackling the neglect of crops and livestock , controlling the consumption of alcohol and introducing legal reforms .
The 680-metre -LRB- 2,230 ft -RRB- high hill there is named for him and is called Halley 's Mount .
East Indiamen would stop there on the return leg of their voyages to British India and China .
Governor Robert Patton -LRB- 1802 -- 1807 -RRB- recommended that the company import Chinese labour to supplement the rural workforce .
Many were allowed to stay , and their descendents became integrated into the population .
He was taken to the island in October 1815 .
Subsequent administrative cost-cutting triggered the start of a long-term population decline whereby those who could afford to do so tended to leave the island for better opportunities elsewhere .
The British Nationality Act 1981 reclassified Saint Helena and the other Crown colonies as British Dependent Territories .
In 2009 , Saint Helena and its two territories received equal status under a new constitution , and the British Overseas Territory was renamed Saint Helena , Ascension and Tristan da Cunha .
As of August , 2015 ticketing was postponed until an airline could be firmly designated .
Located in the South Atlantic Ocean on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge , more than 2,000 kilometres -LRB- 1,200 mi -RRB- from the nearest major landmass , Saint Helena is one of the most remote places in the world .
The island is associated with two other isolated islands in the southern Atlantic , also British territories : Ascension Island about 1,300 kilometres -LRB- 810 mi -RRB- due northwest in more equatorial waters and Tristan da Cunha , which is well outside the tropics 2,430 kilometres -LRB- 1,510 mi -RRB- to the south .
Coastal areas are covered in volcanic rock and warmer and drier than the centre .
When the island was discovered , it was covered with unique indigenous vegetation , including a remarkable cabbage tree species .
The island 's hinterland must have been a dense tropical forest but the coastal areas were probably also quite green .
The modern landscape is very different , with widespread bare rock in the lower areas , although inland it is green , mainly due to introduced vegetation .
There are no native land mammals , but cattle , cats , dogs , donkeys , goats , mice , rabbits , rats and sheep have been introduced , and native species have been adversely affected as a result .
The dramatic change in landscape must be attributed to these introductions .
As a result , the string tree -LRB- Acalypha rubrinervis -RRB- and the St Helena olive -LRB- Nesiota elliptica -RRB- are now extinct , and many of the other endemic plants are threatened with extinction .
It appears on the coat of arms of Saint Helena and on the flag .
The climate varies noticeably across the island .
Temperatures in Jamestown , on the north leeward shore , range between 21 -- 28 °C -LRB- 70 -- 82 °F -RRB- in the summer -LRB- January to April -RRB- and 17 -- 24 °C -LRB- 63 -- 75 °F -RRB- during the remainder of the year .
Jamestown also has a very low annual rainfall , while 750 -- 1,000 mm -LRB- 30 -- 39 in -RRB- falls per year on the higher ground and the south coast , where it is also noticeably cloudier .
There are weather recording stations in the Longwood and Blue Hill districts .
The island is a single electoral area and elects twelve representatives to the Legislative Council of fifteen .
Only a few older men remained after the British Crown took over the government of the island from the East India Company in 1834 .
The majority were sent back to China , although records in the Cape suggest that they never got any farther than Cape Town .
There were also a very few Indian lascars who worked under the harbour master .
See also British nationality law .
The majority of `` Saints '' emigrated to the UK , South Africa and in the early years , Australia .
The Catholics are pastorally served by the Mission sui iuris of Saint Helena , Ascension and Tristan da Cunha , whose office of ecclesiastical superior is vested in the Apostolic Prefecture of the Falkland Islands .
The Governor is appointed by the Queen on the advice of the British government .
There are fifteen seats in the Legislative Council of Saint Helena , a unicameral legislature , in addition to a Speaker and a Deputy Speaker .
Twelve of the fifteen members are elected in elections held every four years .
The three ex officio members are the Chief Secretary , Financial Secretary and Attorney General .
There is no elected Chief Minister , and the Governor acts as the head of government .
In January 2013 it was proposed that the Executive Council would be led by a `` Chief Councillor '' who would be elected by the members of the Legislative Council and would nominate the other members of the Executive Council .
In recent years -LSB- when ? -RSB-
The highland areas contain most of the 400 endemic species recognised to date .
Inflation was running at 4 % in 2005 .
There have been increases in the cost of fuel , power and all imported goods .
Exports are much smaller , amounting to # 0.2 million in 2004-05 .
The coin remains readily available to collectors .
It has branches in Jamestown on Saint Helena , and Georgetown , Ascension Island and it took over the business of the St. Helena government savings bank and Ascension Island Savings Bank .
It berths in James Bay , St Helena approximately thirty times per year .
By January 2009 , construction had not commenced and no final contracts had been signed .
Car hire is available for visitors .
Saint FM provided a local radio service for the island which was also available on internet radio and relayed in Ascension Island .
The station was not government funded .
The station operates as a limited-by-guarantee company owned by its members and is registered as a fund-raising Association .
The channels are from DSTV and include Mnet , SuperSport and BBC channels .
There were no plans to land the cable and install a landing station ashore , which could supply St Helena 's population with sufficient bandwidth to fully leverage the benefits of today 's Information Society .
In January 2012 , a group of supporters petitioned the UK government to meet the cost of landing the cable at St Helena .
Islanders have sought the assistance of the UK Department for International Development and Foreign and Commonwealth Office in funding the # 10m required to bridge the connection from a local junction box on the cable to the island .
The UK Government have announced that a review of the island 's economy would be required before such funding would be agreed to .
Sports played on the island include football , cricket , volleyball , tennis , golf , motocross , shooting sports and yachting .
Saint Helena has sent teams to a number of Commonwealth Games .
In Jamestown a timed run takes place up Jacob 's Ladder every year , with people coming from all over the world to take part .
One should either feel a puff of air or see a flicker of the candle flame with pin that one does not get with spin .
In most dialects of English , the initial consonant is aspirated in pin and unaspirated in spin .
An old symbol for light aspiration was ⟨ ʻ ⟩ , but this is now obsolete .
An easy way to measure this is by noting the consonant 's voice-onset time , as the voicing of a following vowel can not begin until the vocal cords close .
Aspirated consonants are not always followed by vowels or other voiced sounds .
Korean has lightly aspirated stops that fall between the Armenian and Cantonese unaspirated and aspirated stops as well as strongly aspirated stops whose aspiration lasts longer than that of Armenian or Cantonese .
-LRB- See voice-onset time . -RRB-
The Spanish voiceless stops / p t k / have voice-onset times -LRB- VOTs -RRB- of about 5 , 10 , and 30 milliseconds , whereas English aspirated / p t k / have VOTs of about 60 , 70 , and 80 ms. Voice-onset time in Korean has been measured at 20 , 25 , and 50 ms for / p t k / and 90 , 95 , and 125 for / pʰ tʰ kʰ / .
A doubled aspirated affricate has a longer hold in the stop portion and then has a release consisting of the fricative and aspiration .
Although most aspirated obstruents in the world 's language are stops and affricates , aspirated fricatives such as -LSB- sʰ -RSB- , -LSB- fʰ -RSB- or -LSB- ɕʰ -RSB- have been documented in Korean , in a few Tibeto-Burman languages , in some Oto-Manguean languages , and in the Siouan language Ofo .
Reported aspirated voiced stops , affricates and clicks are -LSB- b͡pʰ , d͡tʰ , d͡tsʰ , d͡tʃʰ , ɡ͡kʰ , ɢ͡qʰ , ᶢʘʰ , ᶢǀʰ , ᶢǁʰ , ᶢǃʰ , ᶢǂʰ -RSB- .
When the consonants in a cluster like st are analyzed as belonging to different morphemes -LRB- heteromorphemic -RRB- the stop is aspirated , but when they are analyzed as belonging to one morpheme the stop is unaspirated .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- For instance , distend has unaspirated -LSB- t -RSB- since it is not analyzed as two morphemes , but distaste has an aspirated middle -LSB- tʰ -RSB- because it is analyzed as dis - + taste and the word taste has an aspirated initial t.
Thus d represents / t / , and t represents / tʰ / .
In addition to aspirated and unaspirated consonants , there is a series of muddy consonants , like / b / .
Many Indo-Aryan languages have aspirated stops .
The modifier letter ⟨ ◌ ʰ ⟩ after a voiced consonant actually represents a breathy-voiced or murmured dental stop , as with the `` voiced aspirated '' bilabial stop ⟨ bʰ ⟩ in the Indo-Aryan languages .
Its monatomic form -LRB- H -RRB- is the most abundant chemical substance in the Universe , constituting roughly 75 % of all baryonic mass .
-LSB- note 1 -RSB- Non-remnant stars are mainly composed of hydrogen in its plasma state .
The most common isotope of hydrogen , termed protium -LRB- name rarely used , symbol 1H -RRB- , has one proton and no neutrons .
The universal emergence of atomic hydrogen first occurred during the recombination epoch .
Since hydrogen readily forms covalent compounds with most non-metallic elements , most of the hydrogen on Earth exists in molecular forms such as in the form of water or organic compounds .
Hydrogen plays a particularly important role in acid -- base reactions as many acid-base reactions involve the exchange of protons between soluble molecules .
The hydrogen cation is written as though composed of a bare proton , but in reality , hydrogen cations in ionic compounds are always more complex species than that would suggest .
Industrial production is mainly from the steam reforming of natural gas , and less often from more energy-intensive hydrogen production methods like the electrolysis of water .
Hydrogen is a concern in metallurgy as it can embrittle many metals , complicating the design of pipelines and storage tanks .
Hydrogen gas forms explosive mixtures with air if it is 4 -- 74 % concentrated and with chlorine if it is 5 -- 95 % concentrated .
The mixtures may be ignited by spark , heat or sunlight .
The hydrogen autoignition temperature , the temperature of spontaneous ignition in air , is 500 °C -LRB- 932 °F -RRB- .
The detection of a burning hydrogen leak may require a flame detector ; such leaks can be very dangerous .
Hydrogen flames in other conditions are blue , resembling blue natural gas flames .
H2 reacts with every oxidizing element .
Because of the discretization of angular momentum postulated in early quantum mechanics by Bohr , the electron in the Bohr model can only occupy certain allowed distances from the proton , and therefore only certain allowed energies .
A more accurate description of the hydrogen atom comes from a purely quantum mechanical treatment that uses the Schrödinger equation , Dirac equation or even the Feynman path integral formulation to calculate the probability density of the electron around the proton .
The most complicated treatments allow for the small effects of special relativity and vacuum polarization .
There exist two different spin isomers of hydrogen diatomic molecules that differ by the relative spin of their nuclei .
The equilibrium ratio of orthohydrogen to parahydrogen depends on temperature , but because the ortho form is an excited state and has a higher energy than the para form , it is unstable and can not be purified .
At very low temperatures , the equilibrium state is composed almost exclusively of the para form .
The liquid and gas phase thermal properties of pure parahydrogen differ significantly from those of the normal form because of differences in rotational heat capacities , as discussed more fully in spin isomers of hydrogen .
The ortho/para distinction also occurs in other hydrogen-containing molecules or functional groups , such as water and methylene , but is of little significance for their thermal properties .
The uncatalyzed interconversion between para and ortho H2 increases with increasing temperature ; thus rapidly condensed H2 contains large quantities of the high-energy ortho form that converts to the para form very slowly .
The ortho/para ratio in condensed H2 is an important consideration in the preparation and storage of liquid hydrogen : the conversion from ortho to para is exothermic and produces enough heat to evaporate some of the hydrogen liquid , leading to loss of liquefied material .
When bonded to fluorine , oxygen , or nitrogen , hydrogen can participate in a form of medium-strength noncovalent bonding with other similar molecules between their hydrogens called hydrogen bonding , which is critical to the stability of many biological molecules .
Hydrogen also forms compounds with less electronegative elements , such as the metals and metalloids , in which it takes on a partial negative charge .
By some definitions , `` organic '' compounds are only required to contain carbon .
However , most of them also contain hydrogen , and because it is the carbon-hydrogen bond which gives this class of compounds most of its particular chemical characteristics , carbon-hydrogen bonds are required in some definitions of the word `` organic '' in chemistry .
Millions of hydrocarbons are known , and they are usually formed by complicated synthetic pathways , which seldom involve elementary hydrogen .
Compounds of hydrogen are often called hydrides , a term that is used fairly loosely .
The term `` hydride '' suggests that the H atom has acquired a negative or anionic character , denoted H − , and is used when hydrogen forms a compound with a more electropositive element .
For hydrides other than group I and II metals , the term is quite misleading , considering the low electronegativity of hydrogen .
In lithium aluminium hydride , the AlH − 4 anion carries hydridic centers firmly attached to the Al -LRB- III -RRB- .
Binary indium hydride has not yet been identified , although larger complexes exist .
That is why H + is often called a proton .
This species is central to discussion of acids .
Except at the high temperatures associated with plasmas , such protons can not be removed from the electron clouds of atoms and molecules , and will remain attached to them .
However , the term ` proton ' is sometimes used loosely and metaphorically to refer to positively charged or cationic hydrogen attached to other species in this fashion , and as such is denoted `` H + '' without any implication that any single protons exist freely as a species .
However , even in this case , such solvated hydrogen cations are more realistically conceived as being organized into clusters that form species closer to H 9O + 4 .
In its nomenclatural guidelines , the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry allows any of D , T , 2H , and 3H to be used , although 2H and 3H are preferred .
He is usually given credit for its discovery as an element .
In 1783 , Antoine Lavoisier gave the element the name hydrogen -LRB- from the Greek ὑδρο - hydro meaning `` water '' and - γενής genes meaning `` creator '' -RRB- when he and Laplace reproduced Cavendish 's finding that water is produced when hydrogen is burned .
Anaerobic oxidation of iron by the protons of water at high temperature can be schematically represented by the set of following reactions :
He produced solid hydrogen the next year .
Heavy water , which consists of deuterium in the place of regular hydrogen , was discovered by Urey 's group in 1932 .
François Isaac de Rivaz built the first de Rivaz engine , an internal combustion engine powered by a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen in 1806 .
Edward Daniel Clarke invented the hydrogen gas blowpipe in 1819 .
The Döbereiner 's lamp and limelight were invented in 1823 .
Hydrogen provided the lift for the first reliable form of air-travel following the 1852 invention of the first hydrogen-lifted airship by Henri Giffard .
Regularly scheduled flights started in 1910 and by the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , they had carried 35,000 passengers without a serious incident .
Hydrogen-lifted airships were used as observation platforms and bombers during the war .
Regular passenger service resumed in the 1920s and the discovery of helium reserves in the United States promised increased safety , but the U.S. government refused to sell the gas for this purpose .
The incident was broadcast live on radio and filmed .
Ignition of leaking hydrogen is widely assumed to be the cause , but later investigations pointed to the ignition of the aluminized fabric coating by static electricity .
But the damage to hydrogen 's reputation as a lifting gas was already done .
For example , the ISS , Mars Odyssey and the Mars Global Surveyor are equipped with nickel-hydrogen batteries .
Maxwell observed that the specific heat capacity of H2 unaccountably departs from that of a diatomic gas below room temperature and begins to increasingly resemble that of a monatomic gas at cryogenic temperatures .
These widely spaced levels inhibit equal partition of heat energy into rotational motion in hydrogen at low temperatures .
Diatomic gases composed of heavier atoms do not have such widely spaced levels and do not exhibit the same effect .
Molecular clouds of H2 are associated with star formation .
Hydrogen plays a vital role in powering stars through the proton-proton reaction and the CNO cycle nuclear fusion .
As a plasma , hydrogen 's electron and proton are not bound together , resulting in very high electrical conductivity and high emissivity -LRB- producing the light from the Sun and other stars -RRB- .
The charged particles are highly influenced by magnetic and electric fields .
For example , in the solar wind they interact with the Earth 's magnetosphere giving rise to Birkeland currents and the aurora .
Under ordinary conditions on Earth , elemental hydrogen exists as the diatomic gas , H2 .
However , hydrogen gas is very rare in the Earth 's atmosphere -LRB- 1 ppm by volume -RRB- because of its light weight , which enables it to escape from Earth 's gravity more easily than heavier gases .
The ion is relatively stable in the environment of outer space due to the low temperature and density .
H + 3 is one of the most abundant ions in the Universe , and it plays a notable role in the chemistry of the interstellar medium .
By contrast , the positive hydrogen molecular ion -LRB- H + 2 -RRB- is a rare molecule in the universe .
Typically the cathode is made from platinum or another inert metal when producing hydrogen for storage .
If , however , the gas is to be burnt on site , oxygen is desirable to assist the combustion , and so both electrodes would be made from inert metals .
-LRB- Iron , for instance , would oxidize , and thus decrease the amount of oxygen given off . -RRB-
The theoretical maximum efficiency -LRB- electricity used vs. energetic value of hydrogen produced -RRB- is in the range 80 -- 94 % .
This has important potential implications for a hydrogen economy , as hydrogen can be produced on-site and does not need to be transported .
Commercial bulk hydrogen is usually produced by the steam reforming of natural gas .
This is because high-pressure H 2 is the most marketable product and Pressure Swing Adsorption -LRB- PSA -RRB- purification systems work better at higher pressures .
One of the many complications to this highly optimized technology is the formation of coke or carbon :
Consequently , steam reforming typically employs an excess of H 2O .
This reaction is also a common industrial source of carbon dioxide :
Hydrogen is sometimes produced and consumed in the same industrial process , without being separated .
The corresponding reaction leading to the formation of magnetite -LRB- Fe 3O 4 -RRB- , quartz -LRB- SiO 2 -RRB- and hydrogen -LRB- H 2 -RRB- is the following :
The largest application of H 2 is for the processing -LRB- `` upgrading '' -RRB- of fossil fuels , and in the production of ammonia .
H 2 has several other important uses .
H 2 is used as a hydrogenating agent , particularly in increasing the level of saturation of unsaturated fats and oils -LRB- found in items such as margarine -RRB- , and in the production of methanol .
It is similarly the source of hydrogen in the manufacture of hydrochloric acid .
H 2 is also used as a reducing agent of metallic ores .
It is used as a shielding gas in welding methods such as atomic hydrogen welding .
Because H 2 is lighter than air , having a little more than 1⁄14 of the density of air , it was once widely used as a lifting gas in balloons and airships .
Hydrogen 's rarer isotopes also each have specific applications .
Deuterium compounds have applications in chemistry and biology in studies of reaction isotope effects .
Hydrogen may be obtained from fossil sources -LRB- such as methane -RRB- , but these sources are unsustainable .
The energy density per unit volume of both liquid hydrogen and compressed hydrogen gas at any practicable pressure is significantly less than that of traditional fuel sources , although the energy density per unit fuel mass is higher .
For example , CO 2 sequestration followed by carbon capture and storage could be conducted at the point of H 2 production from fossil fuels .
Hydrogen used in transportation would burn relatively cleanly , with some NOx emissions , but without carbon emissions .
However , the infrastructure costs associated with full conversion to a hydrogen economy would be substantial .
Fuel cells can convert hydrogen and oxygen directly to electricity more efficiently than internal combustion engines .
These enzymes catalyze the reversible redox reaction between H2 and its component two protons and two electrons .
Efforts have been undertaken to genetically modify cyanobacterial hydrogenases to efficiently synthesize H2 gas even in the presence of oxygen .
Efforts have also been undertaken with genetically modified alga in a bioreactor .
In addition , liquid hydrogen is a cryogen and presents dangers -LRB- such as frostbite -RRB- associated with very cold liquids .
Hydrogen gas leaking into external air may spontaneously ignite .
Moreover , hydrogen fire , while being extremely hot , is almost invisible , and thus can lead to accidental burns .
Even interpreting the hydrogen data -LRB- including safety data -RRB- is confounded by a number of phenomena .
His browser was called WorldWideWeb and later renamed Nexus .
Andreesen 's browser sparked the internet boom of the 1990s .
The introduction of Mosaic in 1993 -- one of the first graphical web browsers -- led to an explosion in web use .
As of August 2011 , Firefox has a 28 % usage share .
Chrome 's take-up has increased significantly year by year , by doubling its usage share from 8 % to 16 % by August 2011 .
In December 2011 , Chrome overtook Internet Explorer 8 as the most widely used web browser but still had lower usage than all versions of Internet Explorer combined .
By April 2014 , Chrome 's usage had hit 45 % .
It is likely that releasing IE for the Mac was part of Microsoft 's overall strategy to fight threats to its quasi-monopoly platform dominance - threats such as web standards and Java - by making some web developers , or at least their managers , assume that there was `` no need '' to develop for anything other than Internet Explorer .
In this respect , IE may have contributed to Windows and Microsoft applications sales in another way , through `` lock-in '' to Microsoft 's browser .
Microsoft Corp v Commission
Today , most commercial web browsers are paid by search engine companies to make their engine default , or to include them as another option .
Mozilla makes enough money from this deal that it does not need to charge users for Firefox .
Users searching for websites or items on the Internet would be led to Google 's search results page , increasing ad revenue and which funds development at Google and of Google Chrome .
Prefixes that the web browser can not directly handle are often handed off to another application entirely .
In the case of http , https , file , and others , once the resource has been retrieved the web browser will display it .
Aside from HTML , web browsers can generally display any kind of content that can be part of a web page .
Upon encountering a file of an unsupported type or a file that is set up to be downloaded rather than displayed , the browser prompts the user to save the file to disk .
Each link contains the URI of a resource to go to .
When a link is clicked , the browser navigates to the resource indicated by the link 's target URI , and the process of bringing content to the user begins again .
All major web browsers allow the user to open multiple information resources at the same time , either in different browser windows or in different tabs of the same window .
Every major web browser supports the development of browser extensions .
Early web browsers supported only a very simple version of HTML .
Boston also served as the historic county seat of Suffolk County until Massachusetts disbanded county government in 1999 .
Greater Boston as a commuting region is home to 8.1 million people , making it the sixth-largest combined statistical area in the United States .
Upon American independence from Great Britain , the city continued to be an important port and manufacturing hub , as well as a center for education and culture .
Through land reclamation and municipal annexation , Boston has expanded beyond the original peninsula .
Boston 's many firsts include the United States ' first public school , Boston Latin School -LRB- 1635 -RRB- , and first subway system -LRB- 1897 -RRB- .
Boston 's economic base also includes finance , professional and business services , biotechnology , information technology , and government activities .
Their settlement was initially limited to the Shawmut Peninsula , at that time surrounded by the Massachusetts Bay and Charles River and connected to the mainland by a narrow isthmus .
The peninsula is known to have been inhabited as early as 5000 BC .
Boston was the largest town in British North America until Philadelphia grew larger in the mid 18th century .
Although foreign trade returned after these hostilities , Boston 's merchants had found alternatives for their capital investments in the interim .
A network of small rivers bordering the city and connecting it to the surrounding region facilitated shipment of goods and led to a proliferation of mills and factories .
Later , a dense network of railroads furthered the region 's industry and commerce .
In the latter half of the 19th century , the city saw increasing numbers of Irish , Germans , Lebanese , Syrians , French Canadians , and Russian and Polish Jews settled in the city .
By the end of the 19th century , Boston 's core neighborhoods had become enclaves of ethnically distinct immigrants -- Italians inhabited the North End , Irish dominated South Boston and Charlestown , and Russian Jews lived in the West End .
Between 1631 and 1890 , the city tripled its area through land reclamation by filling in marshes , mud flats , and gaps between wharves along the waterfront .
Reclamation projects in the middle of the century created significant parts of the South End , the West End , the Financial District , and Chinatown .
During the mid-to-late 19th century , workers filled almost 600 acres -LRB- 2.4 km2 -RRB- of brackish Charles River marshlands west of Boston Common with gravel brought by rail from the hills of Needham Heights .
The city annexed the adjacent towns of South Boston -LRB- 1804 -RRB- , East Boston -LRB- 1836 -RRB- , Roxbury -LRB- 1868 -RRB- , Dorchester -LRB- including present day Mattapan and a portion of South Boston -RRB- -LRB- 1870 -RRB- , Brighton -LRB- including present day Allston -RRB- -LRB- 1874 -RRB- , West Roxbury -LRB- including present day Jamaica Plain and Roslindale -RRB- -LRB- 1874 -RRB- , Charlestown -LRB- 1874 -RRB- , and Hyde Park -LRB- 1912 -RRB- .
Other proposals , for the annexation of Brookline , Cambridge , and Chelsea , were unsuccessful .
In 1958 , BRA initiated a project to improve the historic West End neighborhood .
The BRA subsequently reevaluated its approach to urban renewal in its future projects , including the construction of Government Center .
It mostly served the massive Columbia Point public housing complex adjoining it , which was built in 1953 .
The Columbia Point complex itself was redeveloped and revitalized into a mixed-income community called Harbor Point Apartments from 1984 to 1990 .
By the 1970s , the city 's economy boomed after 30 years of economic downturn .
A large number of high rises were constructed in the Financial District and in Boston 's Back Bay during this time period .
This boom continued into the mid-1980s and later began again .
Hospitals such as Massachusetts General Hospital , Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center , and Brigham and Women 's Hospital lead the nation in medical innovation and patient care .
Schools such as Boston College , Boston University , the Harvard Medical School , Northeastern University , Wentworth Institute of Technology , Berklee College of Music and Boston Conservatory attract students to the area .
Nevertheless , the city experienced conflict starting in 1974 over desegregation busing , which resulted in unrest and violence around public schools throughout the mid-1970s .
Boston has experienced gentrification in the latter half of the 20th century , with housing prices increasing sharply since the 1990s .
Living expenses have risen , and Boston has one of the highest costs of living in the United States , and was ranked the 129th most expensive major city in the world in a 2011 survey of 214 cities .
Despite cost of living issues , Boston ranks high on livability ratings , ranking 36th worldwide in quality of living in 2011 in a survey of 221 major cities .
The highest point in Boston is Bellevue Hill at 330 feet -LRB- 100 m -RRB- above sea level , and the lowest point is at sea level .
The Neponset River forms the boundary between Boston 's southern neighborhoods and the city of Quincy and the town of Milton .
The Mystic River separates Charlestown from Chelsea and Everett , and Chelsea Creek and Boston Harbor separate East Boston from Boston proper .
Downtown and its immediate surroundings consists largely of low-rise -LRB- often Federal style and Greek Revival -RRB- masonry buildings , interspersed with modern highrises , notably in the Financial District , Government Center , and South Boston .
Back Bay includes many prominent landmarks , such as the Boston Public Library , Christian Science Center , Copley Square , Newbury Street , and New England 's two tallest buildings -- the John Hancock Tower and the Prudential Center .
Near the John Hancock Tower is the old John Hancock Building with its prominent illuminated beacon , the color of which forecasts the weather .
Smaller commercial areas are interspersed among areas of single-family homes and wooden/brick multi-family row houses .
The South End Historic District is the largest surviving contiguous Victorian-era neighborhood in the US .
The geography of downtown and South Boston was particularly impacted by the Central Artery/Tunnel Project -LRB- known unofficially as the `` Big Dig '' -RRB- , which allowed for the removal of the unsightly elevated Central Artery and the incorporation of new green spaces and open areas .
Summers are typically warm to hot , rainy , and humid , while winters oscillate between periods of cold rain and snow , with cold temperatures .
Spring and fall are usually mild , with varying conditions dependent on wind direction and jet stream positioning .
The coldest month is January , with a mean of 29.0 °F -LRB- − 1.7 °C -RRB- .
Periods exceeding 90 °F -LRB- 32 °C -RRB- in summer and below freezing in winter are not uncommon but rarely extended , with about 13 and 25 days per year seeing each , respectively .
The most recent sub-0 °F -LRB- − 18 °C -RRB- reading occurring on February 14 , 2016 when the temperature dipped down to − 9 °F -LRB- − 23 °C -RRB- , the coldest reading since 1957 .
In addition , several decades may pass between 100 °F -LRB- 38 °C -RRB- readings , with the most recent such occurrence on July 22 , 2011 when the temperature reached 103 °F -LRB- 39 °C -RRB- .
The city 's average window for freezing temperatures is November 9 through April 5 .
-LSB- c -RSB- Official temperature records have ranged from − 18 °F -LRB- − 28 °C -RRB- on February 9 , 1934 , up to 104 °F -LRB- 40 °C -RRB- on July 4 , 1911 ; the record cold daily maximum is 2 °F -LRB- − 17 °C -RRB- on December 30 , 1917 , while , conversely , the record warm daily minimum is 83 °F -LRB- 28 °C -RRB- on August 2 , 1975 .
Snowfall increases dramatically as one goes inland away from the city -LRB- especially north and west of the city -RRB- -- away from the moderating influence of the ocean .
There is also high year-to-year variability in snowfall ; for instance , the winter of 2011 -- 12 saw only 9.3 in -LRB- 23.6 cm -RRB- of accumulating snow , but the previous winter , the corresponding figure was 81.0 in -LRB- 2.06 m -RRB- .
-LSB- d -RSB-
Although downtown Boston has never been struck by a violent tornado , the city itself has experienced many tornado warnings .
Damaging storms are more common to areas north , west , and northwest of the city .
The city is the third most densely populated large U.S. city of over half a million residents .
This fluctuation of people is caused by hundreds of thousands of suburban residents who travel to the city for work , education , health care , and special events .
The median age was 30.8 years .
For every 100 females , there were 92.0 males .
For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 89.9 males .
There were 252,699 households , of which 20.4 % had children under the age of 18 living in them , 25.5 % were married couples living together , 16.3 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 54.0 % were non-families .
37.1 % of all households were made up of individuals and 9.0 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older .
The average household size was 2.26 and the average family size was 3.08 .
The per capita income for the city was $ 33,158 .
Of the total population , 28.8 % of those under the age of 18 and 20.4 % of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line .
But as of 2010 , in part due to the housing crash , as well as increased efforts to make more affordable housing more available , the minority population has rebounded .
This may also have to do with an increased Latino population and more clarity surrounding US Census statistics , which indicate a Non-Hispanic White population of 47 percent -LRB- some reports give slightly lower figures -RRB- .
People of West Indian and Caribbean ancestry are another sizable group , at 6.0 % , about half of whom are of Haitian ancestry .
Some neighborhoods , such as Dorchester , have received an influx of people of Vietnamese ancestry in recent decades .
Neighborhoods such as Jamaica Plain and Roslindale have experienced a growing number of Dominican Americans .
The city and greater area also has a growing immigrant population of South Asians , including the tenth-largest Indian community in the country .
Hispanics in Boston are mostly of Puerto Rican -LRB- 30,506 or 4.9 % of total city population -RRB- , Dominican -LRB- 25,648 or 4.2 % of total city population -RRB- , Salvadoran -LRB- 10,850 or 1.8 % of city population -RRB- , Colombian -LRB- 6,649 or 1.1 % of total city population -RRB- , Mexican -LRB- 5,961 or 1.0 % of total city population -RRB- , and Guatemalan -LRB- 4,451 or 0.7 % of total city population -RRB- ethnic origin .
The United Church of Christ had 55,000 members and 213 churches .
The UCC is the successor of the city 's Puritan religious traditions .
Notable past members include Samuel Adams , William Dawes , Benjamin Franklin , Samuel Sewall , and Phillis Wheatley .
In 1773 , Adams gave the signals from the Old South Meeting House that started the Boston Tea Party .
Boston 's colleges and universities have a significant effect on the regional economy .
The area 's schools are major employers and attract industries to the city and surrounding region .
Boston 's status as a state capital as well as the regional home of federal agencies has rendered law and government to be another major component of the city 's economy .
The city is a major seaport along the United States ' East Coast and the oldest continuously operated industrial and fishing port in the Western Hemisphere .
State Street Corporation , which specializes in asset management and custody services , is based in the city .
Boston is a printing and publishing center -- Houghton Mifflin Harcourt is headquartered within the city , along with Bedford-St .
Martin 's Press and Beacon Press .
Pearson PLC publishing units also employ several hundred people in Boston .
The city is home to three major convention centers -- the Hynes Convention Center in the Back Bay , and the Seaport World Trade Center and Boston Convention and Exhibition Center on the South Boston waterfront .
There are private , parochial , and charter schools as well , and approximately 3,300 minority students attend participating suburban schools through the Metropolitan Educational Opportunity Council .
Some of the most renowned and highly ranked universities in the world are located in the Boston area .
Hospitals , universities , and research institutions in Greater Boston received more than $ 1.77 billion in National Institutes of Health grants in 2013 , more money than any other American metropolitan area .
Boston 's only public university is the University of Massachusetts Boston , on Columbia Point in Dorchester .
Roxbury Community College and Bunker Hill Community College are the city 's two public community colleges .
Altogether , Boston 's colleges and universities employ over 42,600 people , accounting for nearly 7 percent of the city 's workforce .
Several universities located outside Boston have a major presence in the city .
Harvard has plans for additional expansion into Allston .
Tufts University , whose main campus is north of the city in Somerville and Medford , locates its medical and dental school in Boston 's Chinatown at Tufts Medical Center , a 451-bed academic medical institution that is home to both a full-service hospital for adults and the Floating Hospital for Children .
This helped lead in part to what has been touted as the `` Boston Miracle '' .
Boston 's literary culture continues today thanks to the city 's many universities and the Boston Book Festival .
Music is cherished in Boston .
The British newspaper The Guardian called Boston Symphony Hall `` one of the top venues for classical music in the world , '' adding that `` Symphony Hall in Boston was where science became an essential part of concert hall design . ''
Other concerts are held at the New England Conservatory 's Jordan Hall .
The Boston Ballet performs at the Boston Opera House .
Other performing-arts organizations located in the city include the Boston Lyric Opera Company , Opera Boston , Boston Baroque -LRB- the first permanent Baroque orchestra in the US -RRB- , and the Handel and Haydn Society -LRB- one of the oldest choral companies in the United States -RRB- .
The city is a center for contemporary classical music with a number of performing groups , several of which are associated with the city 's conservatories and universities .
These include the Boston Modern Orchestra Project and Boston Musica Viva .
The city is the site of several events during the Fourth of July period .
The city is also home to several art museums , including the Museum of Fine Arts and the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum .
The University of Massachusetts Boston campus on Columbia Point houses the John F. Kennedy Library .
Unitarian Universalism has its headquarters on Beacon Hill .
The oldest church in Boston is First Church in Boston , founded in 1630 .
Other churches include Christ Church -LRB- better known as Old North Church , 1723 -RRB- , the oldest church building in the city , Trinity Church -LRB- 1733 -RRB- , Park Street Church -LRB- 1809 -RRB- , Old South Church -LRB- 1874 -RRB- , Jubilee Christian Church and Basilica and Shrine of Our Lady of Perpetual Help on Mission Hill -LRB- 1878 -RRB- .
Boston is also breaking ground on multiple green affordable housing facilities to help reduce the carbon footprint of the city while simultaneously making these initiatives financially available to a greater population .
This legislature includes the Building Energy Reporting and Disclosure Ordinance , which requires the city 's larger buildings to disclose their yearly energy and water use statistics and partake in an energy assessment every five years .
These statistics are made public by the city , thereby increasing incentives for buildings to be more environmentally conscious .
This , much like the green housing developments , gives people of low socioeconomic status an opportunity to find housing in communities that support the environment .
A city agency , the Boston Groundwater Trust , coordinates monitoring of groundwater levels throughout the city via a network of public and private monitoring wells .
However , Boston 's drinking water supply , from the Quabbin and Wachusett Reservoirs to the west , is one of the very few in the country so pure as to satisfy federal water quality standards without filtration .
It is one of six cities -LRB- along with Chicago , Detroit , Los Angeles , New York and Philadelphia -RRB- to have won championships in all four major sports .
The series was played between the AL Champion Boston Americans and the NL champion Pittsburgh Pirates .
Persistent reports that the team was known in 1903 as the `` Boston Pilgrims '' appear to be unfounded .
The team played under that name until 1883 , under the name Beaneaters until 1911 , and under the name Braves from 1912 until they moved to Milwaukee after the 1952 season .
Since 1966 they have played in Atlanta as the Atlanta Braves .
The Bruins were the first American member of the National Hockey League and an Original Six franchise .
The Boston Celtics were founding members of the Basketball Association of America , one of the two leagues that merged to form the NBA .
The Celtics have the distinction of having won more championships than any other NBA team , with seventeen .
The team won the Super Bowl after the 2001 , 2003 , 2004 , and 2014 seasons .
The Boston Breakers of Women 's Professional Soccer , which formed in 2009 , play their home games at Dilboy Stadium in Somerville .
The area 's many colleges and universities are active in college athletics .
The Emerald Necklace includes Jamaica Pond , Boston 's largest body of freshwater , and Franklin Park , the city 's largest park and home of the Franklin Park Zoo .
Another major park is the Esplanade , located along the banks of the Charles River .
The Hatch Shell , an outdoor concert venue , is located adjacent to the Charles River Esplanade .
Other parks are scattered throughout the city , with the major parks and beaches located near Castle Island ; in Charlestown ; and along the Dorchester , South Boston , and East Boston shorelines .
Boston 's park system is well-reputed nationally .
The Boston City Council is elected every two years ; there are nine district seats , and four citywide `` at-large '' seats .
Both are Democrats ; a Republican has not represented a significant portion of Boston in over a century .
The state 's senior member of the United States Senate is Democrat Elizabeth Warren , first elected in 2012 .
The state 's junior member of the United States Senate is Democrat Ed Markey , who was elected in 2013 to succeed John Kerry after Kerry 's appointment and confirmation as the United States Secretary of State .
The city is also served by other publications such as Boston magazine , The Improper Bostonian , DigBoston , and the Boston edition of Metro .
The city 's growing Latino population has given rise to a number of local and regional Spanish-language newspapers .
WBZ -LRB- AM -RRB- broadcasts a news radio format .
Six Boston television stations are carried by Canadian satellite television provider Bell TV and by cable television providers in Canada .
New England Baptist Hospital is in Mission Hill .
The city has Veterans Affairs medical centers in the Jamaica Plain and West Roxbury neighborhoods .
Boston EMS provides pre-hospital emergency medical services to residents and visitors .
Massport also operates several major facilities within the Port of Boston , including a cruise ship terminal and facilities to handle bulk and container cargo in South Boston , and other facilities in Charlestown and East Boston .
The MBTA also operates busy bus and commuter rail networks , and water shuttles .
In 2011 , Walk Score ranked Boston the third most walkable city in the United States .
In 2008 , as a consequence of improvements made to bicycling conditions within the city , the same magazine put Boston on its `` Five for the Future '' list as a `` Future Best City '' for biking , and Boston 's bicycle commuting percentage increased from 1 % in 2000 to 2.1 % in 2009 .
The neighboring municipalities of Cambridge , Somerville , and Brookline joined the Hubway program in summer 2012 .
It is planned to begin serving global customers upon its completion in 2020 .
According to China daily .
The official English name of the system is BeiDou Navigation Satellite System .
As such , the name BeiDou also serves as a metaphor for the purpose of the satellite navigation system .
The successful launch of BeiDou-1C also meant the establishment of the BeiDou-1 navigation system .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
On 2 June 2010 , the fourth satellite was launched successfully into orbit .
The fifth orbiter was launched into space from Xichang Satellite Launch Center by an LM-3I carrier rocket on 1 August 2010 .
Three months later , on 1 November 2010 , the sixth satellite was sent into orbit by LM-3C .
Another satellite , the Beidou-2 / Compass IGSO-5 -LRB- fifth inclined geosynchonous orbit -RRB- satellite , was launched from the Xichang Satellite Launch Center by a Long March-3A on 1 December 2011 -LRB- UTC -RRB- .
By April 2006 , eleven cooperation projects within the Galileo framework had been signed between China and EU .
It now appears that Chinese COMPASS satellites will start transmitting in the E1 , E2 , E5B , and E6 bands before Europe 's Galileo satellites and thus have primary rights to these frequency ranges .
IQ modulation has been the method in both wired and wireless digital modulation since morsetting carrier signal 100 years ago .
The notation of Compass signals used in this page follows the naming of the frequency bands and agrees with the notation used in the American literature on the subject , but the notation used by the Chinese seems to be different and is quoted in the first row of the table .
The system will provide test-run services of positioning , navigation and time for China and the neighboring areas before the end of this year , according to the authorities . ''
The system became operational in the China region that same month .
The way that such church law is legislated , interpreted and at times adjudicated varies widely among these three bodies of churches .
There is a very early distinction between the rules enacted by the Church and the legislative measures taken by the State called leges , Latin for laws .
The actual subject material of the canons is not just doctrinal or moral in nature , but all-encompassing of the human condition .
Because of its specialized nature , advanced degrees in civil law or theology are normal prerequisites for the study of canon law .
The dogmatic decisions of the Councils , though , are to be obeyed rather than to be treated as guidelines , since they are essential for the Church 's unity .
Since the Reformation , ecclesiastical courts in England have been royal courts .
degree from Cambridge .
Such lawyers -LRB- called `` doctors '' and `` civilians '' -RRB- were centered at `` Doctors Commons '' , a few streets south of St Paul 's Cathedral in London , where they monopolized probate , matrimonial , and admiralty cases until their jurisdiction was removed to the common law courts in the mid-19th century .
The protest centered on the standard defense that canon law could be retained so long as it did not contradict the civil law .
Communications in Somalia encompasses the communications services and capacity of Somalia .
Several of the telecom firms have begun expanding their activities abroad .
Somalia now offers some of the most technologically advanced and competitively priced telecommunications and internet services in the world .
Prominent Somali telecommunications companies include Somtel Network , Golis Telecom Group , Hormuud Telecom , Somafone , Nationlink , Netco , Telcom and Somali Telecom Group .
Despite their rivalry , several of these companies signed an interconnectivity deal in 2005 that allows them to set prices , maintain and expand their networks , and ensure that competition does not get out of control .
The sector provides key communication services , and in the process facilitates job creation and income generation .
It is part of the Ministry of Information , Posts and Telecommunication .
In order to fill the vacuum , Somali Post signed an agreement in 2003 with the United Arab Emirates ' Emirates Post to process mail to and from Somalia .
Concurrently , the Somali Transitional Federal Government began preparations to revive the national postal service .
They have also rehabilitated the GPO in Mogadishu , and appointed an official Postal Consultant to provide professional advice on the renovations .
Phase II of the rehabilitation project involves the construction of 718 postal outlets from 2014 to 2016 .
Phase III is slated to begin in 2017 , with the objective of creating 897 postal outlets by 2022 .
There are a number of radio news agencies based in Somalia .
After closing down operations in the early 1990s due to the civil war , the station was officially re-opened in the early 2000s by the Transitional National Government .
In the late 2000s , Radio Mogadishu also launched a complementary website of the same name , with news items in Somali , Arabic and English .
Two such TV stations re-broadcast Al-Jazeera and CNN .
In the early 2000s , print media in Somalia reached a peak in activity .
A number of the broadsheets in circulation subsequently closed down operations , as they were no longer able to cover printing costs in the face of the electronic revolution .
In 2012 , the political Xog Doon and Xog Ogaal and Horyaal Sports were reportedly the last remaining newspapers printed in the capital .
It was at the time the only provider of dial up services in Somalia 's south-central regions .
In the northern Puntland and Somaliland regions , online networks offered internet dial up services to their own group of subscribers .
Among these firms was Golis Telecom Somalia in the northeast and Telesom in the northwest .
Pricing ranged from $ 150 to $ 300 a month for unlimited internet access , with bandwidth rates of 64 kbit/s up and down .
The main patrons of these wireless services were scholastic institutions , corporations , and UN , NGO and diplomatic missions .
It was particularly in demand in remote areas that did not have either dialup or wireless online services .
The local telecommunications company Dalkom Somalia provided internet over satellite , as well as premium routes for media operators and content providers , and international voice gateway services for global carriers .
It also offered inexpensive bandwidth through its internet backbone , whereas bandwidth ordinarily cost customers from $ 2,500 to $ 3,000 per month through the major international bandwidth providers .
In total , there were over 300 local satellite terminals available aross the nation , which were linked to teleports in Europe and Asia .
However , it increased in rural areas , as the main client base for the satellite services extended their operations into more remote locales .
The country previously had to rely on expensive satellite links due to the civil conflict , which limited internet usage .
This in turn is expected to further increase the number of internet users .
Dalkom Somalia reached a similar agreement with the West Indian Ocean Cable Company -LRB- WIOCC -RRB- Ltd , which it holds shares in .
Effective the first quarter of 2014 , the deal will establish fiber optic connectivity to and from Somalia via the EASSy cable .
The new services are expected to reduce the cost of international bandwidth and to better optimize performance , thereby further broadening internet access .
The site will facilitate direct connection into the international fiber optic network by hosting equipment for all of the capital 's ISPs and telecommunication companies .
It also has semi-official status in the city of Alghero on the Italian island of Sardinia .
It is also spoken with no official recognition in parts of the Spanish autonomous communities of Aragon -LRB- La Franja -RRB- and Murcia -LRB- Carche -RRB- , and in the historic French region of Roussillon/Northern Catalonia , roughly equivalent to the department of Pyrénées-Orientales .
In 1659 Spain ceded Northern Catalonia to France , and Catalan was banned in both states in the early 18th century .
19th-century Spain saw a Catalan literary revival , which culminated in the 1913 orthographic standardization , and the officialization of the language during the Second Spanish Republic -LRB- 1931 -- 39 -RRB- .
However , the Francoist dictatorship -LRB- 1939 -- 75 -RRB- banned the language again .
Catalan dialects are relatively uniform , and are mutually intelligible .
These similarities are most notable with Occitan .
Pronouns are also inflected for case , animacy -LSB- citation needed -RSB- and politeness , and can be combined in very complex ways .
Verbs are split in several paradigms and are inflected for person , number , tense , aspect , mood , and gender .
The word Catalan derives from the territory of Catalonia , itself of disputed etymology .
Catalan can be pronounced as / ˈkætəlæn / , / kætəˈlæn / or / ˈkætələn / .
See also status of Valencian below .
Examples include the work of Majorcan polymath Ramon Llull -LRB- 1232 -- 1315 -RRB- , the Four Great Chronicles -LRB- 13th -- 14th centuries -RRB- , and the Valencian school of poetry culminating in Ausiàs March -LRB- 1397 -- 1459 -RRB- .
During this period , the Royal Chancery propagated a highly standardized language .
In Catalonia , there is no parallel of a large , bilingual , European , non-state speech community .
There is also some intergenerational shift towards Catalan .
The cultural association La Bressola promotes a network of community-run schools engaged in Catalan language immersion programs .
This view , based on political and ideological considerations , has no linguistic validity .
Spanish and Catalan have important differences in their sound systems , lexicon , and grammatical features , placing the language in a number of respects closer to Occitan -LRB- and French -RRB- .
The descriptions below are mostly for this variety .
Balearic has also instances of stressed / ə / .
Catalan is split in two major dialectal blocks : Eastern Catalan , and Western Catalan .
There are a few other differences in pronunciation , verbal morphology , and vocabulary .
Balearic has also instances of stressed / ə / .
There are a few instances of unreduced -LSB- e -RSB- , -LSB- o -RSB- in some words .
Alguerese has lowered -LSB- ə -RSB- to -LSB- a -RSB- .
Usually , words with / ɛ / in Central Catalan correspond to / ə / in Balearic and / e / in Western Catalan .
Words with / e / in Balearic almost always have / e / in Central and Western Catalan as well .
In verbs , 1st person present indicative desinence is - o , - i or ∅ in all conjugations .
E.g. hòmens ` men ' , jóvens ` youth ' .
In nouns and adjectives , loss of / n / of medieval plurals in proparoxytone words .
The most notable difference between both standards is some tonic ⟨ e ⟩ accentuation , for instance : francès , anglès -LRB- IEC -RRB- -- francés , anglés -LRB- AVL -RRB- .
Nevertheless , AVL 's standard keeps the grave accent ⟨ è ⟩ , without pronouncing this ⟨ e ⟩ as / ɛ / , in some words like : què -LRB- ` what ' -RRB- , or València .
In this way , for instance , IEC says it is correct writing cantam as much as cantem -LRB- ` we sing ' -RRB- but the University says that the priority form in the Balearic Islands must be `` cantam '' in all fields .
The new entity , designated as Acadèmia Aragonesa del Català , shall allow a facultative education in Catalan and a standardization of the Catalan language in La Franja .
This position is promoted by people who do not use Valencian regularly .
There are only a few exceptions , like minso/minsa -LRB- `` scarce '' -RRB- .
Many not completely predictable morphological alternations may occur , such as :
Thus , Catalan has noi/noia -LRB- `` boy '' / `` girl '' -RRB- and gall/gallina -LRB- `` cock '' / `` hen '' -RRB- , whereas French has garçon / fille and coq/poule .
Thus , Catalan can have m ` hi recomanaren -LRB- `` they recommended me to him '' -RRB- , whereas in French one must say ils m ` ont recommandé à lui , and Spanish me recomendaron a él .
However , these are not as productive as in Spanish , and are mostly restricted to irregular verbs .
However , this division is mostly theoretical .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Furthermore , the apocope of word-final sounds is extensive and has contributed to a shift from a purely agglutinative to a fusional language .
Modern standard Estonian has evolved on the basis of the dialects of Northern Estonia .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In 1525 the first book published in the Estonian language was printed .
The New Testament was translated into southern Estonian in 1686 -LRB- northern Estonian , 1715 -RRB- .
The two languages were united based on northern Estonian by Anton thor Helle .
A fragment from Peterson 's poem `` Kuu '' expresses the claim reestablishing the birthright of the Estonian language :
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The Russian language was termed as ` the language of friendship of nations ' and was taught to Estonian children , sometimes as early as in kindergarten .
Although teaching Estonian to non-Estonians in schools was compulsory , in practice learning the language was often considered unnecessary .
And again as in Latvia , today many of the remnant non-Estonians in Estonia have adopted the Estonian language ; about 40 % at the 2000 census .
The letters c , q , w , x and y are limited to proper names of foreign origin , and f , z , š , and ž appear in loanwords and foreign names only .
Ö and ü are pronounced similarly to their equivalents in Swedish and German .
The vowels Ä , Ö and Ü are clearly separate phonemes and inherent in Estonian , although the letter shapes come from German .
The letter õ denotes / ɤ / , unrounded / o / , or a close-mid back unrounded vowel .
It is almost identical to the Bulgarian ъ / ɤ̞ / and the Vietnamese ơ , and is used to transcribe the Russian ы .
Earlier writing in Estonian had by and large used an ad hoc orthography based on Latin and Middle Low German orthography .
Some influences of the standard German orthography -- for example , writing ` W ' / ` w ' instead of ` V ' / ` v ' persisted well into the 1930s .
Examples are the use of `` ya '' for '' ä '' -LRB- e.g. Pyarnu instead of Pärnu -RRB- , `` y '' instead of '' õ '' -LRB- e.g. , Pylva instead of Põlva -RRB- and `` yu '' instead of '' ü '' -LRB- e.g. , Pyussi instead of Püssi -RRB- .
Thus the illative for kollane maja -LRB- `` a yellow house '' -RRB- is kollasesse majja -LRB- `` into a yellow house '' -RRB- , but the terminative is kollase majani -LRB- `` as far as a yellow house '' -RRB- .
With respect to the Proto-Finnic language , elision has occurred ; thus , the actual case marker may be absent , but the stem is changed , cf. maja -- majja and the Pohjanmaa dialect of Finnish maja -- majahan .
The accusative coincides with the genitive in the singular and with nominative in the plural .
This is a rough equivalent of the perfective vs. imperfective aspect opposition .
The percentage of Low Saxon and High German loanwords can be estimated at 22 -- 25 percent , with Low Saxon making up about 15 percent .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Examples are
These words might be better regarded as a peculiar manifestation of morpho-phonemic adaptation of a foreign lexical item .
Although the word paper is etymologically derived from papyrus , the two are produced very differently and the development of the first is distinct from the development of the second .
This is accomplished by dissolving lignin in a cooking liquor , so that it may be washed from the cellulose ; this preserves the length of the cellulose fibres .
Most pulping operations using the kraft process are net contributors to the electricity grid or use the electricity to run an adjacent paper mill .
Another advantage is that this process recovers and reuses all inorganic chemical reagents .
In the TMP process , wood is chipped and then fed into large steam heated refiners , where the chips are squeezed and converted to fibres between two steel discs .
Mechanical pulping does not remove the lignin , so the yield is very high , > 95 % , however it causes the paper thus produced to turn yellow and become brittle over time .
Although large amounts of electrical energy are required to produce mechanical pulp , it costs less than the chemical kind .
On the paper machine the most common is the steam heated can dryer .
Paper at this point is uncoated .
-LRB- Uncoated papers are rarely suitable for screens above 150 lpi . -RRB-
Coated papers are divided into matte , semi-matte or silk , and gloss .
The fibres in the paper basically run in the machine direction .
Wove paper does not exhibit `` laidlines '' , which are small regular lines left behind on paper when it was handmade in a mould made from rows of metal wires or bamboo .
Handmade paper similarly exhibits `` deckle edges '' , or rough and feathery borders .
For example , a ream of 20 lb , 8.5 in × 11 in -LRB- 216 mm × 279 mm -RRB- paper weighs 5 pounds , because it has been cut from a larger sheet into four pieces .
In the United States , printing paper is generally 20 lb , 24 lb , or 32 lb at most .
1189 × 841 mm -RRB- .
Two sheets of A1 , placed upright side by side fit exactly into one sheet of A0 laid on its side .
Similarly , two sheets of A2 fit into one sheet of A1 and so forth .
Much of the early paper made from wood pulp contained significant amounts of alum , a variety of aluminium sulfate salts that is significantly acidic .
Early papermakers did not realize that the alum they added liberally to cure almost every problem encountered in making their product would eventually be detrimental .
The cellulose fibres that make up paper are hydrolyzed by acid , and the presence of alum would eventually degrade the fibres until the paper disintegrated in a process that has come to be known as `` slow fire '' .
The use of non-acidic additives to make paper is becoming more prevalent , and the stability of these papers is less of an issue .
Paper made from bleached kraft or sulfite pulps does not contain significant amounts of lignin and is therefore better suited for books , documents and other applications where whiteness of the paper is essential .
Paper made from wood pulp is not necessarily less durable than a rag paper .
The ageing behavior of a paper is determined by its manufacture , not the original source of the fibres .
Mass-market paperback books and newspapers tend to use mechanical papers .
Dioxins are highly toxic , and health effects on humans include reproductive , developmental , immune and hormonal problems .
They are known to be carcinogenic .
Some manufacturers have started using a new , significantly more environmentally friendly alternative to expanded plastic packaging .
Each team plays two or three games against the teams within its own conference , and two games -LRB- home/road -RRB- against each team interconference-wise .
From 1987 to 2004 , 2010 and 2011 and again starting in 2014 , the game was played at the site of the higher seeded team .
From 2005 to 2008 , the games were at neutral sites , Las Vegas and New Orleans .
In 2012 , the league championship returned to a neutral site and ArenaBowl XXV was held at the New Orleans Arena ; ArenaBowl XXVI was held in Orlando .
The 2016 season will begin April 1 , 2016 .
Later that year both the AFL and af2 were dissolved and reorganized as a new corporation comprising teams from both leagues , and the AFL returned in 2010 .
While at the game , he wrote his idea on a 9x12 envelope , with sketches of the field and notes on gameplay .
He presented the idea to a few friends at the NFL offices , where he received praise and encouragement for his concept .
After solidifying the rules and a business plan , and supplemented with sketches by a professional artist , Foster presented his idea to various television networks .
Foster left the NFL to accept a position in the USFL .
In 1983 , he began organizing the test game in his spare time from his job with the Blitz .
Interest was high enough following the initial test game that Foster decided to put on a second , `` showcase '' , game .
Foster also invited ESPN to send a film crew to the game ; a highlights package aired on SportsCenter .
Following the successes of his trial-run games , Foster moved ahead with his idea for arena football .
Davis hired the original coaches and was the architect of the league 's original wide-open offensive playbooks .
The game was deliberately not televised so that it could be analyzed and any follies and failures would not be subject to national public scrutiny .
Following the inaugural game , tweaks and adjustments were made , and the first season continued .
The broadcast showed a short clip of the Commandos-Gladiators game .
Each team played six games , two against each other team .
The top two teams , Denver and Pittsburgh , then competed in the first-ever AFL championship game , ArenaBowl I.
The patent application covered the rules of the game , specifically detailing the goalposts and rebound netting and their impact on gameplay .
Foster had walked onto the field of play to mediate an altercation between the two teams when Haering , a former NFL assistant , punched him in the jaw .
Haering was suspended without pay .
The second Allstar game was in Oct. 2013 , with two games , the first in Honolulu , Hawai'i , the second being in Beijing , China .
While some teams have enjoyed considerable on-field and even financial success , many teams in the history of the league have enjoyed little success either on or off of the field of play .
There are a number of reasons why these teams failed , including financially weak ownership groups , lack of deep financial support from some owners otherwise capable of providing it , lack of media exposure , and the host city 's evident lack of interest in its team or the sport as a whole .
The year 2000 brought heightened interest in the AFL .
Then-St .
While it was not financially lucrative , it helped set the stage for what the league would become in the new millennium .
Also , the year also brought a spin-off league , the AF2 , intended to be a developmental league , comparable to the National Football League 's NFL Europe .
There was a lot of expansion in the 2000s .
Some of these teams , including the Crush , Desperados , Kats , and VooDoo , were owned by the same group which owned the NFL teams in their host cities .
The NFL purchased , but never exercised , an option to buy a major interest the AFL .
Of all of these teams , only the Soul still compete in the AFL as of now .
There were also several rule changes in this period .
The only way for a player to go out of bounds presently is if he is tackled into or deliberately contacts the side boards .
This was also the first year the ArenaBowl was played at a neutral site .
Baker explained , `` When I took over as commissioner , I thought it would be for one year .
It turned into 12 .
But now it 's time . ''
Benson 's move to shut down the VooDoo came during the Platinum Equity conference call , leading to speculation that he had folded because of the deal .
Because of the sudden loss of the New Orleans franchise , the league announced in October that the beginning of the free agency period would be delayed in order to accommodate a dispersal draft .
However , the draft still never took place , and instead another press release was issued stating that both the draft and free agency had been postponed indefinitely .
Rumors began circulating that the league was in trouble and on the verge of folding , but owners denied those claims .
It was soon revealed the players ' union had agreed to cut the salary cap for the 2009 season to prevent a total cessation of operations .
However , the announced Platinum Equity investment never materialized .
The AFL also became the third sports league to lose its postseason -LRB- the first being Major League Baseball , which lost its postseason in 1994 because of a strike -RRB- .
Progress on the return stalled , and no announcements were made regarding the future of the league .
In early August 2009 , numerous media outlets began reporting that the AFL was folding permanently and would file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy .
Despite this , several of the league 's creditors filed papers to force a Chapter 7 liquidation if the league did not do so voluntarily .
This request was granted on August 7 , though converted to a Chapter 11 reorganization on August 26 .
All assets of the Arena Football League were put up for auction .
AF1 teams were given the option of restoring historical names to their teams .
The Brigade changed its name to the Command , becoming the Kansas City Command .
Even though they were returning teams , the Bossier -- Shreveport Battle Wings moved to New Orleans as the Voodoo , the identity formerly owned by New Orleans Saints owner Tom Benson .
The Alabama Vipers moved to Duluth , Georgia to become the new Georgia Force -LRB- the earlier franchise of that name being a continuation of the first Nashville Kats franchise -RRB- .
On October 25 , 2010 the Oklahoma City Yard Dawgz did not return .
The Milwaukee Iron also changed names to the Milwaukee Mustangs , the name of Milwaukee 's original AFL team that had existed from 1994 to 2001 .
The Dallas Vigilantes were left off the schedule for the 2012 season with no announcement from the management , raising speculations that either the team had suspended operations for the season or was ceasing operations altogether .
-LRB- Apparently the latter was the case as the organization did not field a team for the 2013 season or any subsequent one either . -RRB-
The redesigned website showed the new logo which incorporated the current AFL logo with the one from NET10 Wireless .
After 20 years as a familiar name to the league , an AFL mainstay , the Iowa Barnstormers , departed the league to join the Indoor Football League .
The San Antonio Talons folded on October 13 , 2014 , after the league -LRB- which owned the team -RRB- failed to find a new owner .
On November 16 , 2014 , despite a successful season record-wise , the Pittsburgh Power became the second team to cease operations after the 2014 season .
This resulted from poor attendance .
It was later announced by the league that the Power would go dormant for 2015 and were looking for new ownership .
Rumors began swirling with regards to bringing the AFL back to Austin and San Antonio , Texas .
Announcements have yet to be made on any sort of expansion plans .
A statement from the league indicated that the AFL is working to secure new , long-term owners for the franchise .
The AFL stated this move was made after months of trying work out an arrangement `` to provide financial and operational support . ''
All teams will qualify for the postseason , meaning that the regular season will serve only to establish seeding .
From the league 's inception through ArenaBowl XVIII , the championship game was played at the home of the highest-seeded remaining team .
ArenaBowl XXI in New Orleans was deemed a success , and the city was chosen to host ArenaBowl XXII , in which the Philadelphia Soul defeated the defending champion San Jose Sabercats .
In 2010 , the location returned to being decided by which of the two participating teams was seeded higher .
In ArenaBowl XXIII , the Spokane Shock defeated the Tampa Bay Storm at their home arena , Spokane Arena , in Spokane , Washington .
In ArenaBowl XXIV , the Jacksonville Sharks , coming off of a victory in their conference final game four nights earlier , traveled to US Airways Center in Phoenix and defeated the Arizona Rattlers 73 -- 70 .
ArenaBowl XXV returned to a neutral site and was once again played in New Orleans , where the Rattlers returned and defeated the Philadelphia Soul .
Since 2014 the ArenaBowl has been played at the higher-seeded team .
The plans were to establish a six-team league that would play a 10-week schedule that was slated to start in October 2014 .
The AFL coaches and trainers will travel to China to help teach the rules of the sport to squads made up of Chinese and American players with the goal of starting an official Chinese arena league .
Ganlan Media International were given exclusive rights to the new Chinese league .
The company , called AFL Global , LLC , looks to introduce and launch professional Arena Football teams and franchises in various locations throughout the world -LRB- like NFL Europe -RRB- .
This is the first time professional football of any kind will be played in China with the support of the Chinese government and the CRFA -LRB- Chinese Rugby Football Association -RRB- .
Key persons involved include founder and CEO .
Ganlan Media has since dropped this name and will carry the league 's name as its corporate identity .
Beginning with the 2003 season , the AFL made a deal with NBC to televise league games , which was renewed for another two years in 2005 .
In 2006 , because of the XX Winter Olympic Games , the Stanley Cup playoffs and the Daytona 500 , NBC scaled back from weekly coverage to scattered coverage during the regular season , but committed to a full playoff schedule ending with the 20th ArenaBowl .
Las Vegas owner Jim Ferraro stated during a radio interview that the reason why a deal failed is because ESPN refused to show highlights or even mention a product being broadcast on NBC .
This deal included television rights for the ESPN family of networks .
The deal resulted in added exposure on ESPN 's SportsCenter .
However , after the original AFL filed for bankruptcy , this arrangement did not carry over to the new AFL , which is a separate legal entity .
Briefly , the games were broadcast on a tape delay to prevent the embarrassment that would result should the players stage a work stoppage immediately prior to a scheduled broadcast .
-LRB- In at least once incidence this actually happened , resulting in a non-competitive game being played with replacement players , and further such incidents were threatened . -RRB-
NFL Network dropped the league at the end of the 2012 season .
CBS would also air the ArenaBowl , marking the first time since 2008 that the league 's finale aired on network television .
As the games are being shown live , the start times are not uniform as with most football broadcast packages , but vary with the time zone in which the home team is located .
This means that the AFL may appear either prior to or following the CBSSN 's featured Major League Lacrosse game .
ArenaBowl XXVII was also broadcast on ESPN .
Most teams also have a local TV station broadcast their games locally and all games are available on local radio .
On February 7 , 2006 EA Sports released Arena Football for the PlayStation 2 and Xbox .
EA Sports released another AFL video game , titled Arena Football : Road to Glory , on February 21 , 2007 , for the PlayStation 2 .
A pool of money is allotted to teams to aid in travel costs .
Eleven of the seventeen teams in operation in 2007 had average attendance figures over 13,000 .
Adult contemporary is rather a continuation of the easy listening and soft rock style that became popular in the 1960s and 1970s with some adjustments that reflect the evolution of pop/rock music .
Some stations play only `` hot AC '' , `` soft AC '' , or only one of the variety of subgenres .
Therefore , it is not usually considered a specific genre of music ; it is merely an assemblage of selected tracks from musicians of many different genres .
A few offered 90 % instrumentals , and a handful were entirely instrumental .
The easy listening format , as it was first known , was born of a desire by some radio stations in the late 1950s and early 1960s to continue playing current hit songs but distinguish themselves from being branded as `` rock and roll '' stations .
The chart described itself as `` not too far out in either direction '' .
Better reflecting what middle of the road stations were actually playing , the composition of the chart changed dramatically .
By the 1980s , tastes had changed and radio formats reflected this change , including musical artists such as Journey .
The addition of major radio stars such as Dan Daniel , Steve O'Brien , Dick Summers , Don Bleu and Tom Parker made it possible to fully monetize the format and provide the foundation for financial success enjoyed to this day
This evolved into specialized radio stations that played specific genres of music , and generally followed the evolution of artists in those genres .
Collins has been described by AllMusic as `` one of the most successful pop and adult contemporary singers of the '80s and beyond '' .
However , with the combination of MTV and AC radio , adult contemporary appeared harder to define as a genre , with established soft-rock artists of the past still charting pop hits and receiving airplay alongside mainstream radio fare from newer artists at the time .
The amount of crossover between the AC chart and the Hot 100 has varied based on how much the passing pop music trends of the times appealed to adult listeners .
Several additional singles from the disc made the AC Top 10 as well .
The album won over many critics in the need to define AC , and appeared to change the tolerance and acceptance of AC music into mainstream day to day radio play .
A notable pattern that developed during the 2000s and 2010s has been for certain pop songs to have lengthy runs on AC charts , even after the songs have fallen off the Hot 100 .
Or , to optimists , to get a second life . ''
With the mixture of radio friendly AC tunes with some rock and pop fare also landing on the pop charts , mainstream songs won over many critics in the need to define AC , and appeared to change the tolerance and acceptance of AC music into mainstream day to day radio play .
The vast majority of music played on soft AC stations is mellow , more acoustic , and primarily solo vocalists .
A large portion of music played on this format are either considered oldies or recurrent .
Soft AC , which has never minded keeping songs in high rotation literally for years in some cases , does not appear necessarily to be facing similar pressures to expand its format .
Modern adult contemporary can be a variation of hot AC , and includes modern rock titles in its presentation .
The format 's artists included Alanis Morissette , Counting Crows , Gin Blossoms , Bon Jovi , Train , No Doubt , The Script , The Cranberries , Lifehouse , Sarah McLachlan , Sara Bareilles , John Mayer , Jewel , and Ingrid Michaelson .
This is reflected in many of the urban AC radio stations ' taglines , such as `` Today 's R&B and classic soul '' , `` The best variety of R&B hits and oldies '' and '' -LRB- City/Region -RRB- 's R&B leader '' .
The format includes soul or disco artists such as ABBA , The Village People , The Jackson 5 , Donna Summer , Tina Charles , Gloria Gaynor and the Bee Gees .
Classic songwriting touches and organic-leaning instrumentation , often featuring string arrangements and horn charts , were constants .
Afterwards , the stations usually resume their normal music fare .
Matter is also used loosely as a general term for the substance that makes up all observable physical objects .
Nevertheless , quarks and leptons together make up `` ordinary matter '' , and their interactions contribute to the effective volume of the composite particles that make up ordinary matter .
However , advances in experimental techniques have revealed other previously theoretical phases , such as Bose -- Einstein condensates and fermionic condensates .
However , because mass -LRB- like energy -RRB- can neither be created nor destroyed , the quantity of mass and the quantity of energy remain the same during a transformation of matter -LRB- which represents a certain amount of energy -RRB- into non-material -LRB- i.e. , non-matter -RRB- energy .
This is also true in the reverse transformation of energy into matter .
As such , there is no single universally agreed scientific meaning of the word `` matter '' .
Scientifically , the term `` mass '' is well-defined , but `` matter '' is not .
It is one of the most notable religious buildings in the United Kingdom and has been the traditional place of coronation and burial site for English and , later , British monarchs .
The building itself is the original abbey church .
A week later he was buried in the church , and nine years later his wife Edith was buried alongside him .
Some of the lower parts of the monastic dormitory , an extension of the South Transept , survive in the Norman undercroft of the Great School , including a door said to come from the previous Saxon abbey .
The abbot often was employed on royal service and in due course took his place in the House of Lords as of right .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The proximity of the Palace of Westminster did not extend to providing monks or abbots with high royal connections ; in social origin the Benedictines of Westminster were as modest as most of the order .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
None were buried there until Henry III , intensely devoted to the cult of the Confessor , rebuilt the abbey in Anglo-French Gothic style as a shrine to venerate King Edward the Confessor and as a suitably regal setting for Henry 's own tomb , under the highest Gothic nave in England .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Since the coronations in 1066 of both King Harold and William the Conqueror , coronations of English and British monarchs were held in the abbey .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Although the Stone is now kept in Scotland , in Edinburgh Castle , at future coronations it is intended that the Stone will be returned to St Edward 's Chair for use during the coronation ceremony .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
One of the canons is also Rector of St Margaret 's Church , Westminster , and often holds also the post of Chaplain to the Speaker of the House of Commons .
In addition to the Dean and canons , there are at present two full-time minor canons , one is precentor , and the other is sacrist .
Henry III himself was interred nearby , as were many of the Plantagenet kings of England , their wives and other relatives .
Most monarchs and royals who died after 1760 are buried either in St George 's Chapel or at Frogmore to the east of Windsor Castle .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Other poets , writers and musicians were buried or memorialised around Chaucer in what became known as Poets ' Corner .
Abbey musicians such as Henry Purcell were also buried in their place of work .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Subsequently , it became one of Britain 's most significant honours to be buried or commemorated in the abbey .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In the floor , just inside the great west door , in the centre of the nave , is the tomb of The Unknown Warrior , an unidentified British soldier killed on a European battlefield during the First World War .
This grave is the only one in the abbey on which it is forbidden to walk .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
It was a royal ceremonial funeral including royal pageantry and Anglican funeral liturgy .
The burial occurred privately later the same day .
Diana 's former husband , sons , mother , siblings , a close friend , and a clergyman were present .
Her grave is on the grounds of her family estate , Althorp , on a private island .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The Choir School educates and trains the choirboys who sing for services in the Abbey .
In 1982 and 1987 , Harrison and Harrison enlarged the organ under the direction of the then abbey organist Simon Preston to include an additional Lower Choir Organ and a Bombarde Organ : the current instrument now has five manuals and 109 speaking stops .
In 2006 , the console of the organ was refurbished by Harrison and Harrison , and space was prepared for two additional 16 ft stops on the Lower Choir Organ and the Bombarde Organ .
The entrance is approached from the east cloister walk and includes a double doorway with a large tympanum above .
Inner and outer vestibules lead to the octagonal chapter house , which is of exceptional architectural purity .
The Chapter house was originally used in the 13th century by Benedictine monks for daily meetings .
The outer walls and circular piers are of 11th-century date , several of the capitals were enriched in the 12th century and the stone altar added in the 13th century .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- During recent conservation of Elizabeth I 's effigy , a unique corset dating from 1603 was found on the figure and is now displayed separately .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Although it has been damaged in past centuries , the panel has been expertly cleaned and conserved .
A corona -- a crown-like architectural feature -- was intended to be built around the lantern over the central crossing , replacing an existing pyramidal structure dating from the 1950s .
This was part of a wider # 23m development of the abbey expected to be completed in 2013 .
The aim is to create a new display area for the abbey 's treasures in the galleries high up around the abbey 's nave .
It is the capital city of Jiangsu province of People 's Republic of China and the second largest city in East China , with a total population of 8,216,100 , and legally the capital of Republic of China which lost the mainland during the civil war .
The city whose name means `` Southern Capital '' has a prominent place in Chinese history and culture , having served as the capitals of various Chinese dynasties , kingdoms and republican governments dating from the 3rd century AD to 1949 .
Prior to the advent of pinyin romanization , Nanjing 's city name was spelled as Nanking or Nankin .
Nanjing has a number of other names , and some historical names are now used as names of districts of the city , and among them there is the name Jiangning -LRB- 江寧 -RRB- , whose former character Jiang -LRB- 江 , River -RRB- is the former part of the name Jiangsu and latter character Ning -LRB- 寧 , simplified form 宁 , Peace -RRB- is the short name of Nanjing .
When being the capital of a state , for instance , ROC , Jing -LRB- 京 -RRB- is adopted as the abbreviation of Nanjing .
Nanjing is particularly known as Jinling -LRB- 金陵 , literally meaning Gold Mountain -RRB- and the old name has been used since the Warring States Period in Zhou Dynasty .
Nanjing is also one of the fifteen sub-provincial cities in the People 's Republic of China 's administrative structure , enjoying jurisdictional and economic autonomy only slightly less than that of a province .
Nanjing has been ranked seventh in the evaluation of `` Cities with Strongest Comprehensive Strength '' issued by the National Statistics Bureau , and second in the evaluation of cities with most sustainable development potential in the Yangtze River Delta .
It has also been awarded the title of 2008 Habitat Scroll of Honour of China , Special UN Habitat Scroll of Honour Award and National Civilized City .
Nanjing boasts many high-quality universities and research institutes , with the number of universities listed in 100 National Key Universities ranking third , including Nanjing University .
The ratio of college students to total population ranks No. 1 among large cities nationwide .
Nanjing is one of the three Chinese top research centres according to Nature Index .
Nanjing served as the capital of Eastern Wu , one of the three major states in the Three Kingdoms period -LRB- 211-280 -RRB- ; the Eastern Jin and each of the Southern Dynasties -LRB- Liu Song , Southern Qi , Liang and Chen -RRB- , which successively ruled southern China from 317-589 ; the Southern Tang , one of the Ten Kingdoms -LRB- 937-76 -RRB- ; the Ming dynasty when , for the first time , all of China was ruled from the city -LRB- 1368-1421 -RRB- ; and the Republic of China -LRB- 1927 -- 37 , 1945 -- 49 -RRB- prior to its flight to Taiwan during the Chinese Civil War .
The city also served as the seat of the rebel Taiping Heavenly Kingdom -LRB- 1851 -- 64 -RRB- and the Japanese puppet regime of Wang Jingwei -LRB- 1940 -- 45 -RRB- during the Second Sino-Japanese War , and suffered appalling atrocities in both conflicts , including the Nanjing Massacre .
Nanjing is famous for human historical landscapes , mountains and waters such as Fuzimiao , Ming Palace , Chaotian Palace , Porcelain Tower , Drum Tower , Stone City , City Wall , Qinhuai River , Xuanwu Lake and Purple Mountain .
Key cultural facilities include Nanjing Library , Nanjing Museum and Art Museum .
According to legend , -LSB- which ? -RSB-
Fuchai , King of the State of Wu , founded a fort named Yecheng -LRB- 冶城 -RRB- in today 's Nanjing area in 495 BC .
In 333 BC , after eliminating the State of Yue , the State of Chu built Jinling Yi -LRB- 金陵邑 -RRB- in the western part of present-day Nanjing .
It was renamed Moling -LRB- 秣陵 -RRB- during reign of Qin Shi Huang .
Since then , the city experienced destruction and renewal many times .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The area was successively part of Kuaiji , Zhang and Danyang prefectures in Qin and Han dynasty , and part of Yangzhou region which was established as the nation 's 13 supervisory and administrative regions in the 5th year of Yuanfeng in Han dynasty -LRB- 106 BC -RRB- .
This city would soon play a vital role in the following centuries .
First the rebellions by eight Jin princes for the throne and later rebellions and invasion from Xiongnu and other nomadic peoples that destroyed the rule of the Jin dynasty in the north .
It 's the first time that the capital of the nation moved to southern part .
During this time , Nanjing was the international hub of East Asia .
The period of division ended when the Sui Dynasty reunified China and almost destroyed the entire city , turning it into a small town .
The city of Nanjing was razed after the Sui dynasty took over it .
It renamed Shengzhou -LRB- 昇州 -RRB- in Tang dynasty and resuscitated during the late Tang .
It renamed Jiangning -LRB- 江寧 -RRB- in Northern Song dynasty and renamed Jiankang in Southern Song dynasty .
The present-day City Wall of Nanjing was mainly built during that time and today it remains in good condition and has been well preserved .
It is among the longest surviving city walls in China .
The Jianwen Emperor ruled from 1398 to 1402 .
As the center of the empire , early-Ming Nanjing had worldwide connections .
Over two centuries after the removal of the capital to Beijing , Nanjing was destined to become the capital of a Ming emperor one more time .
Zhu Yousong , however , fared a lot worse than his ancestor Zhu Yuanzhang three centuries earlier .
Beset by factional conflicts , his regime could not offer effective resistance to Qing forces , when the Qing army , led by the Manchu prince Dodo approached Jiangnan the next spring .
They requisitioned a large section of the city for the bannermen 's cantonment , and destroyed the former imperial Ming Palace , but otherwise the city was spared the mass murders and destruction that befell Yangzhou .
As the capital of the brief-lived rebel Taiping Heavenly Kingdom -LRB- founded by the Taiping rebels in the mid-19th century , Nanjing was known as Tianjing -LRB- 天京 , `` Heavenly Capital '' or `` Capital of Heaven '' -RRB- .
Since the Taiping Rebellion began , Qing forces allowed no rebels speaking its dialect to surrender .
This policy of mass murder of civilians occurred in Nanjing .
Yuan demanded the capital be Beijing -LRB- closer to his power base -RRB- .
Their troops occupied Nanjing in December and carried out the systematic and brutal Nanking Massacre -LRB- the `` Rape of Nanking '' -RRB- .
The city itself was also severely damaged during the massacre .
By late 1949 , the PLA was pursuing remnants of KMT forces southwards in southern China , and only Tibet was left .
The downstream Yangtze River flows from Jiujiang , Jiangxi , through Anhui and Jiangsu to East Sea , north to drainage basin of downstream Yangtze is Huai River basin and south to it is Zhe River basin , and they are connected by the Grand Canal east to Nanjing .
The region is also known as Dongnan -LRB- 東南 , South East , the Southeast -RRB- and Jiangnan -LRB- 江南 , River South , south of Yangtze -RRB- .
Mr. Sun Yet-sen spoke highly of Nanjing in the `` Constructive Scheme for Our Country '' , `` The position of Nanjing is wonderful since mountains , lakes and plains all integrated in it .
It is hard to find another city like this . ''
The four seasons are distinct , with damp conditions seen throughout the year , very hot and muggy summers , cold , damp winters , and in between , spring and autumn are of reasonable length .
However , the time from mid-June to the end of July is the plum blossom blooming season in which the meiyu -LRB- rainy season of East Asia ; literally `` plum rain '' -RRB- occurs , during which the city experiences a period of mild rain as well as dampness .
Typhoons are uncommon but possible in the late stages of summer and early part of autumn .
The annual mean temperature is around 15.46 °C -LRB- 59.8 °F -RRB- , with the monthly 24-hour average temperature ranging from 2.4 °C -LRB- 36.3 °F -RRB- in January to 27.8 °C -LRB- 82.0 °F -RRB- in July .
Extremes since 1951 have ranged from − 14.0 °C -LRB- 7 °F -RRB- on 6 January 1955 to 40.7 °C -LRB- 105 °F -RRB- on 22 August 1959 .
Sun Quan then renamed the city from Moling -LRB- 秣陵 -RRB- to Jianye -LRB- 建鄴 -RRB- shortly thereafter .
A lack of cold air flow , combined with slow-moving air masses carrying industrial emissions , collected airborne pollutants to form a thick layer of smog over the region .
On 3 December 2013 , levels of PM2 .5 particulate matter average over 943 micrograms per cubic metre , falling to over 338 micrograms per cubic metre on 4 December 2013 .
Between 3:00 pm , 3 December and 2:00 pm , 4 December local time , several expressways from Nanjing to other Jiangsu cities were closed , stranding dozens of passenger buses in Zhongyangmen bus station .
Children 's Hospital outpatient services increased by 33 percent ; general incidence of bronchitis , pneumonia , upper respiratory tract infections significantly increased .
The smog dissipated 12 December .
Officials blamed the dense pollution on lack of wind , automobile exhaust emissions under low air pressure , and coal-powered district heating system in North China region .
Prevailing winds blew low-hanging air masses of factory emissions -LRB- mostly SO2 -RRB- towards China 's east coast .
The sex ratio of the city population was 107.31 males to 100 females .
Most of the minority nationalities resided in Jianye District , comprising 9.13 percent of the district 's population .
It led in textiles , minting , printing , shipbuilding and many other industries , and was the busiest business center in East Asia .
The current economy of the city is basically newly developed based on the past .
Industries of information technology , energy saving and environmental protection , new energy , smart power grid and intelligent equipment manufacturing have become pillar industries .
Big private firms include Suning , Yurun , Sanpower , Fuzhong , Hiteker , 5stars , Jinpu , Tiandi , CTTQ Pharmaceutical and Simcere Pharmaceutical .
Big state-owned firms include Panda Electronics , Yangzi Petrochemical , Jinling Petrochemical , Nanjing Chemical , Nanjing Steel , Jincheng Motors , Jinling Pharmaceutical , Chenguang and NARI .
Many China-based leading firms such as Huawei , ZTE and Lenovo have key R & D institutes in the city .
In recent years , Nanjing has been developing its economy , commerce , industry , as well as city construction .
The average urban resident 's disposable income was RMB 36,200 , while the average rural resident 's net income was RMB 14,513 .
Nanjing is the transportation hub in eastern China and the downstream Yangtze River area .
In 1999 , On November 12 , 1999 , the station was burnt in a serious fire .
Nanjing South Railway Station , which is one of the 5 hub stations on Beijing -- Shanghai High-Speed Railway , has officially been claimed as the largest railway station in Asia and the second largest in the world in terms of GFA -LRB- Gross Floor Area -RRB- .
Construction of Nanjing South Station began on 10 January 2008 .
The station was opened for public service in 2011 .
Nanjing Metro Line 1 , started service on September 3 , 2005 , with 16 stations and a length of 21.72 km .
Line 2 and the 24.5 km-long south extension of Line 1 officially opened to passenger service on May 28 , 2010 .
They are Line 1 , Line 2 , Line 3 , Line 10 , Line S1 and Line S8 .
The expansion of the Metro network will greatly facilitate the intracity transportation and reduce the currently heavy traffic congestion .
The airport is connected by a 29-kilometre -LRB- 18 mi -RRB- highway directly to the city center , and is also linked to various intercity highways , making it accessible to the passengers from the surrounding cities .
A railway Ninggao Intercity Line is being built to link the airport with Nanjing South Railway Station .
Dajiaochang Airport is still used as a military air base .
As of 2010 , it operated six public ports and three industrial ports .
Going in the downstream direction , the Yangtze crossings in Nanjing are : Dashengguan Bridge , Line 10 Metro Tunnel , Third Bridge , Nanjing Yangtze River Tunnel , First Bridge , Second Bridge and Fourth Bridge .
Other libraries , such as city-owned Jinling Library and various district libraries , also provide considerable amount of information to citizens .
Other museums include the City Museum of Nanjing in the Chaotian Palace , the Oriental Metropolitan Museum , the China Modern History Museum in the Presidential Palace , the Nanjing Massacre Memorial Hall , the Taiping Kingdom History Museum , Jiangning Imperial Silk Manufacturing Museum , Nanjing Yunjin Museum , Nanjing City Wall Cultural Museum , Nanjing Customs Museum in Ganxi House , Nanjing Astronomical History Museum , Nanjing Paleontological Museum , Nanjing Geological Museum , Nanjing Riverstones Museum , and other museums and memorials such Zheng He Memorial , Jinling Four Modern Calligraphers Memorial .
It is well-known that people in Nanjing like eating radish .
From health perspective , eating radish can help to offset the stodgy food that people take during the Spring Festival '' .
Jiangsu Volleyball men and women teams are also traditionally considered as at top level in China volleyball league .
The Nanjing Youth Olympic Games Organising Committee -LRB- NYOGOC -RRB- worked together with the International Olympic Committee -LRB- IOC -RRB- to attract the best young athletes from around the world to compete at the highest level .
Off the competition fields , an integrated culture and education programme focused on discussions about education , Olympic values , social challenges , and cultural diversity .
The metropolitan area had a population of 660,000 in 2000 .
The etymology of the name Bern is uncertain .
It has long been considered likely that the city was named after the Italian city of Verona , which at the time was known as Bern in Middle High German .
The bear was the heraldic animal of the seal and coat of arms of Bern from at least the 1220s .
In antiquity , a Celtic oppidum stood on the Engehalbinsel -LRB- peninsula -RRB- north of Bern , fortified since the 2nd century BC -LRB- late La Tène period -RRB- , thought to be one of the twelve oppida of the Helvetii mentioned by Caesar .
It was , in turn , succeeded by the Christoffelturm -LRB- formerly located close to the site of the modern-day railway station -RRB- until 1622 .
Despite the waves of pestilence that hit Europe in the 14th century , the city continued to grow : mainly due to immigration from the surrounding countryside .
Bern was made the Federal City -LRB- seat of the Federal Assembly -RRB- within the new Swiss federal state in 1848 .
The city 's population rose from about 5,000 in the 15th century to about 12,000 by 1800 and to above 60,000 by 1900 , passing the 100,000 mark during the 1920s .
Population peaked during the 1960s at 165,000 , and has since decreased slightly , to below 130,000 by 2000 .
A further estimated 350,000 people live in the immediate urban agglomeration .
The site of the old observatory in Bern is the point of origin of the CH1903 coordinate system at 46 ° 57 ′ 08.66 ″ N 7 ° 26 ′ 22.50 ″ E / 46.9524056 ° N 7.4395833 ° E / 46.9524056 ; 7.4395833 .
Of the rest of the land , 23.25 square kilometers -LRB- 8.98 sq mi -RRB- or 45.0 % is settled -LRB- buildings or roads -RRB- , 1.06 square kilometers -LRB- 0.41 sq mi -RRB- or 2.1 % is either rivers or lakes and 0.16 square kilometers -LRB- 0.062 sq mi -RRB- or 0.3 % is unproductive land .
The president of the executive department acts as mayor -LRB- Stadtpräsident -RRB- .
Departmental tasks , coordination measures and implementation of laws decreed by the City Parliament are carried by the City Council .
Any resident of Bern allowed to vote can be elected as a member of the City Council .
The delegates are selected by means of a system of Majorz .
The mayor is elected as such as well by public election while the heads of the other directorates are assigned by the collegiate .
The last election was held on 25 November 2012 .
The City Parliament decrees regulations and by-laws that are executed by the City Council and the administration .
The delegates are selected by means of a system of proportional representation .
Unlike members of the City Council , members of the City Parliament are not politicians by profession , and they are paid a fee based on their attendance .
Any resident of Bern allowed to vote can be elected as a member of the City Parliament .
The parliament holds its meetings in the Stadthaus -LRB- Town Hall -RRB- .
The last regular election of the City Parliament was held on 25 November 2012 for the mandate period -LRB- German : Legislatur , French : la législature -RRB- from 2013 to 2016 .
-LRB- or Young Alternatives -RRB- , 1 Grüne Partei Bern - Demokratische Alternative -LRB- GPB-DA -RRB- -LRB- or Green Party Bern - Democratic Alternative -RRB- , 1 Swiss Party of Labour -LRB- PdA -RRB- , 1 Alternative Linke Bern -LRB- AL -RRB- and finally one independent .
The following parties combine their parliamentary power in parliamentary groups -LRB- German : Fraktion -LRB- en -RRB- -RRB- : Independent and AL and GPB-DA and PdA -LRB- 4 -RRB- , SP -LRB- 23 -RRB- , GB and JA !
-LRB- 9 -RRB- , GFL and EVP -LRB- 10 -RRB- , GLP -LRB- 7 -RRB- , BDP and CVP -LRB- 9 -RRB- , FDP -LRB- 7 -RRB- , and SVP -LRB- 11 -RRB- .
There are 171 people who speak Romansh .
As of 2008 -LSB- update -RSB- , the population was 47.5 % male and 52.5 % female .
There were 51,531 Swiss women -LRB- 41.4 % -RRB- and 13,726 -LRB- 11.0 % -RRB- non-Swiss women .
Of the population in the municipality , 39,008 or about 30.3 % were born in Bern and lived there in 2000 .
As of 2009 -LSB- update -RSB- , the construction rate of new housing units was 1.2 new units per 1000 residents .
exchange rate from 2003 -RRB- .
The average rate for a one-room apartment was 619.82 CHF -LRB- US$ 500 , # 280 , $ 400 -RRB- , a two-room apartment was about 879.36 CHF -LRB- US$ 700 , # 400 , $ 560 -RRB- , a three-room apartment was about 1040.54 CHF -LRB- US$ 830 , # 470 , $ 670 -RRB- and a six or more room apartment cost an average of 2094.80 CHF -LRB- US$ 1680 , # 940 , $ 1340 -RRB- .
The average apartment price in Bern was 99.4 % of the national average of 1116 CHF .
Of the rest of the population , there were 1,874 members of an Orthodox church -LRB- or about 1.46 % of the population -RRB- , there were 229 persons -LRB- or about 0.18 % of the population -RRB- who belonged to the Christian Catholic Church , and there were 5,531 persons -LRB- or about 4.30 % of the population -RRB- who belonged to another Christian church .
There were 629 persons who were Buddhist , 1,430 persons who were Hindu and 177 persons who belonged to another church .
On 14 December 2014 the Haus der Religionen was inaugurated .
Thanks to 6 kilometres -LRB- 4 miles -RRB- of arcades , the old town boasts one of the longest covered shopping promenades in Europe .
Bern has several dozen cinemas .
Only a small number of screenings are dubbed in German .
The team has ranked highest in attendance for a European hockey team for more than a decade .
In the tertiary sector ; 11,396 or 10.4 % were in wholesale or retail sales or the repair of motor vehicles , 10,293 or 9.4 % were in the movement and storage of goods , 5,090 or 4.7 % were in a hotel or restaurant , 7,302 or 6.7 % were in the information industry , 8,437 or 7.7 % were the insurance or financial industry , 10,660 or 9.7 % were technical professionals or scientists , 5,338 or 4.9 % were in education and 17,903 or 16.4 % were in health care .
The municipality is a net importer of workers , with about 5.7 workers entering the municipality for every one leaving .
Following the lower secondary pupils may attend additional schooling or they may enter an apprenticeship .
Of the kindergarten pupils , 32.4 % were permanent or temporary residents of Switzerland -LRB- not citizens -RRB- and 40.2 % have a different mother language than the classroom language .
Of the primary pupils , 30.1 % were permanent or temporary residents of Switzerland -LRB- not citizens -RRB- and 35.7 % have a different mother language than the classroom language .
There were 28.7 % who were permanent or temporary residents of Switzerland -LRB- not citizens -RRB- and 32.7 % have a different mother language than the classroom language .
These libraries include ; the Schweiz .
Nationalbibliothek / Bibliothèque nationale suisse , the Universitätsbibliothek Bern , the Kornhausbibliotheken Bern , the BFH Wirtschaft und Verwaltung Bern , the BFH Gesundheit , the BFH Soziale Arbeit , the Hochschule der Künste Bern , Gestaltung und Kunst and the Hochschule der Künste Bern , Musikbibliothek .
There was a combined total -LRB- as of 2008 -LSB- update -RSB- -RRB- of 10,308,336 books or other media in the libraries , and in the same year a total of 2,627,973 items were loaned out .
Additionally Zürich Airport , Geneva Airport and EuroAirport Basel-Mulhouse-Freiburg also serve as international gateways , all reachable within two hours by car or train from Bern .
Many countries have used it at various times since then , particularly since the energy crisis of the 1970s .
The practice has received both advocacy and criticism .
The time of day that individuals begin and end work or school , and the coordination of mass transit , for example , usually remain constant year-round .
Although they did not fix their schedules to the clock in the modern sense , ancient civilizations adjusted daily schedules to the sun more flexibly than modern DST does , often dividing daylight into twelve hours regardless of day length , so that each daylight hour was longer during summer .
After ancient times , equal-length civil hours eventually supplanted unequal , so civil time no longer varies by season .
Despite common misconception , Franklin did not actually propose DST ; 18th-century Europe did not even keep precise schedules .
An avid golfer , he also disliked cutting short his round at dusk .
His solution was to advance the clock during the summer months , a proposal he published two years later .
A select committee was set up to examine the issue , but Pearce 's bill did not become law , and several other bills failed in the following years .
Willett lobbied for the proposal in the UK until his death in 1915 .
Britain , most of its allies , and many European neutrals soon followed suit .
For specific details , an overview is available at Daylight saving time by country .
A one-hour shift is customary , but Australia 's Lord Howe Island uses a half-hour shift .
Twenty-minute and two-hour shifts have been used in the past .
Coordination strategies differ when adjacent time zones shift clocks .
Start and end dates vary with location and year .
Starting in 2007 , most of the United States and Canada observe DST from the second Sunday in March to the first Sunday in November , almost two-thirds of the year .
Daylight saving has caused controversy since it began .
The fate of Willett 's 1907 proposal illustrates several political issues involved .
Willett 's allies introduced similar bills every year from 1911 through 1914 , to no avail .
After Germany led the way with starting DST -LRB- German : Sommerzeit -RRB- during World War I on 30 April 1916 together with its allies to alleviate hardships from wartime coal shortages and air raid blackouts , the political equation changed in other countries ; the United Kingdom used DST first on 21 May 1916 .
The war 's end swung the pendulum back .
Farmers continued to dislike DST , and many countries repealed it after the war .
Wilson 's successor Warren G. Harding opposed DST as a `` deception '' .
Reasoning that people should instead get up and go to work earlier in the summer , he ordered District of Columbia federal employees to start work at 08:00 rather than 09:00 during summer 1922 .
Some businesses followed suit though many others did not ; the experiment was not repeated .
In 2005 , the Sporting Goods Manufacturers Association and the National Association of Convenience Stores successfully lobbied for the 2007 extension to US DST .
DS4SEQ contested the March 2009 Queensland State election with 32 candidates and received one percent of the statewide primary vote , equating to around 2.5 % across the 32 electorates contested .
After a three-year trial , more than 55 % of Western Australians voted against DST in 2009 , with rural areas strongly opposed .
The Bill was defeated in Queensland Parliament on 15 June 2011 .
Most Muslim countries do not use DST , partially for this reason .
The country changed its clocks to Standard Time on 26 October 2014 - and intends to stay there permanently .
Since DST is applied to many varying communities , its effects may be very different depending on their culture , light levels , geography , and climate ; that is why it is hard to make generalized conclusions about the absolute effects of the practice .
Although energy conservation remains an important goal , energy usage patterns have greatly changed since then , and recent research is limited and reports contradictory results .
Dairy farmers are another group who complain of the change .
Today some farmers ' groups are in favor of DST .
Changing clocks and DST rules has a direct economic cost , entailing extra work to support remote meetings , computer applications and the like .
The results have been disputed , and the original authors have refuted the points raised by disputers .
Others have found similar reductions .
It is not clear whether sleep disruption contributes to fatal accidents immediately after the spring clock shifts .
A correlation between clock shifts and traffic accidents has been observed in North America and the UK but not in Finland or Sweden .
If this effect exists , it is far smaller than the overall reduction in traffic fatalities .
Outdoor lighting has a marginal and sometimes even contradictory influence on crime and fear of crime .
DST has mixed effects on health .
Clock shifts were found to increase the risk of heart attack by 10 percent , and to disrupt sleep and reduce its efficiency .
A 2008 study found that although male suicide rates rise in the weeks after the spring transition , the relationship weakened greatly after adjusting for season .
Officials at the time talked about an annual increase in suicides .
DST 's clock shifts have the obvious disadvantage of complexity .
The length of the calendar day becomes variable ; it is no longer always 24 hours .
Disruption to meetings , travel , broadcasts , billing systems , and records management is common , and can be expensive .
Medical devices may generate adverse events that could harm patients , without being obvious to clinicians responsible for care .
Consumers must update devices such as programmable thermostats with the correct DST rules , or manually adjust the devices ' clocks .
This is because the older form is still very common in print and preferred by many editors .
-LRB- `` Although daylight saving time is considered correct , daylight savings time -LRB- with an `` s '' -RRB- is commonly used . '' -RRB-
The first two words are sometimes hyphenated -LRB- daylight-saving -LSB- s -RSB- time -RRB- .
However , even if UTC is used internally , the systems still require information on time zones to correctly calculate local time where it is needed .
In many of those systems there is also a system-wide setting that is applied if the TZ environment variable is n't set : this setting is controlled by the contents of the / etc/localtime file , which is usually a symbolic link or hard link to one of the zoneinfo files .
Procedures for specifying the name and updating the table vary with release .
Updates are not issued for older versions of Microsoft Windows .
Older Microsoft Windows systems usually store only a single start and end rule for each zone , so that the same Canadian setting reliably supports only post-2006 time stamps .
These limitations have caused problems .
For example , before 2005 , DST in Israel varied each year and was skipped some years .
Partial workarounds , which mishandled older time stamps , included manually switching zone files every year and a Microsoft tool that switches zones automatically .
If the time adjustment is changed , the timestamps of the original file and the copy will be different .
The same effect can be observed when compressing and uncompressing files with some file archivers .
It is the NTFS file that changes seen time .
This effect should be kept in mind when trying to determine if a file is a duplicate of another , although there are other methods of comparing files for equality -LRB- such as using a checksum algorithm -RRB- .
Advocates cite the same advantages as normal DST without the problems associated with the twice yearly time shifts .
The RIBA Guide to its Archive and History -LRB- Angela Mace ,1986 -RRB- records that the first official version of this badge was used as a bookplate for the Institute 's library and publications from 1835 to 1891 , when it was redesigned by J.H.Metcalfe .
The RIBA Guide to its Archive and History -LRB- 1986 -RRB- has a section on the `` Statutory registration of architects '' with a bibliography extending from a draft bill of 1887 to one of 1969 .
The content of the acts , particularly section 1 -LRB- 1 -RRB- of the amending act of 1938 , shows the importance which was then attached to giving architects the responsibility of superintending or supervising the building works of local authorities -LRB- for housing and other projects -RRB- , rather than persons professionally qualified only as municipal or other engineers .
This led to proposals for reconstituting ARCUK .
Eventually , in the 1990s , before proceeding , the government issued a consultation paper `` Reform of Architects Registration '' -LRB- 1994 -RRB- .
It has a large architectural bookshop , a café , restaurant and lecture theatres .
RIBA Bookshops , which operates online and at 66 Portland Place , is also part of RIBA Enterprises .
Its collections include :
The library is funded entirely by the RIBA but it is open to the public without charge .
Under the Partnership new study rooms were opened where members of the public could view items from the RIBA and V&A architectural collections under the supervision of curatorial staff .
These and the nearby education room were designed by Wright & Wright Architects .
The RIBA European Award was inaugurated in 2005 for work in the European Union , outside the UK .
The RIBA National Award and the RIBA International Award were established in 2007 .
Since 1966 , the RIBA also judges regional awards which are presented locally in the UK regions -LRB- East , East Midlands , London , North East , North West , Northern Ireland , Scotland , South/South East , South West/Wessex , Wales , West Midlands and Yorkshire -RRB- .
NARA is officially responsible for maintaining and publishing the legally authentic and authoritative copies of acts of Congress , presidential proclamations and executive orders , and federal regulations .
The NARA also transmits votes of the Electoral College to Congress .
The Archivist not only maintains the official documentation of the passage of amendments to the U.S. Constitution by state legislatures , but has the authority to declare when the constitutional threshold for passage has been reached , and therefore when an act has become an amendment .
It also administers the Electoral College .
Originally , each branch and agency of the U.S. government was responsible for maintaining its own documents , which often resulted in records loss and destruction .
An audit indicated that more than one third withdrawn since 1999 did not contain sensitive information .
However , records from other sources may still be protected by copyright or donor agreements .
Many of NARA 's most requested records are frequently used for genealogy research .
It holds the original copies of the three main formative documents of the United States and its government : the Declaration of Independence , the Constitution , and the Bill of Rights .
It also hosts a copy of the 1297 Magna Carta confirmed by Edward I .
The National Archives Building also exhibits other important American historical documents such as the Louisiana Purchase Treaty , the Emancipation Proclamation , and collections of photography and other historically and culturally significant American artifacts .
Largely because of this proximity , NARA and the University of Maryland engage in cooperative initiatives .
The College Park campus includes an archaeological site that was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1996 .
Federal government agencies pay a yearly fee for storage at the facility .
The Presidential Libraries include :
During the announcement , Weinstein noted that the agreement would '' ... reap major benefits for the public-at-large and for the National Archives . ''
Adding , `` While the public can come to our College Park , MD research room to view films and even copy them at no charge , this new program will make our holdings much more accessible to millions of people who can not travel to the Washington , DC area . ''
The agreement also calls for CreateSpace partnership to provide the National Archives with digital reference and preservation copies of the films as part of NARA 's preservation program .
The website features 3,000 documents , images , and recordings from the holdings of the Archives .
The site also features lesson plans and tools for creating new classroom activities and lessons .
He named the main island after himself , Ilha de Tristão da Cunha , which was anglicised from its earliest mention on British Admiralty charts to Tristan da Cunha Island .
The first undisputed landing was made in 1643 by the crew of the Heemstede , captained by Claes Gerritsz Bierenbroodspot .
After being joined by an Andrew Millet , three of the four men died in 1812 ; however , the survivor among the original three permanent settlers , Thomas Currie -LRB- or Tommaso Corri -RRB- remained as a farmer on the island .
This is reported to have primarily been a measure to ensure that the French would be unable to use the islands as a base for a rescue operation to free Napoleon Bonaparte from his prison on Saint Helena .
The occupation also prevented the United States from using Tristan da Cunha as a cruiser base , as it had during the War of 1812 .
The islands were occupied by a garrison of British Marines and a civilian population was gradually built up .
Whalers also set up on the islands as a base for operations in the Southern Atlantic .
Prior to roughly this period , passing ships stopped irregularly at the island for a period of mere hours .
This outbreak was compounded by Tristan 's lack of suitable and sufficient medical supplies .
This fire was devastating to the island because fishing is a mainstay of the economy .
This event made the island , its inhabitants and lifestyle known worldwide thanks to the media reports .
Robinson and his wife Sara bestowed the 40-acre -LRB- 16 ha -RRB- site to the State of Kansas in exchange for land elsewhere .
On November 2 , 1863 , Governor Carney announced that Lawrence had met the conditions to get the state university , and the following year the university was officially organized .
Work on the first college building began later that year .
The Bachelor of Architecture degree was added in 1920 .
In 2008 , the Fiske Guide to Colleges praised the KU J-School for its strength .
Programs available at the Edwards Campus include developmental psychology , public administration , social work , systems analysis , information technology , engineering management and design .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
For transfer students , who do not take part in the compact , 2014 -- 15 per-credit-hour tuition was $ 295 for in-state undergraduates and $ 785 for out-of-state undergraduates ; subject to annual increases .
Students enrolled in 6 or more credit hours also paid an annual required campus fee of $ 888 .
They participate in the NCAA 's Division I and in the Big 12 Conference .
Their most recent championship came on June 8 , 2013 when the KU women 's track and field team won the NCAA outdoor in Eugene , Oregon becoming the first University of Kansas women 's team to win a national title .
This capstone victory marked the end of the most successful season in school history , in which the Jayhawks went 12 -- 1 -LRB- .923 -RRB- .
The basketball program is currently the second winningest program in college basketball history with an overall record of 2,070 -- 806 through the 2011 -- 12 season .
The team plays at Allen Fieldhouse .
Kansas has counted among its coaches Dr. James Naismith -LRB- the inventor of basketball and only coach in Kansas history to have a losing record -RRB- , Basketball Hall of Fame inductee Phog Allen -LRB- `` the Father of basketball coaching '' -RRB- , Basketball Hall of Fame inductee Roy Williams of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , and Basketball Hall of Fame inductee and former NBA Champion Detroit Pistons coach Larry Brown .
In addition , legendary University of Kentucky coach and Basketball Hall of Fame inductee Adolph Rupp played for KU 's 1922 and 1923 Helms National Championship teams , and NCAA Hall of Fame inductee and University of North Carolina Coach Dean Smith played for KU 's 1952 NCAA Championship team .
Both Rupp and Smith played under Phog Allen .
Allen also coached Hall of Fame coaches Dutch Lonborg and Ralph Miller .
Allen founded the National Association of Basketball Coaches -LRB- NABC -RRB- , which started what is now the NCAA Tournament .
The additional funds brought improvements to the university , including :
They have received student funding for operations in 2008 -- 09 .
The KU Department of English publishes the Coal City Review , an annual literary journal of prose , poetry , reviews and illustrations .
Kansas Public Radio station KANU was one of the first public radio stations in the nation .
The KU Bookstore is the official bookstore of KU .
The Corporation also includes KU Dining Services , with more than 20 campus locations , including The Market -LRB- inside the Kansas Union -RRB- and The Underground -LRB- located in Wescoe Hall -RRB- .
For instance , some political funding practices that are legal in one place may be illegal in another .
It violates a basic principle of republicanism regarding the centrality of civic virtue .
Evidence from fragile states also shows that corruption and bribery can adversely impact trust in institutions .
Officials may increase the technical complexity of public sector projects to conceal or pave the way for such dealings , thus further distorting investment .
In Nigeria , for example , more than $ 400 billion was stolen from the treasury by Nigeria 's leaders between 1960 and 1999 .
-LRB- The results , expressed in retarded or suppressed development , have been modeled in theory by economist Mancur Olson . -RRB-
This encouraged officials to stash their wealth abroad , out of reach of any future expropriation .
In contrast , Asian administrations such as Suharto 's New Order often took a cut on business transactions or provided conditions for development , through infrastructure investment , law and order , etc. .
Ultimately , there is a sufficient amount of money for health in developing countries , but local corruption denies the wider citizenry the resource they require .
Officials often steal state property .
In Bihar , India , more than 80 % of the subsidized food aid to poor is stolen by corrupt officials .
Similarly , food aid is often robbed at gunpoint by governments , criminals , and warlords alike , and sold for a profit .
The 20th century is full of many examples of governments undermining the food security of their own nations -- sometimes intentionally .
Corruption is not specific to poor , developing , or transition countries .
In western countries , cases of bribery and other forms of corruption in all possible fields exist : under-the-table payments made to reputed surgeons by patients attempting to be on top of the list of forthcoming surgeries , bribes paid by suppliers to the automotive industry in order to sell low-quality connectors used for instance in safety equipment such as airbags , bribes paid by suppliers to manufacturers of defibrillators -LRB- to sell low-quality capacitors -RRB- , contributions paid by wealthy parents to the `` social and culture fund '' of a prestigious university in exchange for it to accept their children , bribes paid to obtain diplomas , financial and other advantages granted to unionists by members of the executive board of a car manufacturer in exchange for employer-friendly positions and votes , etc. .
Examples are endless .
Either may initiate the corrupt offering ; for example , a customs official may demand bribes to let through allowed -LRB- or disallowed -RRB- goods , or a smuggler might offer bribes to gain passage .
Bribes may be demanded in order for an official to do something he is already paid to do .
They may also be demanded in order to bypass laws and regulations .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- In some developing nations , up to half of the population has paid bribes during the past 12 months .
In recent years , -LSB- when ? -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
This dissociation aims to make the early steps -LRB- offering , promising , requesting an advantage -RRB- of a corrupt deal already an offence and , thus , to give a clear signal -LRB- from a criminal-policy point-of-view -RRB- that bribery is not acceptable .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Furthermore , such a dissociation makes the prosecution of bribery offences easier since it can be very difficult to prove that two parties -LRB- the bribe-giver and the bribe-taker -RRB- have formally agreed upon a corrupt deal .
It can be difficult to make a distinction between this form of corruption and some forms of extreme and loosely regulated lobbying where for instance law - or decision-makers can freely `` sell '' their vote , decision power or influence to those lobbyists who offer the highest compensation , including where for instance the latter act on behalf of powerful clients such as industrial groups who want to avoid the passing of specific environmental , social , or other regulations perceived as too stringent , etc. .
This may be legitimate , as when a newly elected government changes the top officials in the administration in order to effectively implement its policy .
It can be seen as corruption if this means that incompetent persons , as a payment for supporting the regime , are selected before more able ones .
In nondemocracies many government officials are often selected for loyalty rather than ability .
They may be almost exclusively selected from a particular group -LRB- for example , Sunni Arabs in Saddam Hussein 's Iraq , the nomenklatura in the Soviet Union , or the Junkers in Imperial Germany -RRB- that support the regime in return for such favors .
This may be combined with bribery , for example demanding that a business should employ a relative of an official controlling regulations affecting the business .
The most extreme example is when the entire state is inherited , as in North Korea or Syria .
A lesser form might be in the Southern United States with Good ol' boys , where women and minorities are excluded .
Acts of fraud affect vote counts to bring about an election result , whether by increasing the vote share of the favored candidate , depressing the vote share of the rival candidates , or both .
For example , suppose that a politician is in charge of choosing how to spend some public funds .
In this case , the company benefits , and in exchange for betraying the public , the official receives a kickback payment , which is a portion of the sum the company received .
This sum itself may be all or a portion of the difference between the actual -LRB- inflated -RRB- payment to the company and the -LRB- lower -RRB- market-based price that would have been paid had the bidding been competitive .
An early use of the term was by former US President Theodore `` Teddy '' Roosevelt :
The relationship kept the flow of profits from the gang 's gambling dens , prostitution , and protection rackets undisturbed .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Later the U.S. invaded Panama and captured Noriega .
Thomas Jefferson observed a tendency for `` The functionaries of every government ... to command at will the liberty and property of their constituents .
Where the press is free , and every man able to read , all is safe . ''
Recent research supports Jefferson 's claim .
They also presented `` evidence which suggests that the direction of causation runs from higher press freedom to lower corruption . ''
... Congressmen who are less covered by the local press work less for their constituencies : they are less likely to stand witness before congressional hearings ... .
Federal spending is lower in areas where there is less press coverage of the local members of congress . ''
This work is often credited with breaking a taboo and forcing the issue of corruption into high level development policy discourse .
The Corruption Perceptions Index is the best known of these metrics , though it has drawn much criticism and may be declining in influence .
This index evaluates the risk of corruption in countries ' military sector .
While the definition itself is fairly precise , the data aggregated into the Worldwide Governance Indicators is based on any available polling : questions range from `` is corruption a serious problem ? ''
to measures of public access to information , and not consistent across countries .
A number of parties have collected survey data , from the public and from experts , to try and gauge the level of corruption and bribery , as well as its impact on political and economic outcomes .
A second wave of corruption metrics has been created by Global Integrity , the International Budget Partnership , and many lesser known local groups .
These second wave projects aim to create policy change by identifying resources more effectively and creating checklists toward incremental reform .
These approaches compliment the first wave , awareness-raising tools by giving governments facing public outcry a checklist which measures concrete steps toward improved governance .
Opponents of privatization see the argument as ideological .
Therefore , due to their lack of corruption in the first place , they can run large public sectors without inducing political corruption .
Recent evidence that takes both the size of expenditures and regulatory complexity into account has found that high-income democracies with more expansive state sectors do indeed have higher levels of corruption .
Privatizations in Russia , Latin America , and East Germany were accompanied by large-scale corruption during the sale of the state owned companies .
A corrupt dictatorship typically results in many years of general hardship and suffering for the vast majority of citizens as civil society and the rule of law disintegrate .
He is reputed to have stolen some US$ 3 -- 4 billion .
He and his relatives are often mentioned in Nigerian 419 letter scams claiming to offer vast fortunes for `` help '' in laundering his stolen `` fortunes '' , which in reality turn out not to exist .
More than $ 400 billion was stolen from the treasury by Nigeria 's leaders between 1960 and 1999 .
The proper national wealth distribution including the government spending on the judiciary is subject of the constitutional economics .
Judicial corruption can be difficult to completely eradicate , even in developed countries .
According to this definition , any variety of a language constitutes `` a dialect '' , including any standard varieties .
In this sense , unlike in the first usage , the standard language would not itself be considered a `` dialect , '' as it is the dominant language in a particular state or region , whether in terms of social or political status , official status , predominance or prevalence , or all of the above .
These various Latin-derived regional languages are therefore , in a linguistic sense , not truly `` dialects '' of the standard Italian language , but are instead better defined as their own separate languages .
Conversely , with the spread of standard Italian throughout Italy in the 20th century , various regional versions or varieties of standard Italian developed , generally as a mix of the national standard Italian with local regional languages and local accents .
There may be multiple standard dialects associated with a single language .
There is no universally accepted criterion for distinguishing two different languages from two dialects -LRB- i.e. varieties -RRB- of the same language .
A number of rough measures exist , sometimes leading to contradictory results .
The distinction is therefore subjective and depends on the user 's frame of reference .
For example , there is discussion about if the Limón Creole English must be considered as `` a kind '' of English or a different language .
The position that Costa Rican linguists support depends on the University they belong .
In this case the criterion of mutual intelligibility makes it impossible to decide whether A and C are dialects of the same language or not .
Cases may also arise in which a speaker of dialect X can understand a speaker of dialect Y , but not vice versa ; the mutual intelligibility criterion flounders here as well .
According to this definition , two varieties are considered dialects of the same language if -LRB- under at least some circumstances -RRB- they would defer to the same authority regarding some questions about their language .
According to that interpretation , the criteria above merely serve to distinguish whether two varieties are dialects of the same language or dialects of different languages .
The significance of the political factors in any attempt at answering the question `` what is a language ? ''
is great enough to cast doubt on whether any strictly linguistic definition , without a socio-cultural approach , is possible .
This is illustrated by the frequency with which the army-navy aphorism is cited .
The German dialects show a wide spectrum of variation .
Most of them are not mutually intelligible .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Some Swiss German speakers perceive standard German to be a foreign language .
The Low German varieties spoken in Germany are often counted among the German dialects .
Italy is home to a vast array of native regional minority languages , most of which are Romance-based and have their own local variants .
They are therefore better classified as individual languages rather than `` dialects . ''
Though mostly mutually unintelligible , the exact degree to which the regional Italian languages are mutual unintelligible varies , often correlating with geographical distance or geographical barriers between the languages , with some regional Italian languages that are closer in geographical proximity to each other or closer to each other on the dialect continuum being more or less mutually intelligible .
A regional Italian dialect is generally standard Italian that has been heavily influenced or mixed with local or regional native languages and accents .
This wide category includes :
The classification of speech varieties as dialects or languages and their relationship to other varieties of speech can be controversial and the verdicts inconsistent .
English and Serbo-Croatian illustrate the point .
-LRB- The Serbo-Croatian language article deals with this topic much more fully . -RRB-
Similar examples abound .
All Lebanese laws are written in the standard literary form of Arabic , though parliamentary debate may be conducted in Lebanese Arabic .
Although , especially since the 1960s , the Darijas are occupying an increasing use and influence in the cultural life of these countries .
Examples of cultural elements where Darijas ' use became dominant include : theatre , film , music , television , advertisement , social media , folk-tale books and companies ' names .
However , the dialects in Ukraine eventually differed substantially from the dialects in Russia .
There have been cases of a variety of speech being deliberately reclassified to serve political purposes .
One example is Moldovan .
Although the written characters remained relatively consistent for the last two thousand years , the pronunciation and grammar in different regions has developed to an extent that the varieties of the spoken language are often mutually unintelligible .
Since then , other spoken varieties are regarded as fangyan -LRB- dialects -RRB- .
Cantonese is still the most commonly used language in Hong Kong , Macau and among some overseas Chinese communities , whereas Southern Min has been accepted in Taiwan as an important local language along with Mandarin .
Many historical linguists view any speech form as a dialect of the older medium of communication from which it developed .
This paradigm is not entirely problem-free .
It sees genetic relationships as paramount : the `` dialects '' of a `` language '' -LRB- which itself may be a `` dialect '' of a yet older language -RRB- may or may not be mutually intelligible .
Moreover , a parent language may spawn several `` dialects '' which themselves subdivide any number of times , with some `` branches '' of the tree changing more rapidly than others .
This can give rise to the situation in which two dialects -LRB- defined according to this paradigm -RRB- with a somewhat distant genetic relationship are mutually more readily comprehensible than more closely related dialects .
In fact , Italian and French share many more root words in common that do not even appear in Spanish .
Spanish only retains `` haber '' and has done away with `` ser '' in forming compound tenses .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
developed a theory that the modern Western languages were actually dialects of a hidden or latent language .
In theory , speakers of the Western languages would understand written or spoken Interlingua immediately , without prior study , since their own languages were its dialects .
This has often turned out to be true , especially , but not solely , for speakers of the Romance languages and educated speakers of English .
Interlingua has also been found to assist in the learning of other languages .
It should be noted , however , that the vocabulary of Interlingua extends beyond the Western language families .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The key characteristic of classical music that distinguishes it from popular music and folk music is that the repertoire tends to be written down in musical notation , creating a musical part or score .
Musical notation enables 2000s-era performers to sing a choral work from the 1300s Renaissance era or a 1700s Baroque concerto with many of the features of the music -LRB- the melodies , lyrics , forms , and rhythms -RRB- being reproduced .
Even if the tempo is written with an Italian instruction -LRB- e.g. , Allegro -RRB- , we do not know exactly how fast the piece should be played .
During the Classical era , some virtuoso soloists would improvise the cadenza sections of a concerto .
During the Romantic era , Beethoven would improvise at the piano .
For more information , see Improvisation .
They consist of the instruments found in an orchestra or in a concert band , together with several other solo instruments -LRB- such as the piano , harpsichord , and organ -RRB- .
The concert band consists of members of the woodwind , brass , and percussion families .
However , many concert bands use a double bass .
Many of the instruments used to perform medieval music still exist , but in different forms .
Woodwinds included the Baroque flute , Baroque oboe , rackett , recorder and the bassoon .
Keyboard instruments included the clavichord , tangent piano , the fortepiano -LRB- an early version of the piano -RRB- , the harpsichord and the pipe organ .
This section is about the more specific meaning .
Keyboard instruments included the clavichord and the fortepiano .
The exceptions to this are his Symphony No. 4 , Violin Concerto , and Piano Concerto No. 4 , which each specify a single flute .
The composer 's instrumentation usually included paired flutes , oboes , clarinets , bassoons , horns and trumpets .
The third horn in the `` Eroica '' Symphony arrives to provide not only some harmonic flexibility , but also the effect of `` choral '' brass in the Trio .
The Ninth asks for a second pair of horns , for reasons similar to the `` Eroica '' -LRB- four horns has since become standard -RRB- ; Beethoven 's use of piccolo , contrabassoon , trombones , and untuned percussion -- plus chorus and vocal soloists -- in his finale , are his earliest suggestion that the timbral boundaries of symphony should be expanded .
This training may be from private lessons from instrument or voice teachers or from completion of a formal program offered by a Conservatory , college or university , such as a B.mus .
or M.mus .
Moreover , formal training is not unique to the classical genre .
In April 1996 , the orchestra 's press secretary wrote that `` compensating for the expected leaves of absence '' of maternity leave would be a problem .
In 2012 , women still made up just 6 % of the orchestra 's membership .
VPO president Clemens Hellsberg said the VPO now uses completely screened blind auditions .
The 20th century calendar period -LRB- 1901 -- 2000 -RRB- includes most of the early modern musical era -LRB- 1890 -- 1930 -RRB- , the entire high modern -LRB- mid 20th-century -RRB- , and the first 25 years of the contemporary or postmodern musical era -LRB- 1975 -- current -RRB- .
Ancient Greek instruments such as the aulos -LRB- a reed instrument -RRB- and the lyre -LRB- a stringed instrument similar to a small harp -RRB- eventually led to the modern-day instruments of a classical orchestra .
The antecedent to the early period was the era of ancient music before the fall of the Roman Empire -LRB- 476 AD -RRB- .
Very little music survives from this time , most of it from ancient Greece .
It was characterized by greater use of instrumentation , multiple interweaving melodic lines , and the use of the first bass instruments .
Later in the period , early versions of keyboard instruments like the clavichord and harpsichord began to appear .
Instrumental ensembles began to distinguish and standardize by size , giving rise to the early orchestra for larger ensembles , with chamber music being written for smaller groups of instruments where parts are played by individual -LRB- instead of massed -RRB- instruments .
The concerto as a vehicle for solo performance accompanied by an orchestra became widespread , although the relationship between soloist and orchestra was relatively simple .
Opera continued to develop , with regional styles in Italy , France , and German-speaking lands .
The symphony came into its own as a musical form , and the concerto was developed as a vehicle for displays of virtuoso playing skill .
Orchestras no longer required a harpsichord -LRB- which had been part of the traditional continuo in the Baroque style -RRB- , and were often led by the lead violinist -LRB- now called the concertmaster -RRB- .
Some musicians and composers were the stars of the day ; some , like Franz Liszt and Niccolò Paganini , fulfilled both roles .
The family of instruments used , especially in orchestras , grew .
A few authorities have claimed high-modernism as the beginning of postmodern music from about 1930 .
Citron `` examines the practices and attitudes that have led to the exclusion of women composers from the received ` canon ' of performed musical works . ''
Abbey Philips states that '' -LSB- d -RSB- uring the 20th century the women who were composing/playing gained far less attention than their male counterparts . ''
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- While there are differences between particular performances of a classical work , a piece of classical music is generally held to transcend any interpretation of it .
The research further indicated that students who listened to the music prior to an examination also had positively elevated achievement scores .
This study is reflective of several recent studies -LRB- i.e. Mike Manthei and Steve N. Kelly of the University of Nebraska at Omaha ; Donald A. Hodges and Debra S. O'Connell of the University of North Carolina at Greensboro ; etc. -RRB- and others who had significant results through the discourse of their work .
This popularized version of the theory was expressed succinctly by the New York Times music columnist Alex Ross : `` researchers ... have determined that listening to Mozart actually makes you smarter . ''
Promoters marketed CDs claimed to induce the effect .
One of the co-authors of the original studies of the Mozart effect commented `` I do n't think it can hurt .
I 'm all for exposing children to wonderful cultural experiences .
But I do think the money could be better spent on music education programs . ''
.
Previously , improvisation -LRB- in preludes , cadenzas and ornaments -RRB- , rhythmic flexibility -LRB- e.g. , tempo rubato -RRB- , improvisatory deviation from the score and oral tradition of playing was integral to the style .
Instead , musicians tend to use just the score to play music .
Traditionally this was improvised by the performer ; however , it is often written for -LRB- or occasionally by -RRB- the performer beforehand .
Generally however , it is the composers who are remembered more than the performers .
The primacy of the composer 's written score has also led , today , to a relatively minor role played by improvisation in classical music , in sharp contrast to the practice of musicians who lived during the baroque , classical and romantic era .
Slavs speak Indo-European Slavic languages and share , to varying degrees , some cultural traits and historical backgrounds .
For a more comprehensive list , see the ethnocultural subdivisions .
Modern Slavic nations and ethnic groups are considerably diverse both genetically and culturally , and relations between them -- even within the individual ethnic groups themselves -- are varied , ranging from a sense of connection to mutual feelings of hostility .
Other early Slavic attestations include Old East Slavic Словѣнѣ Slověně for `` an East Slavic group near Novgorod . ''
However , the earliest written references to the Slavs under this name are in other languages .
However , the origin of this word is disputed .
Alternative proposals for the etymology of * Slověninъ propounded by some scholars have much less support .
The name may refer both to Balts and Slavs .
-LSB- page needed -RSB- The Byzantine records note that grass would not regrow in places where the Slavs had marched through , so great were their numbers .
This southern movement has traditionally been seen as an invasive expansion .
Very old also are the Principality of Nitra and the Moravian principality -LRB- see under Great Moravia -RRB- .
In this period , there existed central Slavic groups and states such as the Balaton Principality , but the subsequent expansion of the Magyars , as well as the Germanisation of Austria , separated the northern and southern Slavs .
In the entire Austro-Hungarian Empire of approximately 50 million people , about 23 million were Slavs .
The Slavic peoples who were , for the most part , denied a voice in the affairs of the Austro-Hungarian Empire , were calling for national self-determination .
During World War I , representatives of the Czechs , Slovaks , Poles , Serbs , Croats , and Slovenes set up organizations in the Allied countries to gain sympathy and recognition .
Because of the vastness and diversity of the territory occupied by Slavic people , there were several centers of Slavic consolidation .
The common Slavic experience of communism combined with the repeated usage of the ideology by Soviet propaganda after World War II within the Eastern bloc -LRB- Warsaw Pact -RRB- was a forced high-level political and economic hegemony of the USSR dominated by Russians .
Slavic standard languages which are official in at least one country : Belarusian , Bosnian , Bulgarian , Croatian , Czech , Macedonian , Montenegrin , Polish , Russian , Serbian , Slovak , Slovene , and Ukrainian .
Few Greek Roman and Roman Catholics use the Cyrillic alphabet however .
The Serbian language and Montenegrin language uses both Cyrillic and Latin alphabets .
That language was uniform , and on the basis of borrowings from foreign languages and Slavic borrowings into other languages , can not be said to have any recognizable dialects , suggesting a comparatively compact homeland .
There are minor Slavic Muslim groups .
Religious delineations by nationality can be very sharp ; usually in the Slavic ethnic groups the vast majority of religious people share the same religion .
Some Slavs are atheist or agnostic : only 19 % of Czechs professed belief in god/s in the 2005 Eurobarometer survey .
^ 5 Also considered Poles .
Parts of the southmost population of Upper Silesia is sometimes considered Czech -LRB- controversial -RRB- .
^ 7 A census category recognized as an ethnic group .
There are a multitude of reasons as to why people prefer this affiliation , some published on the article .
Note : Besides ethnic groups , Slavs often identify themselves with the local geographical region in which they live .
The modern Slavic peoples carry a variety of mitochondrial DNA haplogroups and Y-chromosome DNA haplogroups .
The correlation between R1a1a -LSB- M17 -RSB- and the speakers of Indo-European languages , particularly those of Eastern Europe -LRB- Russian -RRB- and Central and Southern Asia , was noticed in the late 1990s .
From this Spencer Wells and colleagues , following the Kurgan hypothesis , deduced that R1a1a arose on the Pontic-Caspian steppe .
Specific studies of Slavic genetics followed .
The significant findings of this study are that :
Working with haplotypes , they found a pattern among Western Slavs which turned out to correspond to a newly discovered marker , M458 , which defines subclade R1a1a7 .
This marker correlates remarkably well with the distribution of Slavic-speakers today .
Woźniak and colleagues pointed out that the pedigree mutation rate , giving a later date , is more consistent with the archaeological record .
There is also a high concentration of I2a2a in the Moldavian region of Romania , Moldova and western Ukraine .
He proposes that N is slightly older than S .
He recalculated the age of I2a2 to be ~ 2550 years and proposed that the current distribution is explained by a Slavic expansion from the area north-east of the Carpathians .
Malyarchuk added that `` Slavic populations '' `` almost always '' contain Mongoloid mtDNA lineage .
Malyarchuk said the Mongoloid component of Slavic people was partially added before the split of `` Balto-Slavics '' in 2,000 -- 3,000 BC with additional Mongoloid mixture occurring among Slavics in the last 4,000 years .
Malyarchuk said the `` Russian population '' was developed by the `` assimilation of the indigenous pre-Slavic population of Eastern Europe by true Slavs '' with additional `` assimilation of Finno-Ugric populations '' and `` long-lasting '' interactions with the populations of `` Siberia '' and `` Central Asia '' .
An analysis of the DNA did not reveal any specific combinations of unique mtDNA haplotypes and their subclusters .
The DNA clearly shows that both Poles and Russians are not different from the neighbouring European populations .
Throughout their history , Slavs came into contact with non-Slavic groups .
Over time , due to the larger number of Slavs , most descendants of the indigenous populations of the Balkans were Slavicized .
Exceptions are Greece , where the lesser numbered Slavs scattered there came to be Hellenized -LRB- aided in time by more Greeks returning to Greece in the 9th century and the role of the church and administration -RRB- and Romania where Slavic people settled en route for present-day Greece , Republic of Macedonia , Bulgaria and East Thrace whereby the Slavic population had come to assimilate .
Bulgars were also assimilated by local Slavs but their ruling status and subsequent land cast the nominal legacy of Bulgarian country and people onto all future generations .
The Romance speakers within the fortified Dalmatian cities managed to retain their culture and language for a long time , as Dalmatian Romance was spoken until the high Middle Ages .
However , they too were eventually assimilated into the body of Slavs .
Some Finno-Ugric tribes in the north were also absorbed into the expanding Rus population .
At the time of the Magyar migration , the present-day Hungary was inhabited by Slavs , numbering about 200,000 , and by Romano-Dacians who were either assimilated or enslaved by the Magyars .
In the 11th and 12th centuries , constant incursions by nomadic Turkic tribes , such as the Kipchaks and the Pechenegs , caused a massive migration of East Slavic populations to the safer , heavily forested regions of the north .
In the Middle Ages , groups of Saxon ore miners settled in medieval Bosnia , Serbia and Bulgaria where they were Slavicized .
In the 12th century , there was intensification of Slavic piracy in the Baltics .
The Wendish Crusade was started against the Polabian Slavs in 1147 , as a part of the Northern Crusades .
Niklot , pagan chief of the Slavic Obodrites , began his open resistance when Lothar III , Holy Roman Emperor , invaded Slavic lands .
In August 1160 Niklot was killed and German colonization -LRB- Ostsiedlung -RRB- of the Elbe-Oder region began .
In Hanoverian Wendland , Mecklenburg-Vorpommern and Lusatia invaders started germanization .
Early forms of germanization were described by German monks : Helmold in the manuscript Chronicon Slavorum and Adam of Bremen in Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum .
The Polabian language survived until the beginning of the 19th century in what is now the German state of Lower Saxony .
In Eastern Germany , around 20 % of Germans have Slavic paternal ancestry .
Similarly , in Germany , around 20 % of the foreign surnames are of Slavic origin .
Conversely , some Slavs were assimilated into other populations .
-LSB- better source needed -RSB-
Southampton is a major port and the closest city to the New Forest .
It lies at the northernmost point of Southampton Water at the confluence of the River Test and River Itchen , with the River Hamble joining to the south of the urban area .
Significant employers in Southampton include The University of Southampton , Southampton Solent University , Southampton Airport , Ordnance Survey , BBC South , the NHS , ABP and Carnival UK .
Construction by Sir Robert McAlpine commenced in January 2015 .
Clausentum was not abandoned until around 410 .
Archaeological excavations of this site have uncovered one of the best collections of Saxon artefacts in Europe .
Over the years it has been used as home to the city 's gunner , the Town Gaol and even as storage for the Southampton Harbour Board .
On the other hand , many of the medieval buildings once situated within the town walls are now in ruins or have disappeared altogether .
Elsewhere , remnants of the medieval water supply system devised by the friars can still be seen today .
The structural and economic development of docks continued for the next few decades .
The variety of style and color of material in the buildings affords an exhibition of outline , light and color , that I think is seldom equalled .
In 1912 , the RMS Titanic sailed from Southampton .
In 1938 , Southampton docks also became home to the flying boats of Imperial Airways .
The Supermarine Spitfire was designed and developed in Southampton , evolving from the Schneider trophy-winning seaplanes of the 1920s and 1930s .
World War II hit Southampton particularly hard because of its strategic importance as a major commercial port and industrial area .
Prior to the Invasion of Europe , components for a Mulberry harbour were built here .
Southampton docks was featured in the television show 24 : Live Another Day in Day 9 : 9:00 p.m. -- 10:00 p.m.
However a large portion of those walls remain .
There is a great source of confusion in the fact that the ancient shire county , along with its associated assizes , was known as the County of Southampton or Southamptonshire .
The corporation had resident representatives in Newport , Lymington and Portsmouth .
VI , m. 32 -RRB- , the mayor , bailiffs and burgesses of the towns and ports of Southampton and Portsmouth became a County incorporate and separate from Hampshire .
In this regime , The Town and County of the Town of Southampton also became a county borough with shared responsibility for aspects of local government .
Since the 2015 council elections , the composition of the council is :
The geography of Southampton is influenced by the sea and rivers .
In this area the general water flow is distorted by more local conditions reaching across to France .
The River Itchen runs through the middle of the city and is bridged in several places .
The original bridge is closed to road traffic , but is still standing and open to pedestrians and cyclists .
Further south is Cobden Bridge which is notable as it was opened as a free bridge -LRB- it was originally named the Cobden Free Bridge -RRB- , and was never a toll bridge .
Downstream of the Cobden Bridge is the Northam Railway Bridge , then the Northam Road Bridge , which was the first major pre-stressed concrete bridge to be constructed in the United Kingdom .
The southernmost , and newest , bridge on the Itchen is the Itchen Bridge , which is a toll bridge .
Southampton is divided into council wards , suburbs , constituencies , ecclesiastical parishes , and other less formal areas .
Its southerly , low lying and sheltered location ensures it is among the warmer , sunnier cities in the UK .
Southampton has always been a port , and the docks have long been a major employer in the city .
Unlike some other ports , such as Liverpool , London , and Bristol , where industry and docks have largely moved out of the city centres leaving room for redevelopment , Southampton retains much of its inner-city industry .
University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust is one of the city 's largest employers .
Closure of the plant in 2013 was announced in 2012 , with the loss of hundreds of jobs .
Southampton has also been granted a licence for a large casino .
Marlands is a smaller shopping centre , built in the 1990s and located close to the northern side of WestQuay .
Southampton currently has two disused shopping centres : the 1970s Eaststreet mall , and the 1980s Bargate centre .
Neither of these were ever commercially successful ; the former has been earmarked for redevelopment as a Morrison 's supermarket , while the future of the latter is uncertain .
There is also the East Street area which has been designated for speciality shopping , with the aim of promoting smaller retailers , alongside the chain store Debenhams .
In 2007 , Southampton was ranked 13th for shopping in the UK .
The SeaCity Museum is located in the west wing of the civic centre , formerly occupied by Hampshire Constabulary and the Magistrates ' Court , and focuses on Southampton 's trading history and on the RMS Titanic .
It was awarded The Stage Award for Best Regional Theatre in 2015 .
It also hosts touring companies and local performing societies -LRB- such as Southampton Operatic Society , the Maskers and the University Players -RRB- .
There are many innovative art galleries in the city .
, Manic Street Preachers , The Killers , The Kaiser Chiefs , Amy Winehouse , Lostprophets , The Midnight Beast , Modestep , and All Time Low .
The Joiners has played host to such acts as Oasis , Radiohead , Green Day , Suede , PJ Harvey , the Manic Street Preachers , Coldplay , the Verve , the Libertines and Franz Ferdinand , while Hampton 's and Lennon 's have hosted early appearances by Kate Nash , Scouting for Girls and Band of Skulls .
Local media include the Southern Daily Echo newspaper based in Redbridge and BBC South , which has its regional headquarters in the city centre opposite the civic centre .
Until December 2004 , the station 's studios were located in the Northam area of the city on land reclaimed from the River Itchen .
A third station , Awaaz FM -LRB- www.awaazfm.co.uk -RRB- , is an internet only radio stations also catering for Asian and Ethnic community .
The club was promoted back to the Premier League in 2012 following a brief spell in the third-tier and severe financial difficulties .
In 2015 , `` The Saints '' finished 7th in the Premier League , their highest league finish in 30 years , after a remarkable season under new manager Ronald Koeman .
Their highest league position came in 1984 when they were runners-up in the old First Division .
They were also runners-up in the 1979 Football League Cup final and 2003 FA Cup final .
Notable former managers include Ted Bates , Lawrie McMenemy , Chris Nicholl , Ian Branfoot and Gordon Strachan .
There is a strong rivalry between Portsmouth F.C. -LRB- `` South Coast derby '' -RRB- which is located only about 30 km -LRB- 19 mi -RRB- away .
Many of the sides run mini and midi teams from under sevens up to under sixteens for both boys and girls .
The results were based on the incidence of heart disease , the amount of junk food and alcohol consumed , and the level of gym membership .
A training track operated in the 1950s in the Hamble area .
Previously , the central Southampton operation was located within the west wing of the Civic Centre , however the ageing facilities and the plans of constructing a new museum in the old police station and magistrates court necessitated the move .
There are additional police stations at Portswood , Banister Park , Bitterne , and Shirley as well as a British Transport Police station at Southampton Central railway station .
Data from the Southampton Safer City Partnership shows there has been a reduction in all crimes in recent years and an increase in crime detection rates .
For example , in Hampshire all reported incidents are recorded and all records then retained .
However , in neighbouring Dorset crimes reports withdrawn or shown to be false are not recorded , reducing apparent crime figures .
In the violence against the person category , the national average is 16.7 per 1000 population while Southampton is 42.4 per 1000 population .
In the theft from a vehicle category , the national average is 7.6 per 1000 compared to Southampton 's 28.4 per 1000 .
The university is ranked in the top 100 research universities in the world in the Academic Ranking of World Universities 2010 .
The university considers itself one of the top 5 research universities in the UK .
The university has a global reputation for research into engineering sciences , oceanography , chemistry , cancer sciences , sound and vibration research , computer science and electronics , optoelectronics and textile conservation at the Textile Conservation Centre -LRB- which is due to close in October 2009 . -RRB-
Both this and its successor the Southern Railway -LRB- UK -RRB- played a significant role in the creation of the modern port following their purchase and development of the town 's docks .
Southampton used to be home to a number of ferry services to the continent , with destinations such as San Sebastian , Lisbon , Tangier and Casablanca .
Other operators include Brijan Tours , Stagecoach and Xelabus .
Free buses are provided by City-link ' .
The City-link runs from the Red Funnel ferry terminal at Town Quay to Central station via WestQuay and is operated by Bluestar .
There is also a door-to-door minibus service called Southampton Dial a Ride , for residents who can not access public transport .
This is funded by the council and operated by SCA Support Services .
There are two main termini for bus services .
This leaves the other terminal of West Quay available for other operators .
A treaty may also be known as an -LRB- international -RRB- agreement , protocol , covenant , convention , pact , or exchange of letters , among other terms .
For example , the Charter of the United Nations was `` DONE at the city of San Francisco the twenty-sixth day of June , one thousand nine hundred and forty-five . ''
Each of these treaties has seventeen parties .
These however are still bilateral , not multilateral , treaties .
The parties are divided into two groups , the Swiss -LRB- `` on the one part '' -RRB- and the EU and its member states -LRB- `` on the other part '' -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Treaties can also be amended informally by the treaty executive council when the changes are only procedural , technical change in customary international law can also amend a treaty , where state behavior evinces a new interpretation of the legal obligations under the treaty .
An example of a treaty requiring such legislation would be one mandating local prosecution by a party for particular crimes .
Hence , nations can be very careful about terming an agreement to be a treaty .
Many treaties expressly forbid withdrawal .
Consequently , withdrawal was not possible .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
An advantage of such an arbiter is that it prevents a party from prematurely and perhaps wrongfully suspending or terminating its own obligations due to another 's alleged material breach .
Other treaties may self-terminate if the treaty is meant to exist only under certain conditions .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Stillman and Watt deny the authenticity of al-Waqidi .
Al-Waqidi has been frequently criticized by Muslim writers , who claim that he is unreliable .
It seems that no treaty has ever actually been invalidated on this provision .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In the United States , the term `` treaty '' has a different , more restricted legal sense than exists in international law .
United States law distinguishes what it calls treaties from executive agreement , congressional-executive agreements , and sole executive agreements .
Some treaties grant the President the authority to fill in the gaps with executive agreements , rather than additional treaties or protocols .
120 , 16 Stat .
While his presidency has been criticized as authoritarian , and concerns about the repression of political opponents have been raised , Tito was `` seen by most as a benevolent dictator '' due to his economic and diplomatic policies .
Viewed as a unifying symbol , his internal policies maintained the peaceful coexistence of the nations of the Yugoslav federation .
From 1943 to his death in 1980 , he held the rank of Marshal of Yugoslavia , serving as the supreme commander of the Yugoslav military , the Yugoslav People 's Army -LRB- JNA -RRB- .
Drafted into military service , he distinguished himself , becoming the youngest Sergeant Major in the Austro-Hungarian Army of that time .
Tito was a backer of independent roads to socialism -LRB- sometimes referred to as `` national communism '' -RRB- .
A turn towards a model of market socialism brought economic expansion in the 1950s and 1960s and a decline during the 1970s .
His internal policies included the suppression of nationalist sentiment and the promotion of the `` brotherhood and unity '' of the six Yugoslav nations .
He remains a very controversial figure in the Balkans .
-LSB- nb 1 -RSB- He was the seventh child of Franjo and Marija Broz .
His parents were married on 21 January 1891 .
In 1907 he moved out of the rural environment and started working as a machinist 's apprentice in Sisak .
There , he became aware of the labour movement and celebrated 1 May -- Labour Day for the first time .
In 1910 , he joined the union of metallurgy workers and at the same time the Social-Democratic Party of Croatia and Slavonia .
Between 1911 and 1913 , Broz worked for shorter periods in Kamnik -LRB- 1911 -- 1912 , factory `` Titan '' -RRB- , Cenkov , Munich and Mannheim , where he worked for the Benz car factory ; then he went to Wiener Neustadt , Austria , and worked as a test driver for Daimler .
In January 1915 , he was sent to the Eastern Front in Galicia to fight against Russia .
He distinguished himself as a capable soldier , becoming the youngest Sergeant Major in the Austro-Hungarian Army .
For his bravery in the face of the enemy , he was recommended for the Silver Bravery Medal but was taken prisoner of war before it could be formally presented .
In February 1917 , revolting workers broke into the prison and freed the prisoners .
Broz subsequently joined a Bolshevik group .
In April 1917 , he was arrested again but managed to escape and participate in the July Days demonstrations in Petrograd -LRB- St. Petersburg -RRB- on 16 -- 17 July 1917 .
On his way to Finland , Broz was caught and imprisoned in the Peter and Paul Fortress for three weeks .
He was again sent to Kungur , but escaped from the train .
He hid with a Russian family in Omsk , Siberia where he met his future wife Pelagija Belousova .
After the October Revolution , he joined a Red Guard unit in Omsk .
In the spring of 1918 , he joined the Yugoslav section of the Russian Communist Party .
By June of the same year , Broz left Omsk to find work and support his family , and was employed as a mechanic near Omsk for a year .
In January 1920 , Tito and his wife made a long and difficult journey home to Yugoslavia where he arrived in September .
Upon his return , Broz joined the Communist Party of Yugoslavia .
The CPY 's influence on the political life of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia was growing rapidly .
After the assassination of Milorad Drašković , the Yugoslav Minister of the Interior , by a young communist on 2 August 1921 , the CPY was declared illegal under the Yugoslav State Security Act of 1921 .
During 1920 and 1921 all Communist-won mandates were nullified .
Broz continued his work underground despite pressure on Communists from the government .
In 1925 , Broz moved to Kraljevica where he started working at a shipyard .
He was elected as a union leader and a year later he led a shipyard strike .
He was fired and moved to Belgrade , where he worked in a train coach factory in Smederevska Palanka .
He was elected as Workers ' Commissary but was fired as soon as his CPY membership was revealed .
Broz then moved to Zagreb , where he was appointed secretary of Metal Workers ' Union of Croatia .
In 1928 , he became the Zagreb Branch Secretary of the CPY .
In the same year he was arrested , tried in court for his illegal communist activities , and sent to jail .
After his release , he lived incognito and assumed numerous noms de guerre , among them `` Walter '' and `` Tito '' .
He was appointed to the Committee and started to appoint allies to him , among them Edvard Kardelj , Milovan Đilas , Aleksandar Ranković and Boris Kidrič .
In 1935 , Tito travelled to the Soviet Union , working for a year in the Balkans section of Comintern .
He was a member of the Soviet Communist Party and the Soviet secret police -LRB- NKVD -RRB- .
Tito was also involved in recruiting for the Dimitrov Battalion , a group of volunteers serving in the Spanish Civil War .
On 10 April 1941 , Slavko Kvaternik proclaimed the Independent State of Croatia , and Tito responded by forming a Military Committee within the Central Committee of the Yugoslav Communist Party .
Attacked from all sides , the armed forces of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia quickly crumbled .
They quickly agreed to end military resistance .
On 1 July 1941 , the Comintern sent precise instructions calling for immediate action .
In liberated territories , the Partisans organised People 's Committees to act as civilian government .
The Anti-Fascist Council of National Liberation of Yugoslavia -LRB- AVNOJ -RRB- convened in Bihać on 26 -- 27 November 1942 and in Jajce on 29 November 1943 .
In the two sessions , the resistance representatives established the basis for post-war organisation of the country , deciding on a federation of the Yugoslav nations .
This resulted in Allied aid being parachuted behind Axis lines to assist the Partisans .
On 17 June 1944 on the Dalmatian island of Vis , the Treaty of Vis -LRB- Viški sporazum -RRB- was signed in an attempt to merge Tito 's government -LRB- the AVNOJ -RRB- with the government in exile of King Peter II .
After the Partisan victory and the end of hostilities in Europe , all external forces were ordered off Yugoslav territory .
This government was headed by Tito as provisional Yugoslav Prime Minister and included representatives from the royalist government-in-exile , among others Ivan Šubašić .
In accordance with the agreement between resistance leaders and the government-in-exile , post-war elections were held to determine the form of government .
In November 1945 , Tito 's pro-republican People 's Front , led by the Communist Party of Yugoslavia , won the elections with an overwhelming majority , the vote having been boycotted by monarchists .
The Yugoslav administration in the immediate post-war period managed to unite a country that had been severely affected by ultra-nationalist upheavals and war devastation , while successfully suppressing the nationalist sentiments of the various nations in favor of tolerance , and the common Yugoslav goal .
After the overwhelming electoral victory , Tito was confirmed as the Prime Minister and the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the DFY .
The country was soon renamed the Federal People 's Republic of Yugoslavia -LRB- FPRY -RRB- -LRB- later finally renamed into Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , SFRY -RRB- .
The Assembly drafted a new republican constitution soon afterwards .
Yugoslavia organized the Yugoslav People 's Army -LRB- Jugoslavenska narodna armija , or JNA -RRB- from the Partisan movement and became the fourth strongest army in Europe at the time .
The following year Stepinac was arrested and put on trial .
In October 1946 , in its first special session for 75 years , the Vatican excommunicated Tito and the Yugoslav government for sentencing Stepinac to 16 years in prison on charges of assisting Ustaše terror and of supporting forced conversions of Serbs to Catholicism .
At the conclusion of the `` Informbiro period '' , reforms rendered Yugoslavia considerably more religiously liberal than the Eastern Bloc states .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In the immediate aftermath of World War II , there occurred several armed incidents between Yugoslavia and the Western Allies .
This led to several armed incidents , notably attacks by Yugoslav fighter planes on US transport aircraft , causing bitter criticism from the west .
-LSB- better source needed -RSB- Stalin was opposed to these provocations , as he felt the USSR unready to face the West in open war so soon after the losses of World War II and at the time when US had operational nuclear weapons whereas USSR had yet to conduct its first test .
The Soviet answer on 4 May admonished Tito and the Communist Party of Yugoslavia -LRB- CPY -RRB- for failing to admit and correct its mistakes , and went on to accuse them of being too proud of their successes against the Germans , maintaining that the Red Army had saved them from destruction .
Tito 's response on 17 May suggested that the matter be settled at the meeting of the Cominform to be held that June .
On 28 June , the other member countries expelled Yugoslavia , citing `` nationalist elements '' that had `` managed in the course of the past five or six months to reach a dominant position in the leadership '' of the CPY .
The assumption in Moscow was that once it was known that he had lost Soviet approval , Tito would collapse ; ' I will shake my little finger and there will be no more Tito , ' Stalin remarked .
In a correspondence between the two leaders , Tito openly wrote :
Not every person accused of a political crime was convicted and nobody was sentenced to death for his or her pro-Soviet feelings .
Still , he did not agree to align with the West , which was a common consequence of accepting American aid at the time .
In this way , Tito played East-West antagonism to his advantage .
Instead of choosing sides , he was instrumental in kick-starting the Non-Aligned Movement , which would function as a ` third way ' for countries interested in staying outside of the East-West divide .
On 13 January 1953 , they established that the law on self-management was the basis of the entire social order in Yugoslavia .
Nikita Khrushchev and Nikolai Bulganin visited Tito in Belgrade in 1955 and apologized for wrongdoings by Stalin 's administration .
However , the relationship between the USSR and Yugoslavia would reach another low in the late 1960s .
Commenting on the crisis , Tito concluded that :
The Tito-Stalin split had large ramifications for countries outside the USSR and Yugoslavia .
This move did much to improve Yugoslavia 's diplomatic position .
His public speeches often reiterated that policy of neutrality and cooperation with all countries would be natural as long as these countries did not use their influence to pressure Yugoslavia to take sides .
Yugoslavia had a liberal travel policy permitting foreigners to freely travel through the country and its citizens to travel worldwide , whereas it was limited by most Communist countries .
A number -LSB- quantify -RSB- of Yugoslav citizens worked throughout Western Europe .
He also met numerous celebrities .
Because of its neutrality , Yugoslavia would often be rare among Communist countries to have diplomatic relations with right-wing , anti-Communist governments .
Reforms encouraged private enterprise and greatly relaxed restrictions on freedom of speech and religious expression .
In Chile , two government ministers resigned over his visit to that country .
Tito and Eisenhower discussed a range of issues from arms control to economic development .
The agreement also eased tensions , which had prevented the naming of new bishops in Yugoslavia since 1945 .
Tito 's new socialism met opposition from traditional communists culminating in conspiracy headed by Aleksandar Ranković .
His plan called for Arabs to recognize the state of Israel in exchange for territories Israel gained .
The amendments provided for a collective presidency , a 22-member body consisting of elected representatives from six republics and two autonomous provinces .
The body would have a single chairman of the presidency and chairmanship would rotate among six republics .
When the Federal Assembly fails to agree on legislation , the collective presidency would have the power to rule by decree .
Amendments also provided for stronger cabinet with considerable power to initiate and pursue legislature independently from the Communist Party .
The new amendments aimed to decentralize the country by granting greater autonomy to republics and provinces .
Control of education , healthcare , and housing would be exercised entirely by the governments of the republics and the autonomous provinces .
It was Tito 's call for unity , and related methods , that held together the people of Yugoslavia .
Tito 's visits to the United States avoided most of the Northeast due to large minorities of Yugoslav emigrants bitter about communism in Yugoslavia .
During the visit strict security was imposed in Washington , D.C. owing to protests by anti-communist Croat , Serb and Albanian groups .
His funeral drew many world statesmen .
Based on the number of attending politicians and state delegations , at the time it was the largest state funeral in history ; this concentration of dignitaries would be unmatched until the funeral of Pope John Paul II in 2005 and the memorial service of Nelson Mandela in 2013 .
Those who attended included four kings , 31 presidents , six princes , 22 prime ministers and 47 ministers of foreign affairs .
They came from both sides of the Cold War , from 128 different countries out of 154 UN members at the time .
The Government of Serbia has planned to merge it into the Museum of the History of Serbia .
At the time of his death , speculation began about whether his successors could continue to hold Yugoslavia together .
Ethnic divisions and conflict grew and eventually erupted in a series of Yugoslav wars a decade after his death .
During his life and especially in the first year after his death , several places were named after Tito .
Streets in Belgrade , the capital , have all reverted to their original pre -- World War II and pre-communist names as well .
It was subsequently repaired .
Twice in 2008 , protests took place in Zagreb 's Marshal Tito Square , organized by a group called Circle for the Square -LRB- Krug za Trg -RRB- , with an aim to force the city government to rename it to its previous name , while a counter-protest by Citizens ' Initiative Against Ustašism -LRB- Građanska inicijativa protiv ustaštva -RRB- accused the `` Circle for the Square '' of historical revisionism and neo-fascism .
In the Croatian coastal city of Opatija the main street -LRB- also its longest street -RRB- still bears the name of Marshal Tito , as do streets in numerous towns in Serbia , mostly in the country 's north .
One of the main streets in downtown Sarajevo is called Marshal Tito Street , and Tito 's statue in a park in front of the university campus -LRB- ex .
JNA barrack `` Maršal Tito '' -RRB- in Marijin Dvor is a place where Bosnians and Sarajevans still today commemorate and pay tribute to Tito -LRB- image on the right -RRB- .
One of the main bridges in Slovenia 's second largest city of Maribor is Tito Bridge -LRB- Titov most -RRB- .
The central square in Koper , the largest Slovenian port city , is as well named Tito Square .
The relay is a left-over from Yugoslav times , when young people made a similar yearly trek on foot through Yugoslavia that ended in Belgrade with a massive celebration .
The court , however , explicitly made it clear that the purpose of the review was `` not a verdict on Tito as a figure or on his concrete actions , as well as not a historical weighing of facts and circumstances '' .
Tito carried on numerous affairs and was married several times .
When Tito was jailed in 1928 , she returned to Russia .
After the divorce in 1936 she later remarried .
Broz left for Belgrade after the April War , leaving Haas pregnant .
Haas and Tito suddenly parted company in 1943 in Jajce during the second meeting of AVNOJ after she reportedly walked in on him and Davorjanka .
Davorjanka died of tuberculosis in 1946 and Tito insisted that she be buried in the backyard of the Beli Dvor , his Belgrade residence .
Their eventual marriage came about somewhat unexpectedly since Tito actually rejected her some years earlier when his confidante Ivan Krajacic brought her in originally .
At that time , she was in her early 20s and Tito , objecting to her energetic personality , opted for the more mature opera singer Zinka Kunc instead .
Not one to be discouraged easily , Jovanka continued working at Beli Dvor , where she managed the staff and eventually got another chance after Tito 's strange relationship with Zinka failed .
Their relationship was not a happy one , however .
It had gone through many , often public , ups and downs with episodes of infidelities and even allegations of preparation for a coup d'état by the latter pair .
Certain unofficial reports suggest Tito and Jovanka even formally divorced in the late 1970s , shortly before his death .
However , during Tito 's funeral she was officially present as his wife , and later claimed rights for inheritance .
The couple did not have any children .
As the President , Tito had access to extensive -LRB- state-owned -RRB- property associated with the office , and maintained a lavish lifestyle .
Close to 100 foreign heads of state were to visit Tito at the island residence , along with film stars such as Elizabeth Taylor , Richard Burton , Sophia Loren , Carlo Ponti , and Gina Lollobrigida .
While Tito was the person who held the office of president for by far the longest period , the associated property was not private and much of it continues to be in use by Yugoslav successor states , as public property , or maintained at the disposal of high-ranking officials .
With the exception of Titograd , the cities were renamed simply by the addition of the adjective `` Tito 's '' -LRB- `` Titov '' -RRB- .
The cities were :
In the years after Tito 's death up to nowadays , some people have disputed his identity .
The hypothesis that `` a non-Yugoslav , perhaps a Russian or a Pole '' assumed Tito 's identity was included .
Broz himself explains :
Of the 98 international awards and decorations , 92 were received once , and three on two occasions -LRB- Order of the White Lion , Polonia Restituta , and Karl Marx -RRB- .
The decorations were seldom displayed , however .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Geographically , the country is part of the larger island group of Micronesia .
Other expeditions by Spanish and English ships followed .
The islands were historically known by the inhabitants as `` jolet jen Anij '' -LRB- Gifts from God -RRB- .
Along with other Pacific Islands , the Marshall Islands were then consolidated into the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands governed by the US .
Marshall Islands has been a United Nations member state since 1991 .
He stood off a group of islands from which local inhabitants hurled stones at his ship .
The Spaniards went ashore and traded with the local inhabitants .
After that , ships including the San Jeronimo , Los Reyes and Todos los Santos also visited the islands in different years .
The designation was repeated later on British maps .
One year later , the American schooner Dolphin arrived and picked up two boys , the last survivors of a massacre by the natives due to their brutal treatment of the women. :2
A number of vessels visiting the islands were attacked and their crews killed .
Later that year a whaler 's boat crew were killed .
The violence was usually attributed as a response to the ill treatment of the natives in response to petty theft , which was a common practice .
They conscripted the islanders as laborers and mistreated them .
He was very interested in the islands and conducted considerable research on the Marshallese culture and language .
He published a 376-page monograph on the islands in 1914 .
It renounced all of its Pacific possessions , including the Marshall Islands .
The Administrative Centre of the Marshall Islands archipelago remained Jaluit .
Despite the Marshalls ' small area and few resources , the absorption of the territory by Japan would to some extent alleviate Japan 's problem of an increasing population with a diminishing amount of available land to house it .
The Japanese enlarged administration and appointed local leaders , which weakened the authority of local traditional leaders .
Moreover , during the 1930s , one third of all land up to the high water level was declared the property of the Japanese government .
This policy was the government strategy not only in the Marshall Islands , but on all the other mandated territories in Micronesia .
The Marshall Islands were in an important geographical position , being the easternmost point in Japan 's defensive ring at the beginning of World War II .
The battle in the Marshall Islands caused irreparable damage , especially on Japanese bases .
In 1956 , the United States Atomic Energy Commission regarded the Marshall Islands as `` by far the most contaminated place in the world . ''
Nuclear claims between the U.S. and the Marshall Islands are ongoing , and health effects from these nuclear tests linger .
This declaration activated support from US government agencies under the Republic 's `` free association '' status with the United States , which provides humanitarian and other vital support .
De Brum demanded new commitment and international leadership to stave off further climate disasters from battering his country and other similarly vulnerable countries .
-LRB- Majuro , the capital atoll , elects five senators . -RRB-
The President , who is head of state as well as head of government , is elected by the 33 senators of the Nitijela .
Legislative power lies with the Nitijela .
There are currently four political parties in the Marshall Islands : Aelon̄ Kein Ad -LRB- AKA -RRB- , United People 's Party -LRB- UPP -RRB- , Kien Eo Am -LRB- KEA -RRB- and United Democratic Party -LRB- UDP -RRB- .
The following senators are in the legislative body :
The ship was reported to be under the control of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard according to the Pentagon .
Tensions escallated in the region due to the intensifying of Saudi-led coalition attacks in Yemen .
US defense officials have said that they would review U.S. defense obligations to the Government of the Marshall Islands in the wake of recent events and also condemned the shots fired at the bridge as `` inappropriate '' .
It was reported in May 2015 that Tehran would release the ship after it paid a penalty .
The atolls and islands form two groups : the Ratak -LRB- sunrise -RRB- and the Ralik -LRB- sunset -RRB- .
Each includes 15 to 18 islands and atolls .
However , some have questioned the ability of the Marshall Islands to enforce this zone .
United States government assistance is the mainstay of the economy .
Marshallese land owners receive rent for the base .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Operating costs exceeded revenue , and the plant 's owners tried to partner with the government to prevent closure .
But government officials personally interested in an economic stake in the plant refused to help .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Coconut trees abound in the Pacific 's tropical islands .
It is estimated that 330 kW of solar and 450 kW of wind power would be required to make the College of the Marshall Islands energy self-sufficient .
Marshalls Energy Company -LRB- MEC -RRB- , a government entity , provides the islands with electricity .
In 2008 , 420 solar home systems of 200 Wp each were installed on Ailinglaplap Atoll , sufficient for limited electricity use .
Historical population figures are unknown .
This excludes many who have relocated elsewhere , primarily to the United States .
The Compact of Free Association allows them to freely relocate to the United States and obtain work there .
The outer islands are sparsely populated due to lack of employment opportunities and economic development .
Life on the outer atolls is generally traditional .
In its broadest meaning , it can also denote some non-hereditary honorary knighthoods granted today by some European monarchs .
In the past , a certain misconception sometimes led to the mistranslation of `` szlachta '' as `` gentry '' rather than `` nobility '' .
:208
:482 An exact counterpart of Szlachta society was the Meerassee system of tenure of southern India -- an aristocracy of equality -- settled as conquerors among a separate race. :484 The Polish state paralleled the Roman Empire in that full rights of citizenship were limited to the szlachta .
-LRB- Górecki 1992 , pp. 183 -- 185 -RRB- .
Inclusion in the class was almost exclusively based on inheritance .
-LRB- See gens . -RRB-
The starosta -LRB- or starszyna -RRB- had judicial and military power over the ród / clan , although this power was often exercised with an assembly of elders .
-LRB- Manteuffel 1982 , p. 44 -RRB-
Another class of knights were granted land by the prince , allowing them the economic ability to serve the prince militarily .
This rycerstwo/nobility obtained more privileges granting them favored status .
-LRB- Manteuffel 1982 , p. 149 -RRB-
They were the established local leaders and warlords .
This word to this day is used in Lithuanian language to name nobility , not only for own , but also for nobility of other countries .
This led to paradox : Polish nobility claimed own ancestry from Sarmatian tribes , but Sarmatians were considered enemies to Romans .
Thus new Roman-Sarmatian theory was created .
Strong cultural ties with Polish nobility led that in the 16th century the new term to name Lithuanian nobility appeared šlėkta -- a direct loanword from Polish szlachta .
This refusal to use word szlachta -LRB- in Lithuanian text šlėkta -RRB- complicates all naming .
The process of polonization took place over a lengthy period of time .
See for example careers of Senator Adam Kisiel and Jerzy Franciszek Kulczycki .
Compare : historical demography of Poland .
As there were not enough nobles , Vytautas trained suitable men , relieving them of labor on the land and of other duties ; for their military service to the Grand Duke , they were granted land that was worked by hired men -LRB- veldams -RRB- .
Trepka was an impoverished nobleman who lived a townsman life and collected hundreds of such stories hoping to take over any of such estates .
It does not seem he ever succeeded in proving one at the court .
Many sejms issued decrees over the centuries in an attempt to resolve this issue , but with little success .
It is unknown what percentage of the Polish nobility came from the ` lower ' orders of society , but most historians agree that nobles of such base origins formed a ` significant ' element of the szlachta .
Those privileges became the basis of the Golden Liberty in the Polish -- Lithuanian Commonwealth .
Henceforth , also , district offices -LRB- Polish : `` urzędy ziemskie '' -RRB- were reserved exclusively for local nobility , as the Privilege of Koszyce forbade the king to grant official posts and major Polish castles to foreign knights .
On May 2 , 1447 the same king issued the Wilno Privilege which gave the Lithuanian boyars the same rights as those possessed by the Polish szlachta .
-LRB- To be sure , some earlier Polish kings had been elected with help from bodies such as that which put Casimir II on the throne , thereby setting a precedent for free elections . -RRB-
It was there that the tradition of the coronation Sejm -LRB- Polish : `` Sejm koronacyjny '' -RRB- was founded .
Once again the middle nobility -LRB- middle in wealth , not in rank -RRB- attempted to reduce the power of the magnates with a law that made them impeachable before the Senate for malfeasance .
This date commonly marks the beginning of the First Rzeczpospolita , the period of a szlachta-run `` Commonwealth '' .
One of the most famous members of this movement was Jan Zamoyski .
He should also hold a major office in the Commonwealth .
Out of approx .
It was deliberately enacted in a way that would ruin the szlachta .
It was the only area where peasants paid the market price in redemption for the land -LRB- the average for the empire was 34 % above the market price -RRB- .
All land taken from Polish peasants since 1846 was to be returned without redemption payments .
90 % of the ex serfs in the empire who actually gained land after 1861 were in the 8 western provinces .
Along with Romania , Polish landless or domestic serfs were the only ones to be given land after serfdom was abolished .
All this was to punish the szlachta 's role in the uprisings of 1830 and 1863 .
In Second Polish Republic the privileges of the nobility were lawfully abolished by the March Constitution in 1921 and as such not granted by any future Polish law .
The Polish nobility differed in many respects from the nobility of other countries .
There were a number of avenues to upward social mobility and the achievement of nobility .
Also in theory , they were legal peers .
Some tenancies became hereditary and went with both privilege and titles .
They would also share arms with families adopted into the clan -LRB- these would often have their arms officially altered upon ennoblement -RRB- .
Also often noble families claimed inaccurate clan membership .
This belief system became an important part of szlachta culture and affected all aspects of their lives .
It was also manifested in oriental-style apparel -LRB- the żupan , kontusz , sukmana , pas kontuszowy , delia -RRB- ; and made the scimitar-like szabla , too , a near-obligatory item of everyday szlachta apparel .
Many families , however , soon adopted the Reformed faiths .
In the 18th century , many followers of Jacob Frank joined the ranks of Jewish-descended Polish gentry .
Virgil is traditionally ranked as one of Rome 's greatest poets .
Analysis of his name has led to beliefs that he descended from earlier Roman colonists .
Modern speculation ultimately is not supported by narrative evidence either from his own writings or his later biographers .
From Virgil 's admiring references to the neoteric writers Pollio and Cinna , it has been inferred that he was , for a time , associated with Catullus ' neoteric circle .
Virgil seems to have suffered bad health throughout his life and in some ways lived the life of an invalid .
According to the Catalepton , while in the Epicurean school of Siro the Epicurean at Naples , he began to write poetry .
A group of small works attributed to the youthful Virgil by the commentators survive collected under the title Appendix Vergiliana , but are largely considered spurious by scholars .
The biographical tradition asserts that Virgil began the hexameter Eclogues -LRB- or Bucolics -RRB- in 42 BC and it is thought that the collection was published around 39 -- 38 BC , although this is controversial .
This is now thought to be an unsupported inference from interpretations of the Eclogues .
In Eclogues 1 and 9 , Virgil indeed dramatizes the contrasting feelings caused by the brutality of the land expropriations through pastoral idiom , but offers no indisputable evidence of the supposed biographic incident .
While some readers have identified the poet himself with various characters and their vicissitudes , whether gratitude by an old rustic to a new god -LRB- Ecl .
1 -RRB- , frustrated love by a rustic singer for a distant boy -LRB- his master 's pet , Ecl .
2 -RRB- , or a master singer 's claim to have composed several eclogues -LRB- Ecl .
5 -RRB- , modern scholars largely reject such efforts to garner biographical details from works of fiction , preferring to interpret an author 's characters and themes as illustrations of contemporary life and thought .
The ten Eclogues present traditional pastoral themes with a fresh perspective .
Eclogues 1 and 9 address the land confiscations and their effects on the Italian countryside .
2 and 3 are pastoral and erotic , discussing both homosexual love -LRB- Ecl .
2 -RRB- and attraction toward people of any gender -LRB- Ecl .
3 -RRB- .
5 and 8 describe the myth of Daphnis in a song contest , 6 , the cosmic and mythological song of Silenus ; 7 , a heated poetic contest , and 10 the sufferings of the contemporary elegiac poet Cornelius Gallus .
Virgil is credited -LSB- by whom ? -RSB-
in the Eclogues with establishing Arcadia as a poetic ideal that still resonates in Western literature and visual arts and setting the stage for the development of Latin pastoral by Calpurnius Siculus , Nemesianus , and later writers .
In handling this theme , Virgil follows in the didactic -LRB- `` how to '' -RRB- tradition of the Greek poet Hesiod 's Works and Days and several works of the later Hellenistic poets .
The four books of the Georgics focus respectively on raising crops and trees -LRB- 1 and 2 -RRB- , livestock and horses -LRB- 3 -RRB- , and beekeeping and the qualities of bees -LRB- 4 -RRB- .
Well-known passages include the beloved Laus Italiae of Book 2 , the prologue description of the temple in Book 3 , and the description of the plague at the end of Book 3 .
Book 4 concludes with a long mythological narrative , in the form of an epyllion which describes vividly the discovery of beekeeping by Aristaeus and the story of Orpheus ' journey to the underworld .
The Georgics ' tone wavers between optimism and pessimism , sparking critical debate on the poet 's intentions , but the work lays the foundations for later didactic poetry .
The Aeneid 's first six books describe the journey of Aeneas from Troy to Rome .
Virgil made use of several models in the composition of his epic ; Homer , the preeminent author of classical epic , is everywhere present , but Virgil also makes special use of the Latin poet Ennius and the Hellenistic poet Apollonius of Rhodes among the various other writers to which he alludes .
Although the Aeneid casts itself firmly into the epic mode , it often seeks to expand the genre by including elements of other genres such as tragedy and aetiological poetry .
The storm drives the hero to the coast of Carthage , which historically was Rome 's deadliest foe .
At a banquet in Book 2 , Aeneas tells the story of the sack of Troy , the death of his wife , and his escape , to the enthralled Carthaginians , while in Book 3 he recounts to them his wanderings over the Mediterranean in search of a suitable new home .
Jupiter in Book 4 recalls the lingering Aeneas to his duty to found a new city , and he slips away from Carthage , leaving Dido to commit suicide , cursing Aeneas and calling down revenge in a symbolic anticipation of the fierce wars between Carthage and Rome .
Book 9 records an assault by Nisus and Euryalus on the Rutulians , Book 10 , the death of Evander 's young son Pallas , and 11 the death of the Volscian warrior princess Camilla and the decision to settle the war with a duel between Aeneas and Turnus .
The Aeneid ends in Book 12 with the taking of Latinus ' city , the death of Amata , and Aeneas ' defeat and killing of Turnus , whose pleas for mercy are spurned .
The final book ends with the image of Turnus ' soul lamenting as it flees to the underworld .
Critics of the Aeneid focus on a variety of issues .
The tone of the poem as a whole is a particular matter of debate ; some see the poem as ultimately pessimistic and politically subversive to the Augustan regime , while others view it as a celebration of the new imperial dynasty .
A strong teleology , or drive towards a climax , has been detected in the poem .
A further focus of study is the character of Aeneas .
The Aeneid appears to have been a great success .
After meeting Augustus in Athens and deciding to return home , Virgil caught a fever while visiting a town near Megara .
As a result , the text of the Aeneid that exists may contain faults which Virgil was planning to correct before publication .
However , the only obvious imperfections are a few lines of verse that are metrically unfinished -LRB- i.e. not a complete line of dactylic hexameter -RRB- .
Some scholars have argued that Virgil deliberately left these metrically incomplete lines for dramatic effect .
Other alleged imperfections are subject to scholarly debate .
The works of Virgil almost from the moment of their publication revolutionized Latin poetry .
The Eclogues , Georgics , and above all the Aeneid became standard texts in school curricula with which all educated Romans were familiar .
Poets following Virgil often refer intertextually to his works to generate meaning in their own poetry .
The Augustan poet Ovid parodies the opening lines of the Aeneid in Amores 1.1.1 -- 2 , and his summary of the Aeneas story in Book 14 of the Metamorphoses , the so-called `` mini-Aeneid '' , has been viewed as a particularly important example of post-Virgilian response to the epic genre .
Lucan 's epic , the Bellum Civile has been considered an anti-Virgilian epic , disposing with the divine mechanism , treating historical events , and diverging drastically from Virgilian epic practice .
The Flavian poet Statius in his 12-book epic Thebaid engages closely with the poetry of Virgil ; in his epilogue he advises his poem not to `` rival the divine Aeneid , but follow afar and ever venerate its footsteps . ''
Indeed , Silius is known to have bought Virgil 's tomb and worshipped the poet .
In a similar vein Macrobius in the Saturnalia credits the work of Virgil as the embodiment of human knowledge and experience , mirroring the Greek conception of Homer .
Virgil also found commentators in antiquity .
Servius , a commentator of the 4th century AD , based his work on the commentary of Donatus .
Servius ' commentary provides us with a great deal of information about Virgil 's life , sources , and references ; however , many modern scholars find the variable quality of his work and the often simplistic interpretations frustrating .
Dante also mentions Virgil in De vulgari eloquentia , along with Ovid , Lucan and Statius , as one of the four regulati poetae -LRB- ii , vi , 7 -RRB- .
Possibly as early as the second century AD , Virgil 's works were seen as having magical properties and were used for divination .
In what became known as the Sortes Vergilianae -LRB- Virgilian Lots -RRB- , passages would be selected at random and interpreted to answer questions .
She played him along and agreed to an assignation at her house , which he was to sneak into at night by climbing into a large basket let down from a window .
When he did so he was only hoisted halfway up the wall and then left him trapped there into the next day , exposed to public ridicule .
Two explanations are commonly given for this alteration .
One deduces a false etymology associated with the word virgo -LRB- `` maiden '' in Latin -RRB- due to Virgil 's excessive , `` maiden '' - like modesty .
Alternatively , some argue that Vergilius was altered to Virgilius by analogy with the Latin virga -LRB- `` wand '' -RRB- due to the magical or prophetic powers attributed to Virgil in the Middle Ages -LRB- this explanation is found in only a handful of manuscripts , however , and was probably not widespread -RRB- .
In Norman schools -LRB- following the French practice -RRB- , the habit was to anglicize Latin names by dropping their Latin endings , hence Virgil .
Some post-Renaissance writers liked to affect the sobriquet `` The Swan of Mantua '' .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The Caucasus Mountains are higher , and the Urals longer , but both lie partly in Asia .
Extreme shortening caused by the event resulted in marine sedimentary rocks rising by thrusting and folding into high mountain peaks such as Mont Blanc and the Matterhorn .
The 18th and 19th centuries saw an influx of naturalists , writers , and artists , in particular the Romantics , followed by the golden age of alpinism as mountaineers began to ascend the peaks .
The Alpine region has a strong cultural identity .
The Winter Olympic Games have been hosted in the Swiss , French , Italian , Austrian and German Alps .
According to the Old English Dictionary , the Latin Alpes might possibly derive from a pre-Indo-European word * alb `` hill '' ; `` Albania '' is a related derivation .
The range continues toward Vienna in Austria , and east to the Adriatic Sea and into Slovenia .
To the south it dips into northern Italy and to the north extends to the south border of Bavaria in Germany .
In areas like Chiasso , Switzerland , and Neuschwanstein , Bavaria , the demarcation between the mountain range and the flatlands are clear ; in other places such as Geneva , the demarcation is less clear .
The second-highest major peaks are Monte Rosa at 4,634 m -LRB- 15,200 ft -RRB- and Ortler at 3,905 m -LRB- 12,810 ft -RRB- , respectively
From the Colle di Cadibona to Col de Tende it runs westwards , before turning to the northwest and then , near the Colle della Maddalena , to the north .
Crossing routes by road , train or foot are known as passes , and usually consist of depressions in the mountains in which a valley leads from the plains and hilly pre-mountainous zones .
A railroad with a tunnel 1 mile -LRB- 1.6 km -RRB- long was built along the route of the pass in the mid-19th century .
With a summit of 2,469 m -LRB- 8,100 ft -RRB- , the Great St. Bernard Pass is one of the highest in the Alps , crossing the Italian-Swiss border east of the Pennine Alps along the flanks of Mont Blanc .
The Saint Gotthard Pass crosses from Central Switzerland to Ticino ; in the late 19th century the 14 km -LRB- 9 mi -RRB- long Saint Gotthard Tunnel was built connecting Lucerne in Switzerland , with Milan in Italy .
The Mont Cenis pass has been a major commercial road between Western Europe and Italy .
Now the pass has been supplanted by the Fréjus Road and Rail tunnel .
At 2,756 m -LRB- 9,042 ft -RRB- , the Stelvio Pass in northern Italy is one of the highest of the Alpine passes ; the road was built in the 1820s .
The Tethys was later squeezed between colliding plates causing the formation of mountain ranges called the Alpide belt , from Gibraltar through the Himalayas to Indonesia -- a process that began at the end of the Mesozoic and continues into the present .
Similarly the peaks in Switzerland extending to western Austria -LRB- Helvetic nappes -RRB- consist of thin-skinned sedimentary folding that detached from former basement rock .
The tip of the mountain consists of gneisses from the African plate ; the base of the peak , below the glaciated area , consists of European basement rock .
The sequence of Tethyan marine sediments and their oceanic basement is sandwiched between rock derived from the African and European plates .
He completed his series of ascents in 1911 .
Crystals are found throughout much of the Alpine region such as cinnabar , amethyst , and quartz .
In the 20th century Robert Parker wrote a well-known work about the rock crystals of the Swiss Alps ; at the same period a commission was established to control and standardize the naming of Alpine minerals .
His work was continued by other scientists and now a permanent laboratory exists inside a glacier under the Jungfraujoch , devoted exclusively to the study of Alpine glaciers .
Glaciers pick up rocks and sediment with them as they flow .
This causes erosion and the formation of valleys over time .
Glacial valleys have characteristically steep walls -LRB- reliefs -RRB- ; valleys with lower reliefs and talus slopes are remnants of glacial troughs or previously infilled valleys .
Glaciers end in ice caves -LRB- the Rhone Glacier -RRB- , by trailing into a lake or river , or by shedding snowmelt on a meadow .
Tributary valleys , some of which are complicated , channel water to the main valleys which can experience flooding during the snow melt season when rapid runoff causes debris torrents and swollen rivers .
Furthermore , the decrease of glaciated areas combined with a succession of winters with lower-than-expected precipitation may have a future impact on the rivers in the Alps as well as an effect on the water availability to the lowlands .
The effect of mountain chains on prevailing winds is to carry warm air belonging to the lower region into an upper zone , where it expands in volume at the cost of a proportionate loss of temperature , often accompanied by precipitation in the form of snow or rain .
Snow lines vary from 2,400 to 3,000 m -LRB- 7,874 to 9,843 ft -RRB- , above which the snow is permanent and the temperatures hover around the freezing point even July and August .
High-water levels in streams and rivers peak in June and July when the snow is still melting at the higher altitudes .
The climate , plant life and animal life vary among the different sections or zones of the mountains .
The Alpine zone , extending from tree line to snow line , is followed by the glacial zone , which covers the glaciated areas of the mountain .
Climatic conditions show variances within the same zones ; for example , weather conditions at the head of a mountain valley , extending directly from the peaks , are colder and more severe than those at the mouth of a valley which tend to be less severe and receive less snowfall .
The habitats range from meadows , bogs , woodland -LRB- deciduous and coniferous -RRB- areas to soilless scree and moraines , and rock faces and ridges .
These do not reach exactly to the same elevation , nor are they often found growing together ; but their upper limit corresponds accurately enough to the change from a temperate to a colder climate that is further proved by a change in the presence of wild herbaceous vegetation .
This limit usually lies about 1,200 m -LRB- 3,940 ft -RRB- above the sea on the north side of the Alps , but on the southern slopes it often rises to 1,500 m -LRB- 4,920 ft -RRB- , sometimes even to 1,700 m -LRB- 5,580 ft -RRB- .
Writing about the gentians in Switzerland D. H. Lawrence described them as `` darkening the day-time , torch-like with the smoking blueness of Pluto 's gloom . ''
Gentians tend to `` appear '' repeatedly as the spring blooming takes place at progressively later dates , moving from the lower altitude to the higher altitude meadows where the snow melts much later than in the valleys .
On the highest rocky ledges the spring flowers bloom in the summer .
The plants that grow at the highest altitudes have adapted to conditions by specialization such as growing in rock screes that give protection from winds .
Areas of the eastern Alps are still home to brown bears .
Golden eagles and bearded vultures are the largest birds to be found in the Alps ; they nest high on rocky ledges and can be found at altitudes of 2,400 m -LRB- 7,874 ft -RRB- .
Molluscs such as the wood snail live up the snow line .
Popularly gathered as food , the snails are now protected .
Spiders , such as the large wolf spider , live above the snow line and can be seen as high as 400 m -LRB- 1,312 ft -RRB- .
Scorpions can be found in the Italian Alps .
His clothing and gear indicate that he lived in an alpine farming community , while the location and manner of his death - an arrowhead was discovered in his shoulder - suggests he was travelling from one place to another .
Analysis of the mitochondrial DNA of Ötzi , has shown that he belongs to the K1 subclade which can not be categorized into any of the three modern branches of that subclade .
The new subclade has provisionally been named K1ö for Ötzi .
By the 6th century BC the La Tène culture was well established in the region , and became known for high quality decorated weapons and jewelry .
This was one of the most celebrated achievements of any military force in ancient warfare , although no evidence exists of the actual crossing or the place of crossing .
The Rhaetians continued to resist but were eventually conquered when the Romans turned northward to the Danube valley in Austria and defeated the Brigantes .
The Romans built settlements in the Alps ; towns such as Aosta -LRB- named for Augustus -RRB- in Italy , Martigny and Lausanne in Switzerland , and Partenkirchen in Bavaria show remains of Roman baths , villas , arenas and temples .
In 1291 to protect themselves from incursions by the Habsburgs , four cantons in the middle of Switzerland drew up a charter that is considered to be a declaration of independence from neighboring kingdoms .
The Barrière de l'Esseillon is a serie of forts with heavy batteries , built on a cliff with a perfect view on the valley , a gorge on one side and steep mountains on the other side .
The peaks , however , were mostly ignored except for a few notable examples , and long left to the exclusive attention of the people of the adjoining valleys .
The glaciers remained a mystery and many still believed the highest areas to be inhabited by dragons .
Leonardo da Vinci was fascinated by variations of light in the higher altitudes , and climbed a mountain -- scholars are uncertain which one ; some believe it may have been Monte Rosa .
From his description of a `` blue like that of a gentian '' sky it is thought that he reached a significantly high altitude .
By the 19th century more naturalists began to arrive to explore , study and conquer the high peaks ; they were followed by artists , writers and painters .
Two men who first explored the regions of ice and snow were Horace-Bénédict de Saussure -LRB- 1740 -- 1799 -RRB- in the Pennine Alps , and the Benedictine monk of Disentis Placidus a Spescha -LRB- 1752 -- 1833 -RRB- .
Late in the 18th century the first wave of Romantics such as Goethe and Turner came to admire the scenery ; Wordsworth visited the area in 1790 , writing of his experiences in The Prelude .
Schiller later wrote the play William Tell romanticising Swiss independence .
When Coleridge travelled to Chamonix , he declaimed , in defiance of Shelley , who had signed himself `` Atheos '' in the guestbook of the Hotel de Londres near Montenvers , `` Who would be , who could be an atheist in this valley of wonders '' .
At the end of World War II the US Army occupied Obersalzberg , to prevent Hitler from retreating with the Wehrmacht into the mountains .
The Swiss Confederate mobilized its troops -- the country follows the doctrine of `` armed neutrality '' with all males required to have military training -- a number that General Eisenhower estimated to be about 850,000 .
Villagers celebrate the day the cows are herded up to the pastures and again when they return in mid-September .
The Alpanschluss or Désalpes -LRB- `` coming down from the alps '' -RRB- is celebrated by decorating the cows with garlands and enormous cowbells while the farmers dress in traditional costumes .
Owners of the cows traditionally receive from the cheesemakers a portion in relation to the proportion of the cows ' milk from the summer months in the high alps .
Stairs leading to upper levels are sometimes built on the outside , and balconies are sometimes enclosed .
Some meals are communal , such as fondue , where a pot is set in the middle of the table for each person to dip into .
In the lower areas where the forests are widespread , wooden tiles are traditionally used .
Commonly made of Norway spruce , they are called `` tavaillon '' .
The Alpine regions are multicultural and linguistically diverse .
Dialects are common , and vary from valley to valley and region to region .
Some of the French dialects spoken in the French , Swiss and Italian alps of Aosta Valley derive from Arpitan , while the southern part of the western range is related to Old Provençal ; the German dialects derive from Germanic tribal languages .
Both races continue to be held each January on successive weekends .
The Lauberhorn is the more strenuous downhill race at 4.5 km -LRB- 2.8 mi -RRB- and poses danger to racers who reach 130 km/h -LRB- 81 mph -RRB- within seconds of leaving the start gate .
Until this point Austria and Switzerland had been the traditional and more popular destinations for winter sports , but by the end of the 20th century and into the early 21st century , France , Italy and the Tyrol began to see increases in winter visitors .
From 1980 to the present , ski-lifts have been modernized and snow-making machines installed at many resorts , leading to concerns regarding the loss of traditional Alpine culture and questions regarding sustainable development as the winter ski industry continues to develop quickly and the number of summer tourists decline .
Most of Europe 's highest railways are located there .
A multitude of airports around the Alps -LRB- and some within -RRB- , as well as long-distance rail links from all neighbouring countries , afford large numbers of travellers easy access from abroad .
The concept of a gene continues to be refined as new phenomena are discovered .
From 1857 to 1864 , he studied inheritance patterns in 8000 common edible pea plants , tracking distinct traits from parent to offspring .
This description prefigured the distinction between genotype -LRB- the genetic material of an organism -RRB- and phenotype -LRB- the visible traits of that organism -RRB- .
Advances in understanding genes and inheritance continued throughout the 20th century .
Collectively , this body of research established the central dogma of molecular biology , which states that proteins are translated from RNA , which is transcribed from DNA .
:24 In this view , the molecular gene transcribes as a unit , and the evolutionary gene inherits as a unit .
The two strands of a double-helix run in opposite directions .
RNA molecules are less stable than DNA and are typically single-stranded .
The genetic code is nearly the same for all known organisms. :4.1
The length of the telomeres decreases each time the genome is replicated and has been implicated in the aging process .
The centromere is required for binding spindle fibres to separate sister chromatids into daughter cells during cell division. :18.2
This DNA has often been referred to as `` junk DNA '' .
In order to be expressed , genes require a promoter sequence .
Additionally , genes can have regulatory regions many kilobases upstream or downstream of the open reading frame .
Defining exactly what section of a DNA sequence comprises a gene is difficult .
The correspondence between codons and amino acids is nearly universal among all known living organisms .
To initiate transcription , the polymerase first recognizes and binds a promoter region of the gene .
Thus , a major mechanism of gene regulation is the blocking or sequestering the promoter region , either by tight binding by repressor molecules that physically block the polymerase , or by organizing the DNA so that the promoter region is not accessible. :7
One of the modifications performed is the splicing of introns which are sequences in the transcribed region that do not encode protein .
Alternative splicing mechanisms can result in mature transcripts from the same gene having different sequences and thus coding for different proteins .
This is a major form of regulation in eukaryotic cells and also occurs in some prokaryotes. :7.5
The tRNA is also covalently attached to the amino acid specified by the complementary codon .
When the tRNA binds to its complementary codon in an mRNA strand , the ribosome attaches its amino acid cargo to the new polypeptide chain , which is synthesized from amino terminus to carboxyl terminus .
During and after synthesis , most new proteins must folds to their active three-dimensional structure before they can carry out their cellular functions. :3
For example , if the allele specifying tall stems in pea plants is dominant over the allele specifying short stems , then pea plants that inherit one tall allele from one parent and one short allele from the other parent will also have tall stems .
Although Mendelian inheritance remains a good model for many traits determined by single genes -LRB- including a number of well-known genetic disorders -RRB- it does not include the physical processes of DNA replication and cell division .
Eukaryotic cell division is a more complex process known as the cell cycle ; DNA replication occurs during a phase of this cycle known as S phase , whereas the process of segregating chromosomes and splitting the cytoplasm occurs during M phase. :18.1
Two gametes fuse to form a diploid fertilized egg , a single cell that has two sets of genes , with one copy of each gene from the mother and one from the father. :20
This is in fact only true for genes that do not reside on the same chromosome , or are located very far from one another on the same chromosome .
This is known as genetic linkage .
This means that each generation , each human genome accumulates 1 -- 2 new mutations .
Either of these mutations can change the gene by missense -LRB- change a codon to encode a different amino acid -RRB- or nonsense -LRB- a premature stop codon -RRB- .
Additionally , the DNA repair mechanisms that normally revert mutations can introduce errors when repairing the physical damage to the molecule is more important than restoring an exact copy , for example when repairing double-strand breaks. :5.4
The wild-type allele is not necessarily the ancestor of less common alleles , nor is it necessarily fitter .
Many mutations , however , are deleterious or even lethal , and are removed from populations by natural selection .
It is often assumed that the functions of orthologous genes are more similar than those of paralogous genes , although the difference is minimal .
Additionally , any selection on a gene will cause its sequence to diverge at a different rate .
Sets of genes formed in this way comprise a gene family .
Gene duplications and losses within a family are common and represent a major source of evolutionary biodiversity .
Conversely , plants can have extremely large genomes , with rice containing > 46,000 protein-coding genes .
Early experimental measures indicated there to be 50,000 -- 100,000 transcribed genes -LRB- expressed sequence tags -RRB- .
Only a small portion of an organism 's genes are essential .
Although the number is more difficult to measure in higher eukaryotes , mice and humans are estimated to have around 2000 essential genes -LRB- ~ 10 % of their genes -RRB- .
Parts of this kingdom persisted until the 18th century , while a few others were under some rule by the Portuguese Empire since the 16th century .
In the 19th century , it was colonized as Portuguese Guinea .
Other parts of the territory in the current country were considered by the Portuguese as part of their empire .
They kept them in the fortified coastal settlements where the trading took place .
African communities that fought back against slave traders also distrusted European adventurers and would-be settlers .
A small number of European settlers established isolated farms along Bissau 's inland rivers .
Unlike guerrilla movements in other Portuguese colonies , the PAIGC rapidly extended its military control over large portions of the territory , aided by the jungle-like terrain , its easily reached borderlines with neighbouring allies , and large quantities of arms from Cuba , China , the Soviet Union , and left-leaning African countries .
The PAIGC even managed to acquire a significant anti-aircraft capability in order to defend itself against aerial attack .
Some escaped to settle in Portugal or other African nations .
Sanhá initially refused to concede , claiming that tampering and electoral fraud occurred in two constituencies including the capital , Bissau .
Tagme died in an explosion on Sunday , 1 March 2009 , target of an assassination .
Since 1974 , no president has successfully served a full five-year term .
Malam Bacai Sanhá was elected after a transition .
The regions are :
The terrain of is mostly low coastal plain with swamps of Guinean mangroves rising to Guinean forest-savanna mosaic in the east .
-LSB- The Economist , Pocket World in Figures , 2008 Edition , London : Profile Books -RSB-
The key challenges for the country in the period ahead are to achieve fiscal discipline , rebuild public administration , improve the economic climate for private investment , and promote economic diversification .
The remainder speak a variety of native African languages unique to ethnicities .
The under 5 mortality rate , per 1,000 births , was 195 and the neonatal mortality as a percentage of under 5 's mortality was 24 .
In 2010 , Guinea Bissau had the 7th highest maternal mortality rate in the world .
Fish , shellfish , fruits and vegetables are commonly eaten along with cereal grains , milk , curd and whey .
Vigna subterranea -LRB- Bambara groundnut -RRB- and Macrotyloma geocarpum -LRB- Hausa groundnut -RRB- are also grown .
Gomes 's Mortu Nega -LRB- Death Denied -RRB- -LRB- 1988 -RRB- was the first fiction film and the second feature film ever made in Guinea-Bissau .
Mortu Nega is in Creole with English subtitles .
In 1992 , Gomes directed Udju Azul di Yonta , which was screened in the Un Certain Regard section at the 1992 Cannes Film Festival .
Gomes has also served on the boards of many Africa-centric film festivals .
The numbered streets carry crosstown traffic .
Several exceptions reverse this .
Streets that do continue farther west change direction before reaching the Hudson River .
10th Street -LRB- 40 ° 44 ′ 03 ″ N 74 ° 00 ′ 11 ″ W / 40.7342580 ° N 74.0029670 ° W / 40.7342580 ; -74.0029670 -RRB- begins at the FDR Drive and Avenue C. West of Sixth Avenue , it turns southward about 40 degrees to join the Greenwich Village street grid and continue to West Street on the Hudson River .
Because West 4th Street turns northward at Sixth Avenue , it intersects 10th , 11th and 12th and 13th Streets in the West Village .
10th Street has an eastbound bike lane from West Street to the East River .
West 10th Street was previously named Amos Street for Richard Amos .
11th Street is in two parts .
East 11th streets runs from Fourth Avenue to Avenue C and runs past Webster Hall .
14th Street is a main numbered street in Manhattan .
It forms the northern borders of both Union Square -LRB- between Broadway and Park Avenue South -RRB- and Stuyvesant Square .
They all end at Eleventh Avenue .
23rd Street is another main numbered street in Manhattan .
24th Street is in two parts .
On the East Side , both streets end at Second Avenue at Kips Bay Towers and NYU Medical Center which occupy the area between 30th and 34th Streets .
The former Hotel Pierrepont was located at 43 West 32nd Street , The Continental NYC tower is at the corner of Sixth Avenue and 32nd Street .
Notable locations include East River Ferry , LaptopMD headquarters , Mercy College Manhattan Campus , and Jacob K. Javits Convention Center .
90th Street is split into two segments .
The first segment , West 90th Street begins at Riverside Drive and ends at Central Park West or West Drive , when it is open , in Central Park on the Upper West Side .
When East Drive is closed , East 90th Street begins at Fifth Avenue on the Upper East Side and curves to the right at the FDR Drive becoming East End Avenue .
The street resumes at the eastern edge of Morningside Park and extends through Harlem before ending at First Avenue adjacent Thomas Jefferson Park in East Harlem .
Notable locations include :
It then runs east between the campuses of Barnard College and the Union Theological Seminary , then crosses Broadway and runs between the campuses of Columbia University and Teacher 's College .
The street is interrupted by Morningside Park .
Seminary Row also runs by the Manhattan School of Music , Riverside Church , Sakura Park , Grant 's Tomb , and Morningside Park .
West of Convent Avenue , 125th Street was re-routed onto the old Manhattan Avenue .
40 ° 48 ′ 52 ″ N 73 ° 56 ′ 53 ″ W / 40.814583 ° N 73.947944 ° W / 40.814583 ; -73.947944 132nd Street runs east-west above Central Park and is located in Harlem just south of Hamilton Heights .
Boulevard and Malcolm X Boulevard .
The garden also holds a goldfish pond and several benches .
It is the area 's major shopping district .
The brain is located in the head , usually close to the primary sensory organs for such senses as vision , hearing , balance , taste , and smell .
Physiologically , the function of the brain is to exert centralized control over the other organs of the body .
This centralized control allows rapid and coordinated responses to changes in the environment .
The operations of individual brain cells are now understood in considerable detail but the way they cooperate in ensembles of millions is yet to be solved .
It deals with the human brain insofar as it shares the properties of other brains .
The ways in which the human brain differs from other brains are covered in the human brain article .
Several topics that might be covered here are instead covered there because much more can be said about them in a human context .
The most important is brain disease and the effects of brain damage , covered in the human brain article because the most common diseases of the human brain either do not show up in other species , or else manifest themselves in different ways .
The shape and size of the brain varies greatly in different species , and identifying common features is often difficult .
Nevertheless , there are a number of principles of brain architecture that apply across a wide range of species .
Further information can be gained by staining slices of brain tissue with a variety of chemicals that bring out areas where specific types of molecules are present in high concentrations .
Neurons , however , are usually considered the most important cells in the brain .
The property that makes neurons unique is their ability to send signals to specific target cells over long distances .
They send these signals by means of an axon , which is a thin protoplasmic fiber that extends from the cell body and projects , usually with numerous branches , to other areas , sometimes nearby , sometimes in distant parts of the brain or body .
The length of an axon can be extraordinary : for example , if a pyramidal cell , -LRB- an excitatory neuron -RRB- of the cerebral cortex were magnified so that its cell body became the size of a human body , its axon , equally magnified , would become a cable a few centimeters in diameter , extending more than a kilometer .
Some neurons emit action potentials constantly , at rates of 10 -- 100 per second , usually in irregular patterns ; other neurons are quiet most of the time , but occasionally emit a burst of action potentials .
When an action potential , traveling along an axon , arrives at a synapse , it causes a chemical called a neurotransmitter to be released .
Synapses are the key functional elements of the brain .
A large number of synapses are dynamically modifiable ; that is , they are capable of changing strength in a way that is controlled by the patterns of signals that pass through them .
It is widely believed that activity-dependent modification of synapses is the brain 's primary mechanism for learning and memory .
-LRB- There are also unmyelinated axons -RRB- .
At a schematic level , that basic worm-shape continues to be reflected in the body and nervous system architecture of all modern bilaterians , including vertebrates .
The brain is small and simple in some species , such as nematode worms ; in other species , including vertebrates , it is the most complex organ in the body .
It has not been definitively established whether the existence of these brainless species indicates that the earliest bilaterians lacked a brain , or whether their ancestors evolved in a way that led to the disappearance of a previously existing brain structure .
Arthropods have a central brain with three divisions and large optical lobes behind each eye for visual processing .
Each species has an equally long evolutionary history , but the brains of modern hagfishes , lampreys , sharks , amphibians , reptiles , and mammals show a gradient of size and complexity that roughly follows the evolutionary sequence .
Brains are most simply compared in terms of their size .
The relationship between brain size , body size and other variables has been studied across a wide range of vertebrate species .
As a rule , brain size increases with body size , but not in a simple linear proportion .
In general , smaller animals tend to have larger brains , measured as a fraction of body size .
This formula describes the central tendency , but every family of mammals departs from it to some degree , in a way that reflects in part the complexity of their behavior .
All vertebrate brains share a common underlying form , which appears most clearly during early stages of embryonic development .
At the earliest stages of brain development , the three areas are roughly equal in size .
The brains of vertebrates are made of very soft tissue .
Blood vessels enter the central nervous system through holes in the meningeal layers .
Each of these areas has a complex internal structure .
Some parts , such as the cerebral cortex and the cerebellar cortex , consist of layers that are folded or convoluted to fit within the available space .
Thousands of distinguishable areas can be identified within the vertebrate brain based on fine distinctions of neural structure , chemistry , and connectivity .
In birds , there are also major changes in forebrain structure .
These distortions can make it difficult to match brain components from one species with those of another species .
Size , however , is not the only difference : there are also substantial differences in shape .
The hindbrain and midbrain of mammals are generally similar to those of other vertebrates , but dramatic differences appear in the forebrain , which is greatly enlarged and also altered in structure .
The elaboration of the cerebral cortex carries with it changes to other brain areas .
The brains of humans and other primates contain the same structures as the brains of other mammals , but are generally larger in proportion to body size .
Dolphins have values higher than those of primates other than humans , but nearly all other mammals have EQ values that are substantially lower .
Most of the enlargement of the primate brain comes from a massive expansion of the cerebral cortex , especially the prefrontal cortex and the parts of the cortex involved in vision .
For vertebrates , the early stages of neural development are similar across all species .
At the front end , the ventricles and cord swell to form three vesicles that are the precursors of the forebrain , midbrain , and hindbrain .
At about the same time , the hindbrain splits into the metencephalon -LRB- which will contain the cerebellum and pons -RRB- and the myelencephalon -LRB- which will contain the medulla oblongata -RRB- .
Each of these areas contains proliferative zones where neurons and glial cells are generated ; the resulting cells then migrate , sometimes for long distances , to their final positions .
Axons , because they commonly extend a great distance from the cell body and need to reach specific targets , grow in a particularly complex way .
These receptors sense the local environment , causing the growth cone to be attracted or repelled by various cellular elements , and thus to be pulled in a particular direction at each point along its path .
The result of this pathfinding process is that the growth cone navigates through the brain until it reaches its destination area , where other chemical cues cause it to begin generating synapses .
Considering the entire brain , thousands of genes create products that influence axonal pathfinding .
With these exceptions , however , the set of neurons that is present in early childhood is the set that is present for life .
Thus , a neuron can be characterized by the neurotransmitters that it releases .
The great majority of psychoactive drugs exert their effects by altering specific neurotransmitter systems .
This applies to drugs such as cannabinoids , nicotine , heroin , cocaine , alcohol , fluoxetine , chlorpromazine , and many others .
Neurons using these transmitters can be found in nearly every part of the brain .
Because of their ubiquity , drugs that act on glutamate or GABA tend to have broad and powerful effects .
Some general anesthetics act by reducing the effects of glutamate ; most tranquilizers exert their sedative effects by enhancing the effects of GABA .
There are dozens of other chemical neurotransmitters that are used in more limited areas of the brain , often areas dedicated to a particular function .
Other neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine and dopamine have multiple sources in the brain , but are not as ubiquitously distributed as glutamate and GABA .
As a side effect of the electrochemical processes used by neurons for signaling , brain tissue generates electric fields when it is active .
Each part of the brain shows a mixture of rhythmic and nonrhythmic activity , which may vary according to behavioral state .
During an epileptic seizure , the brain 's inhibitory control mechanisms fail to function and electrical activity rises to pathological levels , producing EEG traces that show large wave and spike patterns not seen in a healthy brain .
Relating these population-level patterns to the computational functions of individual neurons is a major focus of current research in neurophysiology .
All vertebrates have a blood -- brain barrier that allows metabolism inside the brain to operate differently from metabolism in other parts of the body .
Brain tissue consumes a large amount of energy in proportion to its volume , so large brains place severe metabolic demands on animals .
The need to limit body weight in order , for example , to fly , has apparently led to selection for a reduction of brain size in some species , such as bats .
Most of the brain 's energy consumption goes into sustaining the electric charge -LRB- membrane potential -RRB- of neurons .
The energy consumption of the brain does not vary greatly over time , but active regions of the cerebral cortex consume somewhat more energy than inactive regions ; this forms the basis for the functional brain imaging methods PET , fMRI , and NIRS .
A centralized brain allows groups of muscles to be co-activated in complex patterns ; it also allows stimuli impinging on one part of the body to evoke responses in other parts , and it can prevent different parts of the body from acting at cross-purposes to each other .
Over the years , though , accumulating information about the electrical responses of brain cells recorded from behaving animals has steadily moved theoretical concepts in the direction of increasing realism .
The essence of the information processing approach is to try to understand brain function in terms of information flow and implementation of algorithms .
Follow-up studies in higher-order visual areas found cells that detect binocular disparity , color , movement , and aspects of shape , with areas located at increasing distances from the primary visual cortex showing increasingly complex responses .
Other investigations of brain areas unrelated to vision have revealed cells with a wide variety of response correlates , some related to memory , some to abstract types of cognition such as space .
Furthermore , even single neurons appear to be complex and capable of performing computations .
So , brain models that do n't reflect this are arguably too abstractive to be representative of brain operation ; models that do try to capture this are very computationally expensive and arguably intractable with present computational resources .
It remains to be seen what level of success they can achieve in the time frame of the project and the wisdom of it has been publicly contested , with high-profile scientists on both sides of the argument .
One of the primary functions of a brain is to extract biologically relevant information from sensory inputs .
The human brain is provided with information about light , sound , the chemical composition of the atmosphere , temperature , head orientation , limb position , the chemical composition of the bloodstream , and more .
One way or another , all of these sensory modalities are initially detected by specialized sensors that project signals into the brain .
The axons of sensory receptor cells travel into the spinal cord or brain , where they transmit their signals to a first-order sensory nucleus dedicated to one specific sensory modality .
This primary sensory nucleus sends information to higher-order sensory areas that are dedicated to the same modality .
Motor systems are areas of the brain that are directly or indirectly involved in producing body movements , that is , in activating muscles .
Spinal motor neurons are controlled both by neural circuits intrinsic to the spinal cord , and by inputs that descend from the brain .
The intrinsic spinal circuits implement many reflex responses , and contain pattern generators for rhythmic movements such as walking or swimming .
The descending connections from the brain allow for more sophisticated control .
The brain contains several motor areas that project directly to the spinal cord .
This direct corticospinal projection allows for precise voluntary control of the fine details of movements .
Other motor-related brain areas exert secondary effects by projecting to the primary motor areas .
Among the most important secondary areas are the premotor cortex , basal ganglia , and cerebellum .
The SCN contains the body 's central biological clock .
Neurons there show activity levels that rise and fall with a period of about 24 hours , circadian rhythms : these activity fluctuations are driven by rhythmic changes in expression of a set of `` clock genes '' .
Sleep involves great changes in brain activity .
Until the 1950s it was generally believed that the brain essentially shuts off during sleep , but this is now known to be far from true ; activity continues , but patterns become very different .
For any animal , survival requires maintaining a variety of parameters of bodily state within a limited range of variation : these include temperature , water content , salt concentration in the bloodstream , blood glucose levels , blood oxygen level , and others .
Maintaining homeostasis is a crucial function of the brain .
The basic principle that underlies homeostasis is negative feedback : any time a parameter diverges from its set-point , sensors generate an error signal that evokes a response that causes the parameter to shift back toward its optimum value .
The hypothalamus is a collection of small nuclei , most of which are involved in basic biological functions .
Some of these functions relate to arousal or to social interactions such as sexuality , aggression , or maternal behaviors ; but many of them relate to homeostasis .
Several hypothalamic nuclei receive input from sensors located in the lining of blood vessels , conveying information about temperature , sodium level , glucose level , blood oxygen level , and other parameters .
These hypothalamic nuclei send output signals to motor areas that can generate actions to rectify deficiencies .
Most organisms studied to date utilize a reward -- punishment mechanism : for instance , worms and insects can alter their behavior to seek food sources or to avoid dangers .
Rewards and punishments function by altering the relationship between the inputs that the basal ganglia receive and the decision-signals that are emitted .
Almost all animals are capable of modifying their behavior as a result of experience -- even the most primitive types of worms .
Because behavior is driven by brain activity , changes in behavior must somehow correspond to changes inside the brain .
Until 1970 , however , experimental evidence to support the synaptic plasticity hypothesis was lacking .
Since then technical advances have made these sorts of experiments much easier to carry out , and thousands of studies have been made that have clarified the mechanism of synaptic change , and uncovered other types of activity-driven synaptic change in a variety of brain areas , including the cerebral cortex , hippocampus , basal ganglia , and cerebellum .
Among other tools , they employ a plethora of stains that reveal neural structure , chemistry , and connectivity .
In recent years , the development of immunostaining techniques has allowed investigation of neurons that express specific sets of genes .
Thousands of experimentally developed drugs affect the nervous system , some in highly specific ways .
The same techniques have occasionally been used to study brain activity in human patients suffering from intractable epilepsy , in cases where there was a medical necessity to implant electrodes to localize the brain area responsible for epileptic seizures .
Functional imaging techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging are also used to study brain activity ; these techniques have mainly been used with human subjects , because they require a conscious subject to remain motionless for long periods of time , but they have the great advantage of being noninvasive .
Another approach to brain function is to examine the consequences of damage to specific brain areas .
Because there is no ability to experimentally control the nature of the damage , however , this information is often difficult to interpret .
On one hand , it is possible to write a computer program to simulate the operation of a group of neurons by making use of systems of equations that describe their electrochemical activity ; such simulations are known as biologically realistic neural networks .
On the other hand , it is possible to study algorithms for neural computation by simulating , or mathematically analyzing , the operations of simplified `` units '' that have some of the properties of neurons but abstract out much of their biological complexity .
The computational functions of the brain are studied both by computer scientists and neuroscientists .
Recent years have seen increasing applications of genetic and genomic techniques to the study of the brain and a focus on the roles of neurotrophic factors and physical activity in neuroplasticity .
It is now possible with relative ease to `` knock out '' or mutate a wide variety of genes , and then examine the effects on brain function .
More sophisticated approaches are also being used : for example , using Cre-Lox recombination it is possible to activate or deactivate genes in specific parts of the brain , at specific times .
Although the brains were shriveled , they were well preserved due to the climate found inside the cave .
In his treatise on epilepsy he wrote :
Galen traced out the anatomical relationships among brain , nerves , and muscles , demonstrating that all muscles in the body are connected to the brain through a branching network of nerves .
Descartes , like Galen , thought of the nervous system in hydraulic terms .
He believed that the highest cognitive functions are carried out by a non-physical res cogitans , but that the majority of behaviors of humans , and all behaviors of animals , could be explained mechanistically .
Since that time , each major advance in understanding has followed more or less directly from the development of a new technique of investigation .
Until the early years of the 20th century , the most important advances were derived from new methods for staining cells .
Without such a stain , brain tissue under a microscope appears as an impenetrable tangle of protoplasmic fibers , in which it is impossible to determine any structure .
These studies complemented the anatomical picture with a conception of the brain as a dynamic entity .
Reflecting the new understanding , in 1942 Charles Sherrington visualized the workings of the brain waking from sleep :
In the second half of the 20th century , developments in chemistry , electron microscopy , genetics , computer science , functional brain imaging , and other fields progressively opened new windows into brain structure and function .
In the United States the now aging Julia Ward Howe , author of the Battle Hymn of the Republic , leaped into the war of words and joined the Red Cross .
Relations of minorities within the Ottoman Empire and the disposition of former Ottoman lands became known as the `` Eastern Question , '' as the Ottomans were on the east of Europe .
It now became relevant to define the east of the eastern question .
Those who used the term had little choice about its meaning .
Some regions beyond the Ottoman Porte were included .
Formerly part of the empire at its apogee .
It is now generally used only in historical contexts , to describe the countries of Western Asia from the Mediterranean to -LRB- or including -RRB- Iran .
There is , in short , no universally understood fixed inventory of nations , languages or historical assets defined to be in it .
There was a linguistic predisposition to use such terms .
Beyond the Ganges and Himalayas -LRB- including the Tien Shan -RRB- were Serica and Serae -LRB- sections of China -RRB- and some other identifiable far eastern locations known to the voyagers and geographers but not to the general European public .
The queen chartered the Company of Merchants of the Levant , shortened to Levant Company , and soon known also as The Turkey Company , in 1581 .
In 1582 , the ship The Great Susan transported the first ambassador , William Harebone , to the Ottoman Porte -LRB- government of the Ottoman Empire -RRB- at Constantinople .
Compared to Anatolia , Levant also means `` land of the rising sun , '' but where Anatolia always only meant the projection of land currently occupied by the Republic of Turkey , Levant meant anywhere in the domain ruled by the Ottoman Porte .
The victors inherited his remaining territory in the Balkans .
The Turks to them were foreigners with completely different customs , way of life , and language .
Intervals when there was no unrest were rare .
The Ottoman Porte was continuously under attack from some quarter in its empire , primarily the Balkans .
Also , on a number of occasions in the early 19th century , American and British warships had to attack the Barbary pirates to stop their piracy and recover thousands of enslaved Europeans and Americans .
The far East , a phrase containing a noun , East , qualified by an adjective , far , could be at any location in the `` far east '' of the speaker 's home territory .
The Ottoman Empire , for example , was the far East as much as the East Indies .
It therefore undertook to oppose the Russians in both places , one result being the Crimean War .
The two terms were now compound nouns often shown hyphenated .
Toward the end of the letter he said :
They became immediately popular , supplanting `` Levant '' and `` East Indies , '' which gradually receded to minor usages and then began to change meaning .
His map delineates the Nearer East with regular lines as though surveyed .
They include Iran , the Balkans , but not the Danube lands , Egypt , but not the rest of North Africa .
Except for the Balkans , the region matches the later Middle East .
It differs from the Ottoman Empire of the times in including Greece and Iran .
Hogarth gives no evidence of being familiar with the contemporaneous initial concept of the Middle East .
For a time , `` Near East '' meant primarily the Balkans .
By `` Far East '' he meant Siberia , China , Japan , Korea , Siam and Malaya .
As the book was a big success , he was off to the Balkan states with his wife in 1896 to develop detail for a sequel , The People and Politics of the Near East , which Scribners planned to publish in 1897 .
Mrs. Norman , a writer herself , wrote glowing letters of the home and person of Mme. Zakki , `` the wife of a Turkish cabinet minister , '' who , she said , was a cultivated woman living in a country home full of books .
As for the natives of the Balkans , they were `` a semi-civilized people . ''
The book was never published .
The empire had descended from an enlightened civilization ruling over barbarians for their own good to something considerably less .
The difference was the Hamidian Massacres , which were being conducted even as the couple traveled the Balkans .
According to Norman now , the empire had been established by `` the Moslem horde '' from Asia , which was stopped by `` intrepid Hungary . ''
Furthermore , `` Greece shook off the turbaned destroyer of her people '' and so on .
Having portrayed the Armenians as revolutionaries in the name of freedom with the expectation of being rescued by the intervention of Christian Europe , he states `` but her hope was vain . ''
Norman concluded his exhortation with `` In the Balkans one learns to hate the Turk . ''
Norman made sure that Gladstone read the article .
Prince Nicolas of Montenegro wrote a letter thanking him for his article .
The countries and regions mentioned are Greece , Bulgaria , Serbia , Bosnia-Herzegovina -LRB- which was Moslem and needed , in his view , to be suppressed -RRB- , Macedonia , Montenegro , Albania , Romania .
The fall of the Ottoman Empire ultimately enmeshed all the others as well .
In the Travel and Politics in the Near East , 1898 , Miller claimed to have made four trips to the Balkans , 1894 , 1896 , 1897 and 1898 , and to be , in essence , an expert on `` the Near East , '' by which he primarily meant the Balkans .
He was in effect -LRB- whatever his formal associations if any -RRB- a point man of British near eastern intelligence .
If the Ottoman Empire had been a sick man , then :
The demise of the political Near East now left a gap where it had been , into which stepped the Middle East .
An uncountable number of places appear to have had their middle easts from gardens to regions , including the United States .
The innovation of the term `` Near East '' to mean the holdings of the Ottoman Empire as early as the Crimean War had left a geographical gap .
`` India This Side of the Ganges '' and Iran had been omitted .
This usage did not sit well with the diplomats ; India was left in an equivocal state .
They needed a regional term .
It was , however , already there to be seen .
The total super-region consisted of `` India , Afghanistan , Persia , Arabistan , Asia Minor , and last , but not least , Egypt . ''
His own term revives `` the Nearer East '' as opposed to `` the Far East . ''
His color chart recognizes a spectrum of black , brown and yellow , which at the time had been traditional since the late 19th century .
Apart from these was `` the great white race '' , which the moderate Simpson tones down to simply the white race .
The eastern question was modified by Simpson to `` The Problem of the Nearer East , '' which had nothing to do with the Ottomans but everything to do with British colonialism .
Simpson wrote of the white man :
This view reveals a somewhat less than altruistic Christian intent of the British Empire ; however , it was paradoxical from the beginning , as Simpson and most other writers pointed out .
It proved to be less acceptable to a colonial point of view that saw the entire region as one .
The book does not contain a single instance of `` Near East . ''
The formerly Near Eastern sections of his trip are now `` Turkish '' and not Ottoman .
They are not generally considered distinct regions as they were at their original definition .
For much , but by no means all , of the Middle East , the predominance of Islam lends some unity , as does the transient accident of geographical continuity .
Otherwise there is but little basis except for history and convention to lump together peoples of multiple , often unrelated languages , governments , loyalties and customs .
The new wave of diplomats often came from those programs .
Their domain became the Ancient Near East , which could no longer be relied upon to be the Near East .
Someone had to reconcile the present with the past .
This duty was inherited by various specialized agencies that were formed to handle specific aspects of international relations , now so complex as to be beyond the scope and abilities of a diplomatic corps in the former sense .
The ancient Near East is frozen in time .
The living Near East is primarily what the agencies say it is .
In most cases this single term is inadequate to describe the geographical range of their operations .
The result is multiple definitions .
In many cases , such as France , no distinct regional substructures have been employed .
Each country has its own French diplomatic apparatus , although regional terms , including Proche-Orient and Moyen-Orient , may be used in a descriptive sense .
The most influential agencies in the United States still using Near East as a working concept are as follows .
The name of the bureau is traditional and historic .
There is , however , no distinct Middle East .
All official Middle Eastern affairs are referred to this bureau .
As the name indicates , that region is a combination of State Department regions ; however , NESA is careful to identify the State Department region .
As its Near East is not different from the State Department 's it does not appear in the table .
Its name , however , is not entirely accurate .
For example , its region includes Mauritania , a member of the State Department 's Africa -LRB- Sub-Sahara -RRB- .
Its views are independent .
Details can be found in Policy Focus # 65 .
The Near East is a separate topic and subdivision of the African and Middle Eastern division .
The Middle East contains a Hebraic section consisting of only Israel for a country , but including eleven modern and ancient languages relating to Judaism , such as Yiddish , a European pidgin language .
The Near East is otherwise nearly identical to the Middle East , except that it extends partly into Central Asia and the Caucasus , regions that the State Department considers to be in Asia .
But few of them include a Near East , and that poorly defined .
UNESCO recognizes neither a Near East nor a Middle East , dividing the countries instead among three regions : Arab States , Asia and the Pacific , and Africa .
Its division `` does not forcibly reflect geography '' but `` refers to the execution of regional activities . ''
Its total area extends further into Central Asia than that of most agencies .
It plays a significant role in providing the president with intelligence .
The CIA was first formed under the National Security Act of 1947 from the army 's Office of Strategic Services -LRB- OSS -RRB- , which furnished both military intelligence and clandestine military operations to the army during the crisis of World War II .
Many revisions and redefinitions have taken place since then .
Although the name of the CIA reflects the original advised intent of Presidents Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry S. Truman , the government 's needs for strategic services have frustrated that intent from the beginning .
The press received by the agency in countless articles , novels and other media have tended to create various popular myths ; for example , that this agency replaced any intelligence effort other than that of the OSS , or that it contains the central intelligence capability of the United States .
Strategic services are officially provided by some 17 agencies called the Intelligence Community .
Army intelligence did not come to an end ; in fact , all the branches of the Armed Forces retained their intelligence services .
This community is currently under the leadership -LRB- in addition to all its other leadership -RRB- of the Office of the Director of National Intelligence .
Under these complex circumstances regional names are less useful .
They are more historical than an accurate gauge of operations .
Its duties are defined as `` support on Middle Eastern and North African countries , as well as on the South Asian nations of India , Pakistan , and Afghanistan . ''
The total range of countries is in fact the same as the State Department 's Near East , but the names do not correspond .
Its list of countries is limited by the Red Sea , comprises the entire eastern coast of the Mediterranean , including Israel , Turkey , the small nations of the Caucasus , Iran and the states of the Arabian Peninsula .
Its definition of Middle East corresponds to that of the State Department , which officially prefers the term Near East .
Its regions include the Middle East , the Balkans and others .
Resorting to this verbal device , however , did not protect the `` Ancient Near East '' from the inroads of `` the Middle East . ''
Woolley had completed it in 1960 two weeks before his death .
The geographical ranges in each case are identical .
These are not new ; however , the erection of these into `` centres '' of national and international interest in the second half of the 20th century have created larger databases not available to the scholars of the past .
Many of these focus on the Ancient Near East or Near East in the sense of Ancient Near East .
Among its many activities CSAD numbers `` a long-term project to create a library of digitised images of Greek inscriptions . ''
These it arranges by region .
The Egypt and the Near East region besides Egypt includes Cyprus , Persia and Afghanistan but not Asia Minor -LRB- a separate region -RRB- .
Similarly the journals associated with these fields of expertise include the words Near East or Near Eastern .
In the modern sense , it is likely to mean any or all of the Arabic languages .
The area of modern Zhejiang was outside the major sphere of influence of the Shang civilization during the second millennium BC .
Evidence suggests that Baiyue and the kingdom of Yue possessed their own culture and history that are different from those kingdoms in north and central China , whose cultures and histories were carefully recorded in chronicles and histories during the Spring and Autumn Period and into the Qin dynasty .
The Song of the Yue Boatman -LRB- Chinese : 越人歌 , p Yuèrén Gē , lit .
`` Song of the man of Yue '' -RRB- was transliterated into Chinese and recorded by authors in north China or inland China of Hebei and Henan around 528 BC .
The song shows that the Yue people spoke a language that was mutually unintelligible with the dialects spoken in north and inland China .
The Yue peoples seem to have had their own written script .
Yuenü -LRB- Chinese : 越女 ; pinyin : Yuènǚ ; Wade -- Giles : Yüeh-nü ; literally : `` the Lady of Yue '' -RRB- was a swordswoman from the state of Yue .
In order to check the growth of the kingdom of Wu , Chu pursued a policy of strengthening Yue .
Under King Goujian , Yue recovered from its early reverses and fully annexed the lands of its rival in 473 BC .
The Yue kings then moved their capital center from their original home around Mount Kuaiji in present-day Shaoxing to the former Wu capital at present-day Suzhou .
With no southern power to turn against Yue , Chu opposed it directly and , in 333 BC , succeeded in destroying it .
Yue 's former lands were annexed by the Qin Empire in 222 BC and organized into a commandery named for Kuaiji in Zhejiang but initially headquartered in Wu in Jiangsu .
In armed military conflicts with Wu , the two states relied intensively on tactics of camouflage and deception to steal Wu 's military resources including arrows and bows .
Some may have lost social privilege , and took refugee in areas south to Yangtze River .
Some of the Chinese refugees from north China might have resided in areas near Hangzhou .
It suggests that a small number of powerful , elite Chinese refugees from the Central Plain might have taken refugee in south of the Yangtze River .
Metropolitan areas of Sichuan was another hub for refugees , given that the state of Shu had long been founded and ruled by political and military elites from the Central Plain and north China .
Some refugees from the north China might have found residence in south China depending on their social status and military power in the north .
The rump Jin state or the Southern Dynasties vied against some elite Chinese from the Central Plain and south of the Yangtze River .
After being incorporated into the Sui dynasty , its economic richness was used for the Sui dynasty 's ambitions to expand north and south , particularly into Korea and Vietnam .
The débâcle of the Korean war led to Sui 's overthrow by the Tang , who then presided over a centuries-long golden age for the country .
Zhejiang was an important economic center of the empire 's Jiangnan East Circuit and was considered particularly prosperous .
Throughout the Tang dynasty , The Grand Canal had remained effective , transporting grains and material resources to North China plain and metropolitan centers of the empire .
As the Tang Dynasty disintegrated , Zhejiang constituted most of the territory of the regional kingdom of Wuyue .
Under the Song , the prosperity of South China began to overtake that of North China .
Renowned for its prosperity and beauty , it may have been the largest city in the world at the time .
From then on , north Zhejiang and neighboring south Jiangsu have been synonymous with luxury and opulence in Chinese culture .
The Mongol conquest and the establishment of the Yuan dynasty in 1279 ended Hangzhou 's political clout , but its economy continued to prosper .
These were produced in large quantities for the Chinese export trade to Southeast Asia , the Middle East , and -LRB- during the Ming -RRB- Europe .
The Duomin -LRB- Chinese : 惰民 ; pinyin : duò mín ; Wade -- Giles : to-min -RRB- are a caste of outcasts in this province .
The Chinese people who helped them , however , paid dearly for sheltering the Americans .
The Imperial Japanese Army began the Zhejiang-Jiangxi Campaign to intimidate the Chinese out of helping downed American airmen .
Mao 's self-reliance policy and the reduction in maritime trade cut off the lifelines of the port cities of Ningbo and Wenzhou .
While Mao invested heavily in railroads in interior China , no major railroads were built in South Zhejiang , where transportation remained poor .
Other prominent mountains include Mounts Yandang , Tianmu , Tiantai , and Mogan , which reach altitudes of 700 to 1,500 meters -LRB- 2,300 to 4,900 ft -RRB- .
Valleys and plains are found along the coastline and rivers .
Another relatively flat area is found along the Qu River around the cities of Quzhou and Jinhua .
Most rivers carve out valleys in the highlands , with plenty of rapids and other features associated with such topography .
Summer , from June to September is long , hot , rainy , and humid .
Fall is generally dry , warm and sunny .
Winters are short but cold except in the far south .
Average annual temperature is around 15 to 19 °C -LRB- 59 to 66 °F -RRB- , average January temperature is around 2 to 8 °C -LRB- 36 to 46 °F -RRB- and average July temperature is around 27 to 30 °C -LRB- 81 to 86 °F -RRB- .
Annual precipitation is about 1,000 to 1,900 mm -LRB- 39 to 75 in -RRB- .
There is plenty of rainfall in early summer , and by late summer Zhejiang is directly threatened by typhoons forming in the Pacific .
Several political figures who served as Zhejiang 's top political office of Communist Party Secretary have played key roles in various events in PRC history .
Three provincial Party Secretaries since the 1990s have gone onto prominence at the national level .
They include CPC General Secretary and President Xi Jinping -LRB- term 2002-2007 -RRB- , National People 's Congress Chairman and former Vice-Premier Zhang Dejiang -LRB- term 1998-2002 -RRB- , and Zhao Hongzhu -LRB- term 2007-2012 -RRB- , the Deputy Secretary of the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection , China 's top anti-corruption body .
Of Zhejiang 's fourteen Party Secretaries since 1949 , none were native to the province .
The main cash crops include jute and cotton , and the province also leads the provinces of China in tea production .
-LRB- The renowned Longjing tea is a product of Hangzhou . -RRB-
Zhejiang 's towns have been known for handicraft production of goods such as silk , for which it is ranked second among the provinces .
Its many market towns connect the cities with the countryside .
Zhejiang 's main manufacturing sectors are electromechanical industries , textiles , chemical industries , food , and construction materials .
As a result , Zhejiang has made itself one of the richest provinces , and the `` Zhejiang spirit '' has become something of a legend within China .
However , some economists now worry that this model is not sustainable , in that it is inefficient and places unreasonable demands on raw materials and public utilities , and also a dead end , in that the myriad small businesses in Zhejiang producing cheap goods in bulk are unable to move to more sophisticated or technologically more advanced industries .
The per capita pure income of rural residents stood at 10,007 yuan -LRB- US$ 1,465 -RRB- , a real growth of 8.1 % year-on-year .
In 2009 , Zhejiang 's primary , secondary , and tertiary industries were worth 116.2 billion yuan -LRB- US$ 17 billion -RRB- , 1.1843 trillion yuan -LRB- US$ 173.4 billion -RRB- , and 982.7 billion yuan -LRB- US$ 143.9 billion -RRB- respectively .
The environmental watchdog had warned the factory , but it had not effectively controlled the pollution , Chen added .
-LRB- See Hangzhou dialect , Shaoxing dialect , Ningbo dialect , Wenzhou dialect , Taizhou dialect , Jinhua dialect , and Quzhou dialect for more information -RRB- .
The dialects spoken in Hangzhou , Shaoxing , and Ningbo have taken on this role historically .
As a result , most of the population now can , to some degree , speak and comprehend Mandarin and can code-switch when necessary .
Nevertheless , a Zhejiang accent is detectable in almost everyone from the area communicating in Mandarin , and the home dialect remains an important part of the everyday lives and cultural identities of most Zhejiang residents .
Other important opera traditions include Yongju -LRB- of Ningbo -RRB- , Shaoju -LRB- of Shaoxing -RRB- , Ouju -LRB- of Wenzhou -RRB- , Wuju -LRB- of Jinhua -RRB- , Taizhou Luantan -LRB- of Taizhou -RRB- and Zhuji Luantan -LRB- of Zhuji -RRB- .
Lord Chatfield held the post until the fall of Neville Chamberlain 's government in 1940 ; his success was limited by his lack of control over the existing Service departments and his limited political influence .
Sir Richard Dannatt predicted British forces to be involved in combating `` predatory non-state actors '' for the foreseeable future , in what he called an `` era of persistent conflict '' .
He told the Chatham House think tank that the fight against al-Qaeda and other militant Islamist groups was `` probably the fight of our generation '' .
In the same article the First Sea Lord and Chief of the Naval Staff , Admiral Sir Mark Stanhope , Royal Navy , acknowledged that there was not enough money within the defence budget and it is preparing itself for tough decisions and the potential for cutbacks .
The MoD has been investing in IT to cut costs and improve services for its personnel .
The MoD also has `` rights of access '' to a further 222,000 hectares .
Within it is the Victoria Cross and George Cross Memorial , and nearby are memorials to the Fleet Air Arm and RAF -LRB- to its east , facing the riverside -RRB- .
A major refurbishment of the building was completed under a PFI contract by Skanska in 2004 .
This was carried out without any significant damage to the structure .
The Ministry of Defence claims that these trials were to simulate germ warfare and that the tests were harmless .
Two scientists commissioned by the Ministry of Defence stated that these trials posed no risk to the public .
This was confirmed by Sue Ellison , a representative of Porton Down who said that the results from these trials `` will save lives , should the country or our forces face an attack by chemical and biological weapons . ''
Asked whether such tests are still being carried out , she said : `` It is not our policy to discuss ongoing research . ''
It is unknown whether or not the harmlessness of the trials was known at the time of their occurrence .
delivery , while troops in Afghanistan have been forced to rely on helicopters which are flying with safety faults .
The government eventually backed down and restored the funding .
The cuts would have meant a significant loss of personnel and would have had adverse effects on recruitment .
The US NTSC 525-line system joined in 1941 .
All of these systems used interlacing and a 4:3 aspect ratio except the 240-line system which was progressive -LRB- actually described at the time by the technically correct term `` sequential '' -RRB- and the 405-line system which started as 5:4 and later changed to 4:3 .
The 240-line system could have doubled its frame rate but this would have meant that the transmitted signal would have doubled in bandwidth , an unacceptable option as the video baseband bandwidth was required to be not more than 3 MHz .
NHK set out to create an HDTV system that ended up scoring much higher in subjective tests than NTSC 's previously dubbed `` HDTV '' .
SMPTE would test HDTV systems from different companies from every conceivable perspective , but the problem of combining the different formats plagued the technology for many years .
The system , known as Hi-Vision or MUSE after its Multiple sub-Nyquist sampling encoding for encoding the signal , required about twice the bandwidth of the existing NTSC system but provided about four times the resolution -LRB- 1080i/1125 lines -RRB- .
These recommendations , however , did not fit in the broadcasting bands which could reach home users .
The standardization of MPEG-1 in 1993 also led to the acceptance of recommendations ITU-R BT .709 .
These broadcasting systems can be used for both SDTV and HDTV .
Common for all DVB standards is the use of highly efficient modulation techniques for further reducing bandwidth , and foremost for reducing receiver-hardware and antenna requirements .
While a comprehensive HDTV standard was not in the end established , agreement on the aspect ratio was achieved .
The resulting ITU-R Recommendation ITU-R BT.709-2 -LRB- `` Rec .
709 '' -RRB- includes the 16:9 aspect ratio , a specified colorimetry , and the scan modes 1080i -LRB- 1,080 actively interlaced lines of resolution -RRB- and 1080p -LRB- 1,080 progressively scanned lines -RRB- .
Field testing of HDTV at 199 sites in the United States was completed August 14 , 1994 .
The signal was transmitted coast-to-coast , and was seen by the public in science centers , and other public theaters specially equipped to receive and display the broadcast .
The connection with Spain was made via the Olympus satellite link from Rome to Barcelona and then with a fiber optic connection from Barcelona to Madrid .
However , Freeview HD is not the first HDTV service over digital terrestrial television in Europe ;
Nevertheless , 29.97 i/59 .94 i is almost universally called 60i , likewise 23.976 p is called 24p .
As an added benefit to the original broadcasters , the losses of the pre-conversion essentially make these files unsuitable for professional TV re-broadcasting .
However , with the roll out of digital broadcasting , and later HDTV broadcasting , countries retained their heritage systems .
720p also imposes less strenuous storage and decoding requirements compared to both 1080i and 1080p .
This is achieved with a TV aerial , just as it has been since the 1940s except now the major network signals are broadcast in high definition -LRB- ABC , Fox , and Ion Television broadcast at 720p resolution ; CBS , My Network TV , NBC , PBS , and The CW at 1080i -RRB- .
As their digital signals more efficiently use the broadcast channel , many broadcasters are adding multiple channels to their signals .
The massive amount of data storage required to archive uncompressed streams meant that inexpensive uncompressed storage options were not available to the consumer .
This device accepts HD content through component video inputs and stores the content in MPEG-2 format in a .
ts file or in a Blu-ray compatible format .
m2ts file on the hard drive or DVD burner of a computer connected to the PVR through a USB 2.0 interface .
None of the direct broadcast satellite providers have offered this feature on any of their supported boxes , but some cable TV companies have .
Wood is sometimes defined as only the secondary xylem in the stems of trees , or it is defined more broadly to include the same type of tissue elsewhere such as in the roots of trees or shrubs .
Wood may also refer to other plant materials with comparable properties , and to material engineered from wood , or wood chips or fiber .
Where there is no seasonal difference growth rings are likely to be indistinct or absent .
However , there are major differences , depending on the kind of wood -LRB- see below -RRB- .
However , by the time they become competent to conduct water , all xylem tracheids and vessels have lost their cytoplasm and the cells are therefore functionally dead .
The more leaves a tree bears and the more vigorous its growth , the larger the volume of sapwood required .
Sometimes trees -LRB- of species that do form heartwood -RRB- grown in the open may become of considerable size , 30 cm or more in diameter , before any heartwood begins to form , for example , in second-growth hickory , or open-grown pines .
This is evidenced by the fact that a tree can thrive with its heart completely decayed .
Others never form heartwood .
No definite relation exists between the annual rings of growth and the amount of sapwood .
No matter how smooth and clear a log is on the outside , it is more or less knotty near the middle .
Whatever advantages , however , that sapwood may have in this connection are due solely to its relative age and position .
Since each succeeding ring is laid down on the outside of the wood previously formed , it follows that unless a tree materially increases its production of wood from year to year , the rings must necessarily become thinner as the trunk gets wider .
Some trees , such as southern oaks , maintain the same width of ring for hundreds of years .
Upon the whole , however , as a tree gets larger in diameter the width of the growth rings decreases .
In some trees , the wood laid on late in the life of a tree is softer , lighter , weaker , and more even-textured than that produced earlier , but in other trees , the reverse applies .
This may or may not correspond to heartwood and sapwood .
In a smaller tree , the reverse may be true .
Stumps thus dug may actually remain a century or more since being cut .
The discoloration is merely an indication of an injury , and in all probability does not of itself affect the properties of the wood .
Ordinary sap-staining is due to fungal growth , but does not necessarily produce a weakening effect .
In heartwood it occurs only in the first and last forms .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Hence the greater the proportion of latewood the greater the density and strength .
In choosing a piece of pine where strength or stiffness is the important consideration , the principal thing to observe is the comparative amounts of earlywood and latewood .
The width of ring is not nearly so important as the proportion and nature of the latewood in the ring .
Several factors may be involved .
In inferior oak , this latewood is much reduced both in quantity and quality .
Such variation is very largely the result of rate of growth .
Here not only strength , but toughness and resilience are important .
In many uses of wood , total strength is not the main consideration .
Of much less importance are plants such as Pandanus , Dracaena and Cordyline .
With all this material , the structure and composition of the structural material is quite different from ordinary wood .
The terms are essentially equivalent as long as the metric system is used .
: -RRB-
It is common to classify wood as either softwood or hardwood .
These names are a bit misleading , as hardwoods are not necessarily hard , and softwoods are not necessarily soft .
One of the densest woods is black ironwood .
Wood also contains sulfur , chlorine , silicon , phosphorus , and other elements in small quantity .
It is mainly five-carbon sugars that are linked in an irregular manner , in contrast to the cellulose .
Lignin is the third component at around 27 % in coniferous wood vs. 23 % in deciduous trees .
Lignin confers the hydrophobic properties reflecting the fact that it is based on aromatic rings .
These three components are interwoven , and direct covalent linkages exist between the lignin and the hemicellulose .
Wood has long been used as an artistic medium .
It is also used in woodcut printmaking , and for engraving .
Certain types of musical instruments , such as those of the violin family , the guitar , the clarinet and recorder , the xylophone , and the marimba , are traditionally made mostly or entirely of wood .
Many types of sports equipment are made of wood , or were constructed of wood in the past .
Somalis -LRB- Somali : Soomaali , Arabic : صومال -RRB- are an ethnic group inhabiting the Horn of Africa -LRB- Somali Peninsula -RRB- .
Al-Umari also credits Ifat with seven `` mother cities '' : Belqulzar , Kuljura , Shimi , Shewa , Adal , Jamme and Laboo .
In the late 19th century , after the Berlin conference had ended , European empires sailed with their armies to the Horn of Africa .
The imperial clouds wavering over Somalia alarmed the Dervish leader Mohammed Abdullah Hassan , who gathered Somali soldiers from across the Horn of Africa and began one of the longest anti-colonial wars ever .
The Dervish State successfully repulsed the British empire four times and forced it to retreat to the coastal region .
The Turks also named Hassan Emir of the Somali nation , and the Germans promised to officially recognize any territories the Dervishes were to acquire .
As a result of this bombardment , former Dervish territories were turned into a protectorate of Britain .
To the extent that Italy held the territory by UN mandate , the trusteeship provisions gave the Somalis the opportunity to gain experience in political education and self-government .
These were advantages that British Somaliland , which was to be incorporated into the new Somali state , did not have .
Although in the 1950s British colonial officials attempted , through various administrative development efforts , to make up for past neglect , the protectorate stagnated .
The disparity between the two territories in economic development and political experience would cause serious difficulties when it came time to integrate the two parts .
Britain included the proviso that the Somali nomads would retain their autonomy , but Ethiopia immediately claimed sovereignty over them .
The referendum turned out in favour of a continued association with France , largely due to a combined yes vote by the sizable Afar ethnic group and resident Europeans .
There was also widespread vote rigging , with the French expelling thousands of Somalis before the referendum reached the polls .
Harbi was killed in a plane crash two years later .
On 20 July 1961 and through a popular referendum , the people of Somalia ratified a new constitution , which was first drafted in 1960 .
In 1967 , Muhammad Haji Ibrahim Egal became Prime Minister , a position to which he was appointed by Shermarke .
Egal would later become the President of the autonomous Somaliland region in northwestern Somalia .
After haplogroup E1b1b , the second most frequently occurring Y-DNA haplogroup among Somalis is the West Asian haplogroup T -LRB- M70 -RRB- .
It is observed in slightly more than 10 % of Somali males .
Haplogroup T , like haplogroup E1b1b , is also typically found among populations of Northeast Africa , North Africa , the Near East and the Mediterranean .
This Ethio-Somali component is today most common among Afro-Asiatic-speaking populations in the Horn of Africa .
The population then likely split into two branches , with one group heading westward toward the Maghreb and the other moving south into the Horn .
The analysis of HLA antigens has also helped clarify the possible background of the Somali people , as the distribution of haplotype frequencies vary among population groups .
The history of Islam in Somalia is as old as the religion itself .
Somalis were among the first populations on the continent to embrace Islam .
They provide Islamic education for children , thereby filling a clear religious and social role in the country .
Known as the most stable local , non-formal system of education providing basic religious and moral instruction , their strength rests on community support and their use of locally made and widely available teaching materials .
The Qur ` anic system , which teaches the greatest number of students relative to other educational sub-sectors , is oftentimes the only system accessible to Somalis in nomadic as compared to urban areas .
Clans are patrilineal and are often divided into sub-clans , sometimes with many sub-divisions .
Tradition holds this general area as an ancestral homeland of the Somali people .
Somali society is traditionally ethnically endogamous .
Community-based video rental stores likewise carry the latest Somali films and music .
Internet cafés , hotels , coffee shops , restaurants and import-export businesses are all testimony to the Somalis ' entrepreneurial spirit .
Besides their traditional areas of inhabitation in Greater Somalia , a Somali community mainly consisting of entrepreneurs , academics , and students also exists in Egypt .
In addition , there is an historical Somali community in the general Sudan area .
The exact number of speakers of Somali is unknown .
The coastal dialects have additional phonemes which do not exist in Standard Somali .
A number of writing systems have been used over the years for transcribing the language .
Somalis have a rich musical heritage centered on traditional Somali folklore .
Epic and period films as well as international co-productions followed suit , facilitated by the proliferation of video technology and national television networks .
In the 1990s and 2000s , a new wave of more entertainment-oriented movies emerged .
Referred to as Somaliwood , this upstart , youth-based cinematic movement has energized the Somali film industry and in the process introduced innovative storylines , marketing strategies and production techniques .
The young directors Abdisalam Aato of Olol Films and Abdi Malik Isak are at the forefront of this quiet revolution .
Somali art is the artistic culture of the Somali people , both historic and contemporary .
More typically , intricate patterns and geometric designs , bold colors and monumental architecture were the norm .
It is worn by Somali women on their hands , arms , feet and neck during weddings , Eid , Ramadan , and other festive occasions .
The palm is also frequently decorated with a dot of henna and the fingertips are dipped in the dye .
The equally diverse Somali beach soccer team also represents the country in international beach soccer competitions .
Abdi Bile won the 1500 m event at the World Championships in 1987 , running the fastest final 800 m of any 1,500 meter race in history .
He was a two-time Olympian -LRB- 1984 and 1996 -RRB- and dominated the event in the late 1980s .
He also won silver medals in this event at the 1987 and 1991 World Championships , as well as the 1985 IAAF World Marathon Cup .
Mo Farah is a double Olympic gold medal winner and world champion , and holds the European track record for 10,000 metres , the British road record for 10,000 metres , the British indoor record in the 3000 metres , the British track record for 5000 metres and the European indoor record for 5000 metres .
The Somali National Olympic committee has devised a special support program to ensure continued success in future tournaments .
The garment can be worn in different styles .
It can also be made with other fabrics , including white cloth with gold borders .
The gown is worn over a full-length half-slip and a brassiere .
The dirac is usually sparkly and very colorful , the most popular styles being those with gilded borders or threads .
The fabric is typically acquired from Somali clothing stores in tandem with the gorgorad .
In the past , dirac fabric was also frequently purchased from South Asian merchandisers .
Unmarried or young women , however , do not always cover their heads .
The Somali flag is an ethnic flag conceived to represent ethnic Somalis .
Upon independence in 1960 , the flag was adopted as the national flag of the nascent Somali Republic .
Somali cuisine varies from region to region and consists of a fusion of diverse culinary influences .
It is the product of Somalia 's rich tradition of trade and commerce .
Spices like cumin , cardamom , cloves , cinnamon , and garden sage are used to aromatize these different rice delicacies .
Somalis eat dinner as late as 9 pm .
It is made from sugar , corn starch , cardamom powder , nutmeg powder and ghee .
Peanuts are also sometimes added to enhance texture and flavor .
Somali scholars have for centuries produced many notable examples of Islamic literature ranging from poetry to Hadith .
Additionally , Mohamed Ibrahim Warsame ` Hadrawi ' is considered by many to be the greatest living Somali poet , and several of his works have been translated internationally .
Xeer is a polycentric legal system where there is no monopolistic agent that determines what the law should be or how it should be interpreted .
There is no evidence that it developed elsewhere or was greatly influenced by any foreign legal system .
The Xeer legal system also requires a certain amount of specialization of different functions within the legal framework .
Somali architecture is a rich and diverse tradition of engineering and designing .
This practice would continue over and over again throughout the following centuries .
The Medieval period is itself subdivided into the Early , the High , and the Late Middle Ages .
Although there were substantial changes in society and political structures , the break with Antiquity was not complete .
The still-sizeable Byzantine Empire survived in the east and remained a major power .
In the West , most kingdoms incorporated the few extant Roman institutions .
Monasteries were founded as campaigns to Christianise pagan Europe continued .
The Franks , under the Carolingian dynasty , briefly established the Carolingian Empire during the later 8th and early 9th century .
It covered much of Western Europe , but later succumbed to the pressures of internal civil wars combined with external invasions -- Vikings from the north , Magyars from the east , and Saracens from the south .
Kings became the heads of centralised nation states , reducing crime and violence but making the ideal of a unified Christendom more distant .
Intellectual life was marked by scholasticism , a philosophy that emphasised joining faith to reason , and by the founding of universities .
The theology of Thomas Aquinas , the paintings of Giotto , the poetry of Dante and Chaucer , the travels of Marco Polo , and the architecture of Gothic cathedrals such as Chartres are among the outstanding achievements toward the end of this period , and into the Late Middle Ages .
When referring to their own times , they spoke of them as being `` modern '' .
Bruni and later historians argued that Italy had recovered since Petrarch 's time , and therefore added a third period to Petrarch 's two .
The `` Middle Ages '' first appears in Latin in 1469 as media tempestas or `` middle season '' .
In early usage , there were many variants , including medium aevum , or `` middle age '' , first recorded in 1604 , and media saecula , or `` middle ages '' , first recorded in 1625 .
The alternative term `` medieval '' -LRB- or occasionally `` mediaeval '' -RRB- derives from medium aevum .
English historians often use the Battle of Bosworth Field in 1485 to mark the end of the period .
Historians from Romance-speaking countries tend to divide the Middle Ages into two parts : an earlier `` High '' and later `` Low '' period .
English-speaking historians , following their German counterparts , generally subdivide the Middle Ages into three intervals : `` Early '' , `` High '' , and `` Late '' .
In the 19th century , the entire Middle Ages were often referred to as the `` Dark Ages '' , -LSB- B -RSB- but with the adoption of these subdivisions , use of this term was restricted to the Early Middle Ages , at least among historians .
Economic issues , including inflation , and external pressure on the frontiers combined to make the 3rd century politically unstable , with emperors coming to the throne only to be rapidly replaced by new usurpers .
More bureaucrats were needed in the central administration to deal with the needs of the army , which led to complaints from civilians that there were more tax-collectors in the empire than tax-payers .
Diocletian 's reforms strengthened the governmental bureaucracy , reformed taxation , and strengthened the army , which bought the empire time but did not resolve the problems it was facing : excessive taxation , a declining birthrate , and pressures on its frontiers , among others .
Civil war between rival emperors became common in the middle of the 4th century , diverting soldiers from the empire 's frontier forces and allowing invaders to encroach .
For much of the 4th century , Roman society stabilised in a new form that differed from the earlier classical period , with a widening gulf between the rich and poor , and a decline in the vitality of the smaller towns .
The settlement did not go smoothly , and when Roman officials mishandled the situation , the Ostrogoths began to raid and plunder .
As well as the threat from such tribal confederacies from the north , internal divisions within the empire , especially within the Christian Church , caused problems .
In 400 , the Visigoths invaded the Western Roman Empire and , although briefly forced back from Italy , in 410 sacked the city of Rome .
In 406 the Alans , Vandals , and Suevi crossed into Gaul ; over the next three years they spread across Gaul and in 409 crossed the Pyrenees Mountains into modern-day Spain .
The Migration Period began , where various people , initially largely Germanic peoples , moved across Europe .
The Franks , Alemanni , and the Burgundians all ended up in northern Gaul while the Angles , Saxons , and Jutes settled in Britain .
In the 430s the Huns began invading the empire ; their king Attila -LRB- r. 434 -- 453 -RRB- led invasions into the Balkans in 442 and 447 , Gaul in 451 , and Italy in 452 .
The Hunnic threat remained until Attila 's death in 453 , when the Hunnic confederation he led fell apart .
These invasions by the tribes completely changed the political and demographic nature of what had been the Western Roman Empire .
By the end of the 5th century the western section of the empire was divided into smaller political units , ruled by the tribes that had invaded in the early part of the century .
The political structure of Western Europe changed with the end of the united Roman Empire .
Although the movements of peoples during this period are usually described as `` invasions '' , they were not just military expeditions but migrations of entire peoples into the empire .
Such movements were aided by the refusal of the western Roman elites to support the army or pay the taxes that would have allowed the military to suppress the migration .
When the line of western emperors ceased , many of the kings who replaced them were from the same background .
Intermarriage between the new kings and the Roman elites was common .
This led to a fusion of Roman culture with the customs of the invading tribes , including the popular assemblies that allowed free male tribal members more say in political matters than was common in the Roman state .
Material artefacts left by the Romans and the invaders are often similar , and tribal items were often modelled on Roman objects .
Much of the scholarly and written culture of the new kingdoms was also based on Roman intellectual traditions .
This meant there was less need for large tax revenues and so the taxation systems decayed .
Warfare was common between and within the kingdoms .
Slavery declined as the supply weakened , and society became more rural .
-LSB- F -RSB-
Between the 5th and 8th centuries , new peoples and individuals filled the political void left by Roman centralised government .
Between today 's Geneva and Lyon , it grew to become the realm of Burgundy in the late 5th and early 6th centuries .
In northern Gaul , the Franks and Britons set up small polities .
-LSB- G -RSB- Under Childeric 's son Clovis -LRB- r. 509 -- 511 -RRB- , the Frankish kingdom expanded and converted to Christianity .
Britons , related to the natives of Britannia -- modern-day Great Britain -- settled in what is now Brittany .
-LSB- H -RSB- Other monarchies were established by the Visigoths in Iberia , the Suevi in north-western Iberia , and the Vandals in North Africa .
In the 6th century , the Lombards settled in northern Italy , replacing the Ostrogothic kingdom with a grouping of duchies that occasionally selected a king to rule over them all .
By the late 6th century this arrangement had been replaced by a permanent monarchy .
The invasions brought new ethnic groups to Europe , although some regions received a larger influx of new peoples than others .
The settlement of peoples was accompanied by changes in languages .
These changes from Latin to the new languages took many centuries .
The Eastern Empire was marked by closer relations between the political state and Christian Church , with doctrinal matters assuming an importance in eastern politics that they did not have in Western Europe .
Justinian also oversaw the construction of the Hagia Sophia in Constantinople and the reconquest of North Africa from the Vandals and Italy from the Ostrogoths , under Belisarius -LRB- d. 565 -RRB- .
The conquest of Italy was not complete , as a deadly outbreak of plague in 542 led to the rest of Justinian 's reign concentrating on defensive measures rather than further conquests .
At the emperor 's death , the Byzantines had control of most of Italy , North Africa , and a small foothold in southern Spain .
Justinian 's reconquests have been criticised by historians for overextending his realm and setting the stage for the Muslim conquests , but many of the difficulties faced by Justinian 's successors were due not just to over-taxation to pay for his wars but to the essentially civilian nature of the empire , which made raising troops difficult .
In the Eastern Empire the slow infiltration of the Balkans by the Slavs added a further difficulty for Justinian 's successors .
They remained a strong power until 796 .
In 628 the empire secured a peace treaty and recovered all of its lost territories .
In Western Europe , some of the older Roman elite families died out while others became more involved with Church than secular affairs .
Values attached to Latin scholarship and education mostly disappeared , and while literacy remained important , it became a practical skill rather than a sign of elite status .
Most intellectual efforts went towards imitating classical scholarship , but some original works were created , along with now-lost oral compositions .
Lords and kings supported entourages of fighters who formed the backbone of the military forces .
Most feuds seem to have ended quickly with the payment of some sort of compensation .
Women took part in aristocratic society mainly in their roles as wives and mothers of men , with the role of mother of a ruler being especially prominent in Merovingian Gaul .
Only in Italy does it appear that women were always considered under the protection and control of a male relative .
Peasant society is much less documented than the nobility .
Landholding patterns in the West were not uniform ; some areas had greatly fragmented landholding patterns , but in other areas large contiguous blocks of land were the norm .
These differences allowed for a wide variety of peasant societies , some dominated by aristocratic landholders and others having a great deal of autonomy .
Land settlement also varied greatly .
Others lived in small groups of a few families and still others lived on isolated farms spread over the countryside .
There were also areas where the pattern was a mix of two or more of those systems .
Roman city life and culture changed greatly in the early Middle Ages .
Although Italian cities remained inhabited , they contracted significantly in size .
In Northern Europe , cities also shrank , while civic monuments and other public buildings were raided for building materials .
The establishment of new kingdoms often meant some growth for the towns chosen as capitals .
Officially they were tolerated , if subject to conversion efforts , and at times were even encouraged to settle in new areas .
Religious beliefs in the Eastern Empire and Persia were in flux during the late 6th and early 7th centuries .
By 714 , Islamic forces controlled much of the peninsula in a region they called Al-Andalus .
The Islamic conquests reached their peak in the mid-8th century .
By the middle of the 8th century , new trading patterns were emerging in the Mediterranean ; trade between the Franks and the Arabs replaced the old Roman patterns of trade .
Franks traded timber , furs , swords and slaves in return for silks and other fabrics , spices , and precious metals from the Arabs .
The migrations and invasions of the 4th and 5th centuries disrupted trade networks around the Mediterranean .
The replacement of goods from long-range trade with local products was a trend throughout the old Roman lands that happened in the Early Middle Ages .
This was especially marked in the lands that did not lie on the Mediterranean , such as northern Gaul or Britain .
In the northern parts of Europe , not only were the trade networks local , but the goods carried were simple , with little pottery or other complex products .
Around the Mediterranean , pottery remained prevalent and appears to have been traded over medium-range networks , not just produced locally .
The various Germanic states in the west all had coinages that imitated existing Roman and Byzantine forms .
From these areas , the denier or penny spread throughout Europe during the centuries from 700 to 1000 .
No silver coins denominated in multiple units were minted .
Christianity was a major unifying factor between Eastern and Western Europe before the Arab conquests , but the conquest of North Africa sundered maritime connections between those areas .
Increasingly the Byzantine Church differed in language , practices , and liturgy from the western Church .
Theological and political differences emerged , and by the early and middle 8th century issues such as iconoclasm , clerical marriage , and state control of the church had widened to the extent that the cultural and religious differences were greater than the similarities .
The ecclesiastical structure of the Roman Empire survived the movements and invasions in the west mostly intact , but the papacy was little regarded , and few of the western bishops looked to the bishop of Rome for religious or political leadership .
Many of the popes prior to 750 were more concerned with Byzantine affairs and eastern theological controversies .
Irish missionaries were most active in Western Europe between the 5th and the 7th centuries , going first to England and Scotland and then on to the continent .
The shape of European monasticism was determined by traditions and ideas that originated with the Desert Fathers of Egypt and Syria .
Monastic ideals spread from Egypt to Western Europe in the 5th and 6th centuries through hagiographical literature such as the Life of Anthony .
Monks and monasteries had a deep effect on the religious and political life of the Early Middle Ages , in various cases acting as land trusts for powerful families , centres of propaganda and royal support in newly conquered regions , and bases for missions and proselytisation .
They were the main and sometimes only outposts of education and literacy in a region .
Many of the surviving manuscripts of the Latin classics were copied in monasteries in the Early Middle Ages .
The 7th century was a tumultuous period of wars between Austrasia and Neustria .
Later members of his family inherited the office , acting as advisers and regents .
-LSB- K -RSB- Great Britain was divided into small states dominated by the kingdoms of Northumbria , Mercia , Wessex , and East Anglia , which were descended from the Anglo-Saxon invaders .
Smaller kingdoms in present-day Wales and Scotland were still under the control of the native Britons and Picts .
Ireland was divided into even smaller political units , usually known as tribal kingdoms , under the control of kings .
There were perhaps as many as 150 local kings in Ireland , of varying importance .
Pippin 's takeover was reinforced with propaganda that portrayed the Merovingians as inept or cruel rulers , exalted the accomplishments of Charles Martel , and circulated stories of the family 's great piety .
When Carloman died of natural causes , Charles blocked the succession of Carloman 's young son and installed himself as the king of the united Austrasia and Neustria .
Charles , more often known as Charles the Great or Charlemagne , embarked upon a programme of systematic expansion in 774 that unified a large portion of Europe , eventually controlling modern-day France , northern Italy , and Saxony .
In the wars that lasted beyond 800 , he rewarded allies with war booty and command over parcels of land .
In 774 , Charlemagne conquered the Lombards , which freed the papacy from the fear of Lombard conquest and marked the beginnings of the Papal States .
-LSB- L -RSB-
It also marks a change in Charlemagne 's relationship with the Byzantine Empire , as the assumption of the imperial title by the Carolingians asserted their equivalence to the Byzantine state .
There were several differences between the newly established Carolingian Empire and both the older Western Roman Empire and the concurrent Byzantine Empire .
The Frankish lands were rural in character , with only a few small cities .
Clergy and local bishops served as officials , as well as the imperial officials called missi dominici , who served as roving inspectors and troubleshooters .
Literacy increased , as did development in the arts , architecture and jurisprudence , as well as liturgical and scriptural studies .
Charlemagne 's chancery -- or writing office -- made use of a new script today known as Carolingian minuscule , -LSB- M -RSB- allowing a common writing style that advanced communication across much of Europe .
Charlemagne sponsored changes in church liturgy , imposing the Roman form of church service on his domains , as well as the Gregorian chant in liturgical music for the churches .
An important activity for scholars during this period was the copying , correcting , and dissemination of basic works on religious and secular topics , with the aim of encouraging learning .
New works on religious topics and schoolbooks were also produced .
Grammarians of the period modified the Latin language , changing it from the Classical Latin of the Roman Empire into a more flexible form to fit the needs of the church and government .
Just before Charlemagne died in 814 , he crowned Louis as his successor .
Louis divided the rest of the empire between Lothair and Charles the Bald -LRB- d. 877 -RRB- , his youngest son .
Lothair took East Francia , comprising both banks of the Rhine and eastwards , leaving Charles West Francia with the empire to the west of the Rhineland and the Alps .
The division was disputed .
Pepin II of Aquitaine -LRB- d. after 864 -RRB- , the emperor 's grandson , rebelled in a contest for Aquitaine , while Louis the German tried to annex all of East Francia .
Louis the Pious died in 840 , with the empire still in chaos .
Charlemagne 's grandsons and great-grandsons divided their kingdoms between their descendants , eventually causing all internal cohesion to be lost .
-LSB- N -RSB- In 987 the Carolingian dynasty was replaced in the western lands , with the crowning of Hugh Capet -LRB- r. 987 -- 996 -RRB- as king .
The breakup of the Carolingian Empire was accompanied by invasions , migrations , and raids by external foes .
The breakup of the Abbasid dynasty meant that the Islamic world fragmented into smaller political states , some of which began expanding into Italy and Sicily , as well as over the Pyrenees into the southern parts of the Frankish kingdoms .
Efforts by local kings to fight the invaders led to the formation of new political entities .
By the middle of the 10th century , Alfred 's successors had conquered Northumbria , and restored English control over most of the southern part of Great Britain .
In 972 , he secured recognition of his title by the Byzantine Empire , which he sealed with the marriage of his son Otto II -LRB- r. 967 -- 983 -RRB- to Theophanu -LRB- d. 991 -RRB- , daughter of an earlier Byzantine Emperor Romanos II -LRB- r. 959 -- 963 -RRB- .
By the late 10th century Italy had been drawn into the Ottonian sphere after a period of instability ; Otto III -LRB- r. 996 -- 1002 -RRB- spent much of his later reign in the kingdom .
The western Frankish kingdom was more fragmented , and although kings remained nominally in charge , much of the political power devolved to the local lords .
Some kings converted to Christianity , although not all by 1000 .
Scandinavians also expanded and colonised throughout Europe .
Commerce revived and the emperors oversaw the extension of a uniform administration to all the provinces .
The military was reorganised , which allowed the emperors John I -LRB- r. 969 -- 976 -RRB- and Basil II -LRB- r. 976 -- 1025 -RRB- to expand the frontiers of the empire on all fronts .
The imperial court was the centre of a revival of classical learning , a process known as the Macedonian Renaissance .
Writers such as John Geometres -LRB- fl .
Missionary efforts by both eastern and western clergy resulted in the conversion of the Moravians , Bulgars , Bohemians , Poles , Magyars , and Slavic inhabitants of the Kievan Rus ' .
These conversions contributed to the founding of political states in the lands of those peoples -- the states of Moravia , Bulgaria , Bohemia , Poland , Hungary , and the Kievan Rus ' .
By 1018 , the last Bulgarian nobles had surrendered to the Byzantine Empire .
During the later Roman Empire , the principal military developments were attempts to create an effective cavalry force as well as the continued development of highly specialised types of troops .
The creation of heavily armoured cataphract-type soldiers as cavalry was an important feature of the 5th-century Roman military .
During the early invasion period , the stirrup had not been introduced into warfare , which limited the usefulness of cavalry as shock troops because it was not possible to put the full force of the horse and rider behind blows struck by the rider .
Carolingian art was produced for a small group of figures around the court , and the monasteries and churches they supported .
It was dominated by efforts to regain the dignity and classicism of imperial Roman and Byzantine art , but was also influenced by the Insular art of the British Isles .
Insular art integrated the energy of Irish Celtic and Anglo-Saxon Germanic styles of ornament with Mediterranean forms such as the book , and established many characteristics of art for the rest of the medieval period .
There are survivals from the large brooches in fibula or penannular form that were a key piece of personal adornment for elites , including the Irish Tara Brooch .
Charlemagne 's court seems to have been responsible for the acceptance of figurative monumental sculpture in Christian art , and by the end of the period near life-sized figures such as the Gero Cross were common in important churches .
The use of militia-type levies of the free population declined over the Carolingian period .
Although much of the Carolingian armies were mounted , a large proportion during the early period appear to have been mounted infantry , rather than true cavalry .
A technological advance that had implications beyond the military was the horseshoe , which allowed horses to be used in rocky terrain .
The High Middle Ages was a period of tremendous expansion of population .
These peasants were often subject to noble overlords and owed them rents and other services , in a system known as manorialism .
There remained a few free peasants throughout this period and beyond , with more of them in the regions of Southern Europe than in the north .
Other sections of society included the nobility , clergy , and townsmen .
Nobles , both the titled nobility and simple knights , exploited the manors and the peasants , although they did not own lands outright but were granted rights to the income from a manor or other lands by an overlord through the system of feudalism .
-LSB- R -RSB- The dominance of the nobility was built upon its control of the land , its military service as heavy cavalry , control of castles , and various immunities from taxes or other impositions .
Control of castles allowed the nobles to defy kings or other overlords .
Nobles were stratified ; kings and the highest-ranking nobility controlled large numbers of commoners and large tracts of land , as well as other nobles .
Beneath them , lesser nobles had authority over smaller areas of land and fewer people .
-LSB- T -RSB-
Townsmen were in a somewhat unusual position , as they did not fit into the traditional three-fold division of society into nobles , clergy , and peasants .
During the 12th and 13th centuries , the ranks of the townsmen expanded greatly as existing towns grew and new population centres were founded .
But throughout the Middle Ages the population of the towns probably never exceeded 10 per cent of the total population .
Jews also spread across Europe during the period .
Women in the Middle Ages were officially required to be subordinate to some male , whether their father , husband , or other kinsman .
Widows , who were often allowed much control over their own lives , were still restricted legally .
Women 's work generally consisted of household or other domestically inclined tasks .
Townswomen , like peasant women , were responsible for the household , and could also engage in trade .
What trades were open to women varied by country and period .
Noblewomen were responsible for running a household , and could occasionally be expected to handle estates in the absence of male relatives , but they were usually restricted from participation in military or government affairs .
In central and northern Italy and in Flanders , the rise of towns that were to a degree self-governing stimulated economic growth and created an environment for new types of trade associations .
-LSB- V -RSB- Great trading fairs were established and flourished in northern France during the period , allowing Italian and German merchants to trade with each other as well as local merchants .
Besides new trading opportunities , agricultural and technological improvements enabled an increase in crop yields , which in turn allowed the trade networks to expand .
New forms of commercial contracts emerged , allowing risk to be shared among merchants .
The High Middle Ages was the formative period in the history of the modern Western state .
Northern Crusades and the advance of Christian kingdoms and military orders into previously pagan regions in the Baltic and Finnic north-east brought the forced assimilation of numerous native peoples into European culture .
His successors continued to struggle against the papacy as well as the German nobility .
A period of instability followed the death of Emperor Henry V -LRB- r. 1111 -- 25 -RRB- , who died without heirs , until Frederick I Barbarossa -LRB- r. 1155 -- 90 -RRB- took the imperial throne .
Although he ruled effectively , the basic problems remained , and his successors continued to struggle into the 13th century .
His court was famous for its scholars and he was often accused of heresy .
He and his successors faced many difficulties , including the invasion of the Mongols into Europe in the mid-13th century .
Mongols first shattered the Kievan Rus ' principalities and then invaded Eastern Europe in 1241 , 1259 , and 1287 .
Under the Capetian dynasty France slowly began to expand its authority over the nobility , growing out of the Île-de-France to exert control over more of the country in the 11th and 12th centuries .
-LSB- X -RSB- Richard 's younger brother John -LRB- r. 1199 -- 1216 -RRB- lost Normandy and the rest of the northern French possessions in 1204 to the French King Philip II Augustus -LRB- r. 1180 -- 1223 -RRB- .
This led to dissension among the English nobility , while John 's financial exactions to pay for his unsuccessful attempts to regain Normandy led in 1215 to Magna Carta , a charter that confirmed the rights and privileges of free men in England .
Under Henry III -LRB- r. 1216 -- 72 -RRB- , John 's son , further concessions were made to the nobility , and royal power was diminished .
The French monarchy continued to make gains against the nobility during the late 12th and 13th centuries , bringing more territories within the kingdom under their personal rule and centralising the royal administration .
Under Louis IX -LRB- r. 1226 -- 70 -RRB- , royal prestige rose to new heights as Louis served as a mediator for most of Europe .
-LSB- Y -RSB-
Christian forces advanced again in the early 13th century , culminating in the capture of Seville in 1248 .
The Turks were then free to invade Asia Minor , which dealt a dangerous blow to the Byzantine Empire by seizing a large part of its population and its economic heartland .
Although the Byzantines regrouped and recovered somewhat , they never fully regained Asia Minor and were often on the defensive .
The Byzantines also faced a revived Bulgaria , which in the late 12th and 13th centuries spread throughout the Balkans .
The crusades were intended to seize Jerusalem from Muslim control .
Urban promised indulgence to anyone who took part .
One feature of the crusades was the pogroms against local Jews that often took place as the crusaders left their countries for the East .
These were especially brutal during the First Crusade , when the Jewish communities in Cologne , Mainz , and Worms were destroyed , and other communities in cities between the rivers Seine and Rhine suffered destruction .
Another outgrowth of the crusades was the foundation of a new type of monastic order , the military orders of the Templars and Hospitallers , which fused monastic life with military service .
The crusaders consolidated their conquests into crusader states .
During the 12th and 13th centuries , there were a series of conflicts between those states and the surrounding Islamic states .
The Byzantines recaptured the city in 1261 , but never regained their former strength .
The Spanish crusades became fused with the Reconquista of Spain from the Muslims .
Although the Templars and Hospitallers took part in the Spanish crusades , similar Spanish military religious orders were founded , most of which had become part of the two main orders of Calatrava and Santiago by the beginning of the 12th century .
During the 11th century , developments in philosophy and theology led to increased intellectual activity .
In the late 11th and early 12th centuries cathedral schools spread throughout Western Europe , signalling the shift of learning from monasteries to cathedrals and towns .
Cathedral schools were in turn replaced by the universities established in major European cities .
Chivalry and the ethos of courtly love developed in royal and noble courts .
This culture was expressed in the vernacular languages rather than Latin , and comprised poems , stories , legends , and popular songs spread by troubadours , or wandering minstrels .
Secular and religious histories were also produced .
Legal studies advanced during the 12th century .
This led to the recording and standardisation of legal codes throughout Western Europe .
12th century -RRB- , a teacher at Bologna , wrote what became the standard text of canon law -- the Decretum .
In the 12th and 13th centuries , Europe produced economic growth and innovations in methods of production .
The construction of cathedrals and castles advanced building technology , leading to the development of large stone buildings .
In military affairs , the use of infantry with specialised roles increased .
Along with the still-dominant heavy cavalry , armies often included mounted and infantry crossbowmen , as well as sappers and engineers .
Crossbows , which had been known in Late Antiquity , increased in use partly because of the increase in siege warfare in the 10th and 11th centuries .
Where available , Roman brick and stone buildings were recycled for their materials .
From the tentative beginnings known as the First Romanesque , the style flourished and spread across Europe in a remarkably homogeneous form .
The large portal with coloured sculpture in high relief became a central feature of façades , especially in France , and the capitals of columns were often carved with narrative scenes of imaginative monsters and animals .
Stained glass became a crucial element in the design of churches , which continued to use extensive wall-paintings , now almost all lost .
It sought to maintain a high quality of spiritual life by placing itself under the protection of the papacy and by electing its own abbot without interference from laymen , thus maintaining economic and political independence from local lords .
Monastic reform inspired change in the secular church .
The emperor saw the protection of the Church as one of his responsibilities as well as wanting to preserve the right to appoint his own choices as bishops within his lands , but the papacy insisted on the Church 's independence from secular lords .
The dispute represents a significant stage in the creation of a papal monarchy separate from and equal to lay authorities .
The High Middle Ages was a period of great religious movements .
Besides the Crusades and monastic reforms , people sought to participate in new forms of religious life .
These new orders were formed in response to the feeling of the laity that Benedictine monasticism no longer met the needs of the laymen , who along with those wishing to enter the religious life wanted a return to the simpler hermetical monasticism of early Christianity , or to live an Apostolic life .
Religious pilgrimages were also encouraged .
Others joined the Cathars , another heretical movement condemned by the papacy .
Towns were especially hard-hit because of their crowded conditions .
-LSB- AD -RSB- Large areas of land were left sparsely inhabited , and in some places fields were left unworked .
Wages rose as landlords sought to entice the reduced number of available workers to their fields .
Further problems were lower rents and lower demand for food , both of which cut into agricultural income .
Urban workers also felt that they had a right to greater earnings , and popular uprisings broke out across Europe .
The trauma of the plague led to an increased piety throughout Europe , manifested by the foundation of new charities , the self-mortification of the flagellants , and the scapegoating of Jews .
Conditions were further unsettled by the return of the plague throughout the rest of the 14th century ; it continued to strike Europe periodically during the rest of the Middle Ages .
Society throughout Europe was disturbed by the dislocations caused by the Black Death .
Lands that had been marginally productive were abandoned , as the survivors were able to acquire more fertile areas .
Landlords also became more conscious of common interests with other landholders , and they joined together to extort privileges from their governments .
Partly at the urging of landlords , governments attempted to legislate a return to the economic conditions that existed before the Black Death .
The rise of banking in Italy during the 13th century continued throughout the 14th century , fuelled partly by the increasing warfare of the period and the needs of the papacy to move money between kingdoms .
Many banking firms loaned money to royalty , at great risk , as some were bankrupted when kings defaulted on their loans .
-LSB- AE -RSB-
Kings profited from warfare that extended royal legislation and increased the lands they directly controlled .
Throughout the 14th century , French kings sought to expand their influence at the expense of the territorial holdings of the nobility .
-LSB- AG -RSB- The resulting stresses almost caused the disintegration of the French kingdom during the early years of the war .
The price was high , as the population of France at the end of the Wars was likely half what it had been at the start of the conflict .
Conversely , the Wars had a positive effect on English national identity , doing much to fuse the various local identities into a national English ideal .
The conflict with France also helped create a national culture in England separate from French culture , which had previously been the dominant influence .
The dominance of the English longbow began during early stages of the Hundred Years ' War , and cannon appeared on the battlefield at Crécy in 1346 .
In modern-day Germany , the Holy Roman Empire continued to rule , but the elective nature of the imperial crown meant there was no enduring dynasty around which a strong state could form .
The major power around the Baltic Sea was the Hanseatic League , a commercial confederation of city states that traded from Western Europe to Russia .
Scotland emerged from English domination under Robert the Bruce -LRB- r. 1306 -- 29 -RRB- , who secured papal recognition of his kingship in 1328 .
They usually controlled only a small section of the Balkan Peninsula near Constantinople , the city itself , and some coastal lands on the Black Sea and around the Aegean Sea .
Western Europeans rallied to the plight of the Christians in the Balkans and declared a new crusade in 1396 ; a great army was sent to the Balkans , where it was defeated at the Battle of Nicopolis .
Constantinople was finally captured by the Ottomans in 1453 .
Besides the schism , the western church was riven by theological controversies , some of which turned into heresies .
The Hussite church , although the target of a crusade , survived beyond the Middle Ages .
Other heresies were manufactured , such as the accusations against the Knights Templar that resulted in their suppression in 1312 and the division of their great wealth between the French King Philip IV -LRB- r. 1285 -- 1314 -RRB- and the Hospitallers .
This further distanced the secular laity from the clergy .
The laity continued the practices of pilgrimages , veneration of relics , and belief in the power of the Devil .
Ockham 's insistence that reason operates independently of faith allowed science to be separated from theology and philosophy .
Commercial secondary schools spread , and some Italian towns had more than one such enterprise .
Universities also spread throughout Europe in the 14th and 15th centuries .
Theatre also developed in the guise of miracle plays put on by the Church .
At the end of the period , the development of the printing press in about 1450 led to the establishment of publishing houses throughout Europe by 1500 .
In the early 15th century , the countries of the Iberian peninsula began to sponsor exploration beyond the boundaries of Europe .
In agriculture , the increased usage of sheep with long-fibred wool allowed a stronger thread to be spun .
Northern Europe and Spain continued to use Gothic styles , which became increasingly elaborate in the 15th century , until almost the end of the period .
All over Europe secular art continued to increase in quantity and quality , and in the 15th century the mercantile classes of Italy and Flanders became important patrons , commissioning small portraits of themselves in oils as well as a growing range of luxury items such as jewellery , ivory caskets , cassone chests , and maiolica pottery .
Italian silk manufacture developed , so that western churches and elites no longer needed to rely on imports from Byzantium or the Islamic world .
In France and Flanders tapestry weaving of sets like The Lady and the Unicorn became a major luxury industry .
From about 1450 printed books rapidly became popular , though still expensive .
Very small woodcuts , nearly all religious , were affordable even by peasants in parts of Northern Europe from the middle of the 15th century .
More expensive engravings supplied a wealthier market with a variety of images .
The medieval period is frequently caricatured as a `` time of ignorance and superstition '' that placed `` the word of religious authorities over personal experience and rational activity . ''
Others argue that reason was generally held in high regard during the Middle Ages .
The caricature of the period is also reflected in some more specific notions .
This is untrue , as lecturers in the medieval universities commonly argued that evidence showed the Earth was a sphere .
While phonetics concerns the physical production , acoustic transmission and perception of the sounds of speech , phonology describes the way sounds function within a given language or across languages to encode meaning .
Definitions of the term vary .
According to Clark et al. -LRB- 2007 -RRB- , it means the systematic use of sound to encode meaning in any spoken human language , or the field of linguistics studying this use .
Trubetzkoy also developed the concept of the archiphoneme .
Another important figure in the Prague school was Roman Jakobson , who was one of the most prominent linguists of the 20th century .
In this view , phonological representations are sequences of segments made up of distinctive features .
These features were an expansion of earlier work by Roman Jakobson , Gunnar Fant , and Morris Halle .
The features describe aspects of articulation and perception , are from a universally fixed set , and have the binary values + or − .
There are at least two levels of representation : underlying representation and surface phonetic representation .
Ordered phonological rules govern how underlying representation is transformed into the actual pronunciation -LRB- the so-called surface form -RRB- .
Rather than acting on segments , phonological processes act on distinctive features within prosodic groups .
Prosodic groups can be as small as a part of a syllable or as large as an entire utterance .
Phonological processes are unordered with respect to each other and apply simultaneously -LRB- though the output of one process may be the input to another -RRB- .
Phonological phenomena are no longer seen as operating on one linear sequence of segments , called phonemes or feature combinations , but rather as involving some parallel sequences of features which reside on multiple tiers .
Principles are held to be inviolable , though parameters may sometimes come into conflict .
Prominent figures in this field include Jonathan Kaye , Jean Lowenstamm , Jean-Roger Vergnaud , Monik Charette , and John Harris .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
For example , in English , the `` p '' sound in pot is aspirated -LRB- pronounced -LSB- pʰ -RSB- -RRB- while that in spot is not aspirated -LRB- pronounced -LSB- p -RSB- -RRB- .
In some other languages , however , these two sounds are perceived as different , and they are consequently assigned to different phonemes .
For example , in Thai , Hindi , and Quechua , there are minimal pairs of words for which aspiration is the only contrasting feature -LRB- two words can have different meanings but with the only difference in pronunciation being that one has an aspirated sound where the other has an unaspirated one -RRB- .
The presence or absence of minimal pairs , as mentioned above , is a frequently used criterion for deciding whether two sounds should be assigned to the same phoneme .
However , other considerations often need to be taken into account as well .
The processing element carries out arithmetic and logic operations , and a sequencing and control unit can change the order of operations in response to stored information .
During this time the first electronic digital computers were developed .
Computers are small enough to fit into mobile devices , and mobile computers can be powered by small batteries .
Personal computers in their various forms are icons of the Information Age and are generally considered as `` computers '' .
However , the embedded computers found in many devices from MP3 players to fighter aircraft and from electronic toys to industrial robots are the most numerous .
It referred to a person who carried out calculations , or computations .
The word continued with the same meaning until the middle of the 20th century .
Devices have been used to aid computation for thousands of years , mostly using one-to-one correspondence with fingers .
The use of counting rods is one example .
Since then , many other forms of reckoning boards or tables have been invented .
It was designed to calculate astronomical positions .
Devices of a level of complexity comparable to that of the Antikythera mechanism would not reappear until a thousand years later .
Many mechanical aids to calculation and measurement were constructed for astronomical and navigation use .
Abū Rayhān al-Bīrūnī invented the first mechanical geared lunisolar calendar astrolabe , an early fixed-wired knowledge processing machine with a gear train and gear-wheels , circa 1000 AD .
As slide rule development progressed , added scales provided reciprocals , squares and square roots , cubes and cube roots , as well as transcendental functions such as logarithms and exponentials , circular and hyperbolic trigonometry and other functions .
To save space and for ease of reading , these are typically circular devices rather than the classic linear slide rule shape .
A popular example is the E6B .
By switching the number and order of its internal wheels different letters , and hence different messages , could be produced .
In effect , it could be mechanically `` programmed '' to read instructions .
In a differential analyzer , the output of one integrator drove the input of the next integrator , or a graphing output .
The torque amplifier was the advance that allowed these machines to work .
The input of programs and data was to be provided to the machine via punched cards , a method being used at the time to direct mechanical looms such as the Jacquard loom .
For output , the machine would have a printer , a curve plotter and a bell .
The machine would also be able to punch numbers onto cards to be read in later .
The Engine incorporated an arithmetic logic unit , control flow in the form of conditional branching and loops , and integrated memory , making it the first design for a general-purpose computer that could be described in modern terms as Turing-complete .
The machine was about a century ahead of its time .
All the parts for his machine had to be made by hand -- this was a major problem for a device with thousands of parts .
Eventually , the project was dissolved with the decision of the British Government to cease funding .
Babbage 's failure to complete the analytical engine can be chiefly attributed to difficulties not only of politics and financing , but also to his desire to develop an increasingly sophisticated computer and to move ahead faster than anyone else could follow .
A dozen of these devices were built before their obsolescence became obvious .
He proved that some such machine would be capable of performing any conceivable mathematical computation if it were representable as an algorithm .
He went on to prove that there was no solution to the Entscheidungsproblem by first showing that the halting problem for Turing machines is undecidable : in general , it is not possible to decide algorithmically whether a given Turing machine will ever halt .
Von Neumann acknowledged that the central concept of the modern computer was due to this paper .
Turing machines are to this day a central object of study in theory of computation .
Except for the limitations imposed by their finite memory stores , modern computers are said to be Turing-complete , which is to say , they have algorithm execution capability equivalent to a universal Turing machine .
During World War II similar devices were developed in other countries as well .
Early digital computers were electromechanical ; electric switches drove mechanical relays to perform the calculation .
These devices had a low operating speed and were eventually superseded by much faster all-electric computers , originally using vacuum tubes .
It was quite similar to modern machines in some respects , pioneering numerous advances such as floating point numbers .
Replacement of the hard-to-implement decimal system -LRB- used in Charles Babbage 's earlier design -RRB- by the simpler binary system meant that Zuse 's machines were easier to build and potentially more reliable , given the technologies available at that time .
The Z3 was Turing complete .
Purely electronic circuit elements soon replaced their mechanical and electromechanical equivalents , at the same time that digital calculation replaced analog .
Experimental equipment that he built in 1934 went into operation 5 years later , converting a portion of the telephone exchange network into an electronic data processing system , using thousands of vacuum tubes .
The German encryption machine , Enigma , was first attacked with the help of the electro-mechanical bombes .
He spent eleven months from early February 1943 designing and building the first Colossus .
It used a large number of valves -LRB- vacuum tubes -RRB- .
It had paper-tape input and was capable of being configured to perform a variety of boolean logical operations on its data , but it was not Turing-complete .
Nine Mk II Colossi were built -LRB- The Mk I was converted to a Mk II making ten machines in total -RRB- .
Although the ENIAC was similar to the Colossus it was much faster and more flexible .
It was unambiguously a Turing-complete device and could compute any problem that would fit into its memory .
Like the Colossus , a `` program '' on the ENIAC was defined by the states of its patch cables and switches , a far cry from the stored program electronic machines that came later .
Once a program was written , it had to be mechanically set into the machine with manual resetting of plugs and switches .
It combined the high speed of electronics with the ability to be programmed for many complex problems .
It also had modules to multiply , divide , and square root .
High speed memory was limited to 20 words -LRB- about 80 bytes -RRB- .
The machine was huge , weighing 30 tons , using 200 kilowatts of electric power and contained over 18,000 vacuum tubes , 1,500 relays , and hundreds of thousands of resistors , capacitors , and inductors .
Early computing machines had fixed programs .
Changing its function required the re-wiring and re-structuring of the machine .
With the proposal of the stored-program computer this changed .
A stored-program computer includes by design an instruction set and can store in memory a set of instructions -LRB- a program -RRB- that details the computation .
His 1945 report ` Proposed Electronic Calculator ' was the first specification for such a device .
It was designed as a testbed for the Williams tube the first random-access digital storage device .
Although the computer was considered `` small and primitive '' by the standards of its time , it was the first working machine to contain all of the elements essential to a modern electronic computer .
As soon as the SSEM had demonstrated the feasibility of its design , a project was initiated at the university to develop it into a more usable computer , the Manchester Mark 1 .
At least seven of these later machines were delivered between 1953 and 1957 , one of them to Shell labs in Amsterdam .
In October 1947 , the directors of British catering company J. Lyons & Company decided to take an active role in promoting the commercial development of computers .
Compared to vacuum tubes , transistors have many advantages : they are smaller , and require less power than vacuum tubes , so give off less heat .
Silicon junction transistors were much more reliable than vacuum tubes and had longer , indefinite , service life .
Transistorized computers could contain tens of thousands of binary logic circuits in a relatively compact space .
The next great advance in computing power came with the advent of the integrated circuit .
Dummer presented the first public description of an integrated circuit at the Symposium on Progress in Quality Electronic Components in Washington , D.C. on 7 May 1952 .
In his patent application of 6 February 1959 , Kilby described his new device as `` a body of semiconductor material ... wherein all the components of the electronic circuit are completely integrated '' .
Noyce also came up with his own idea of an integrated circuit half a year later than Kilby .
His chip solved many practical problems that Kilby 's had not .
This new development heralded an explosion in the commercial and personal use of computers and led to the invention of the microprocessor .
With the continued miniaturization of computing resources , and advancements in portable battery life , portable computers grew in popularity in the 2000s .
The same developments that spurred the growth of laptop computers and other portable computers allowed manufacturers to integrate computing resources into cellular phones .
In practical terms , a computer program may be just a few instructions or extend to many millions of instructions , as do the programs for word processors and web browsers for example .
Large computer programs consisting of several million instructions may take teams of programmers years to write , and due to the complexity of the task almost certainly contain errors .
Program execution might be likened to reading a book .
While a person will normally read each word and line in sequence , they may at times jump back to an earlier place in the text or skip sections that are not of interest .
Similarly , a computer may sometimes go back and repeat the instructions in some section of the program over and over again until some internal condition is met .
In most computers , individual instructions are stored as machine code with each instruction being given a unique number -LRB- its operation code or opcode for short -RRB- .
The command to add two numbers together would have one opcode ; the command to multiply them would have a different opcode , and so on .
The simplest computers are able to perform any of a handful of different instructions ; the more complex computers have several hundred to choose from , each with a unique numerical code .
Since the computer 's memory is able to store numbers , it can also store the instruction codes .
This leads to the important fact that entire programs -LRB- which are just lists of these instructions -RRB- can be represented as lists of numbers and can themselves be manipulated inside the computer in the same way as numeric data .
The fundamental concept of storing programs in the computer 's memory alongside the data they operate on is the crux of the von Neumann , or stored program -LSB- citation needed -RSB- , architecture .
In some cases , a computer might store some or all of its program in memory that is kept separate from the data it operates on .
Modern von Neumann computers display some traits of the Harvard architecture in their designs , such as in CPU caches .
These mnemonics are collectively known as a computer 's assembly language .
Programming languages provide various ways of specifying programs for computers to run .
Unlike natural languages , programming languages are designed to permit no ambiguity and to be concise .
They are purely written languages and are often difficult to read aloud .
Sometimes programs are executed by a hybrid method of the two techniques .
Machine languages and the assembly languages that represent them -LRB- collectively termed low-level programming languages -RRB- tend to be unique to a particular type of computer .
Though considerably easier than in machine language , writing long programs in assembly language is often difficult and is also error prone .
Therefore , most practical programs are written in more abstract high-level programming languages that are able to express the needs of the programmer more conveniently -LRB- and thereby help reduce programmer error -RRB- .
High level languages are less related to the workings of the target computer than assembly language , and more related to the language and structure of the problem -LRB- s -RRB- to be solved by the final program .
It is therefore often possible to use different compilers to translate the same high level language program into the machine language of many different types of computer .
This is part of the means by which software like video games may be made available for different computer architectures such as personal computers and various video game consoles .
These 4G languages are less procedural than 3G languages .
They may be benign and not affect the usefulness of the program , or have only subtle effects .
But in some cases , they may cause the program or the entire system to `` hang '' , becoming unresponsive to input such as mouse clicks or keystrokes , to completely fail , or to crash .
Otherwise benign bugs may sometimes be harnessed for malicious intent by an unscrupulous user writing an exploit , code designed to take advantage of a bug and disrupt a computer 's proper execution .
Bugs are usually not the fault of the computer .
These parts are interconnected by buses , often made of groups of wires .
Inside each of these parts are thousands to trillions of small electrical circuits which can be turned off or on by means of an electronic switch .
The circuits are arranged in logic gates so that one or more of the circuits may control the state of one or more of the other circuits .
Control systems in advanced computers may change the order of execution of some instructions to improve performance .
Adding 100 to the program counter would cause the next instruction to be read from a place 100 locations further down the program .
However , any computer that is capable of performing just the simplest operations can be programmed to break down the more complex operations into simple steps that it can perform .
Therefore , any computer can be programmed to perform any arithmetic operation -- although it will take more time to do so if its ALU does not directly support the operation .
An ALU may also compare numbers and return boolean truth values -LRB- true or false -RRB- depending on whether one is equal to , greater than or less than the other -LRB- `` is 64 greater than 65 ? '' -RRB-
.
These can be useful for creating complicated conditional statements and processing boolean logic .
Graphics processors and computers with SIMD and MIMD features often contain ALUs that can perform arithmetic on vectors and matrices .
A computer 's memory can be viewed as a list of cells into which numbers can be placed or read .
The computer can be instructed to `` put the number 123 into the cell numbered 1357 '' or to `` add the number that is in cell 1357 to the number that is in cell 2468 and put the answer into cell 1595 . ''
The information stored in memory may represent practically anything .
Letters , numbers , even computer instructions can be placed into memory with equal ease .
To store larger numbers , several consecutive bytes may be used -LRB- typically , two , four or eight -RRB- .
When negative numbers are required , they are usually stored in two 's complement notation .
Other arrangements are possible , but are usually not seen outside of specialized applications or historical contexts .
A computer can store any kind of information in memory if it can be represented numerically .
Modern computers have billions or even trillions of bytes of memory .
Registers are used for the most frequently needed data items to avoid having to access main memory every time data is needed .
As data is constantly being worked on , reducing the need to access main memory -LRB- which is often slow compared to the ALU and control units -RRB- greatly increases the computer 's speed .
ROM is typically used to store the computer 's initial start-up instructions .
In embedded computers , which frequently do not have disk drives , all of the required software may be stored in ROM .
Flash memory blurs the distinction between ROM and RAM , as it retains its data when turned off but is also rewritable .
It is typically much slower than conventional ROM and RAM however , so its use is restricted to applications where high speed is unnecessary .
Generally computers with this sort of cache are designed to move frequently needed data into the cache automatically , often without the need for any intervention on the programmer 's part .
I/O is the means by which a computer exchanges information with the outside world .
Computer networking is another form of I/O .
While a computer may be viewed as running one gigantic program stored in its main memory , in some systems it is necessary to give the appearance of running several programs simultaneously .
By remembering where it was executing prior to the interrupt , the computer can return to that task later .
If several programs are running `` at the same time '' .
then the interrupt generator might be causing several hundred interrupts per second , causing a program switch each time .
Since modern computers typically execute instructions several orders of magnitude faster than human perception , it may appear that many programs are running at the same time even though only one is ever executing in any given instant .
If a program is waiting for the user to click on the mouse or press a key on the keyboard , then it will not take a `` time slice '' until the event it is waiting for has occurred .
This frees up time for other programs to execute so that many programs may be run simultaneously without unacceptable speed loss .
Some computers are designed to distribute their work across several CPUs in a multiprocessing configuration , a technique once employed only in large and powerful machines such as supercomputers , mainframe computers and servers .
Such designs tend to be useful only for specialized tasks due to the large scale of program organization required to successfully utilize most of the available resources at once .
Supercomputers usually see usage in large-scale simulation , graphics rendering , and cryptography applications , as well as with other so-called `` embarrassingly parallel '' tasks .
In the 1970s , computer engineers at research institutions throughout the United States began to link their computers together using telecommunications technology .
The technologies that made the Arpanet possible spread and evolved .
The emergence of networking involved a redefinition of the nature and boundaries of the computer .
Computer operating systems and applications were modified to include the ability to define and access the resources of other computers on the network , such as peripheral devices , stored information , and the like , as extensions of the resources of an individual computer .
Initially these facilities were available primarily to people working in high-tech environments , but in the 1990s the spread of applications like e-mail and the World Wide Web , combined with the development of cheap , fast networking technologies like Ethernet and ADSL saw computer networking become almost ubiquitous .
In fact , the number of computers that are networked is growing phenomenally .
A very large proportion of personal computers regularly connect to the Internet to communicate and receive information .
`` Wireless '' networking , often utilizing mobile phone networks , has meant networking is becoming increasingly ubiquitous even in mobile computing environments .
Therefore , any type of computer -LRB- netbook , supercomputer , cellular automaton , etc. -RRB- is able to perform the same computational tasks , given enough time and storage capacity .
A computer does not need to be electronic , nor even have a processor , nor RAM , nor even a hard disk .
While popular usage of the word `` computer '' is synonymous with a personal electronic computer , the modern definition of a computer is literally : `` A device that computes , especially a programmable -LSB- usually -RSB- electronic machine that performs high-speed mathematical or logical operations or that assembles , stores , correlates , or otherwise processes information . ''
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
However , conceptually computational systems as flexible as a personal computer can be built out of almost anything .
There is active research to make computers out of many promising new types of technology , such as optical computers , DNA computers , neural computers , and quantum computers .
Most computers are universal , and are able to calculate any computable function , and are limited only by their memory capacity and operating speed .
A computer will solve problems in exactly the way it is programmed to , without regard to efficiency , alternative solutions , possible shortcuts , or possible errors in the code .
Circuits , displays , power supplies , cables , keyboards , printers and mice are all hardware .
Firmware is the technology which has the combination of both hardware and software such as BIOS chip inside a computer .
The input devices may be hand-operated or automated .
Some examples of hand-operated input devices are :
In response to an advertisement for an acting position , as a young man he said , `` I am not white but I am not exactly black either .
The child was given rights of inheritance to the father 's property , so mixed-race children could share in any wealth of the father .
Because the society was patrilineal , the children took their fathers ' social status at birth and were born free .
Such tolerance for black persons , even when technically `` free '' , was not so common in Morocco .
During the first half of the 20th century , the Afrikaaner-dominated government classified the population according to four main racial groups : Black , White , Asian -LRB- mostly Indian -RRB- , and Coloured .
The Coloured definition occupied an intermediary political position between the Black and White definitions in South Africa .
If so , the person was classified as Black .
Such classifications sometimes divided families .
The officials ' decisions based on her anomalous appearance disrupted her family and adult life .
Some South Africans categorized as `` African Black '' say that `` Coloureds '' did not suffer as much as they did during apartheid .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
This number far exceeded the number of slaves who were taken to the Americas .
Male slaves were castrated in order to serve as harem guards .
The death toll of Black African slaves from forced labor was high .
As a result , few distinctive Afro-Arab black communities have survived in the Arabian Peninsula and neighboring countries .
In addition , Israel is home to over 5,000 members of the African Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem movement that are descendants of African Americans who emigrated to Israel in the 20th century , and who reside mainly in a distinct neighborhood in the Negev town of Dimona .
Some of their descendants remained in situ , and many migrated to larger cities and towns .
In the Makran strip of the Sindh and Balochistan provinces in southwestern Pakistan , these Bantu descendants are known as the Makrani .
Despite this , Negritos are never referred to as black today , and doing so would cause offense .
The common Thai word for Negritos literally means `` frizzy hair '' .
Moors were not a distinct or self-defined people .
The preferred official umbrella term is `` black and minority ethnic '' -LRB- BME -RRB- , but sometimes the term `` black '' is used on its own , to express unified opposition to racism , as in the Southall Black Sisters , which started with a mainly British Asian constituency , and the National Black Police Association , which has a membership of `` African , African-Caribbean and Asian origin '' .
Being identified as either `` black '' or `` white '' in Australia during the 19th and early 20th centuries was critical in one 's employment and social prospects .
The social position of mixed-race or `` half-caste '' individuals varied over time .
In contrast to previous definitions based solely on the degree of Aboriginal ancestry , in 1990 the Government changed the legal definition of Aboriginal to include any :
Thomas Jefferson also used the term `` black '' in his Notes on the State of Virginia in allusion to the slave populations .
Negro had superseded colored as the most polite word for African Americans at a time when black was considered more offensive .
This term was accepted as normal , including by people classified as Negroes , until the later Civil Rights movement in the late 1960s .
During the American Civil Rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s , some African-American leaders in the United States , notably Malcolm X , objected to the word Negro because they associated it with the long history of slavery , segregation , and discrimination that treated African Americans as second-class citizens , or worse .
Malcolm X preferred Black to Negro , but later gradually abandoned that as well for Afro-American after leaving the Nation of Islam .
Individuals identified themselves , for example , as Ashanti , Igbo , Bakongo , or Wolof .
In areas of the Upper South , different ethnic groups were brought together .
A new African-American identity and culture was born that incorporated elements of the various ethnic groups and of European cultural heritage , resulting in fusions such as the Black church and Black English .
They also felt that it would give ammunition to those who were advocating repatriating black people back to Africa .
Since then , African American and black have often had parallel status .
However , controversy continues over which if any of the two terms is more appropriate .
Still others believe that the term black is inaccurate because African Americans have a variety of skin tones .
Some surveys suggest that the majority of Black Americans have no preference for `` African American '' or `` Black '' , although they have a slight preference for `` black '' in personal settings and `` African American '' in more formal settings .
It includes people who indicate their race as `` Black , African Am. , or Negro '' or who provide written entries such as African American , Afro-American , Kenyan , Nigerian , or Haitian .
Most African Americans also have European ancestry in varying amounts ; a lesser proportion have some Native American ancestry .
Legally the definition varied from state to state .
Due to the often political and cultural contours of blackness in the United States , the notion of blackness can also be extended to non-black people .
Thus , we may have lost the mystical power to divine diabolism , but we can still divine blackness by the following symptoms : broken homes , alcoholic mothers , under-the-bridge habits and -LRB- presumable from the rest of -LSB- Arthur -RSB- Miller 's senescent musings -RRB- the tendency to sexual predation and to shameless perjury about same . ''
Others cited that the number of black people in jail increased during his administration .
The story of him and his descendants is that of multi-racial America since it appeared he and his sons married or had unions with white women , likely indentured servants and working-class like them .
Over time , Obama 's line of the Bunch family -LRB- as they became known -RRB- were property owners and continued to `` marry white '' ; they became part of white society , likely by the early to mid-18th century .
Today their descendants number approximately 150 million in South America and the Caribbean .
In addition to skin color , other physical characteristics such as facial features and hair texture are often variously used in classifying peoples as black in South America and the Caribbean .
A Brazilian child was never automatically identified with the racial type of one or both of his or her parents , nor were there only two categories to choose from .
Scholars disagree over the effects of social status on racial classifications in Brazil .
In addition , people of mixed race -LRB- pardo -RRB- often tended to marry white , and their descendants became accepted as white .
As a result , some of the European descended population also has West African or Amerindian blood .
According to the last census of the 20th century , in which Brazilians could choose from five color/ethnic categories with which they identified , 54 % of individuals identified as white , 6.2 % identified as black , and 39.5 % identified as pardo -LRB- brown -RRB- -- a broad multi-racial category , including tri-racial persons .
Essentially most of the black population was absorbed into the multi-racial category by intermixing .
According to the 2010 census , 6.7 % of Brazilians said they were black , compared with 6.2 % in 2000 , and 43.1 % said they were racially mixed , up from 38.5 % .
The gap in income between blacks and other non-whites is relatively small compared to the large gap between whites and all people of color .
Some commentators observe that the United States practice of segregation and white supremacy in the South , and discrimination in many areas outside that region , forced many African Americans to unite in the civil rights struggle .
They suggest that the fluid nature of race in Brazil has divided individuals of African descent , between those with more or less ancestry .
As a result , they have not united for a stronger civil rights movement .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LRB- Pardos may achieve `` white '' status if they have attained the middle-class or higher social status -RRB- .
Trying to identify this entire group as `` black '' would be a false imposition of a different identity from outside the culture and deny people their other , equally valid , ancestries and cultures .
It seems a one-drop rule in reverse .
The Times and The Sunday Times do not share editorial staff , were founded independently and have only had common ownership since 1967 .
In these countries , the newspaper is often referred to as The London Times or The Times of London .
The Sunday Times remains a broadsheet .
An American edition of The Times has been published since 6 June 2006 .
It has been heavily used by scholars and researchers because of its widespread availability in libraries and its detailed index .
Walter had lost his job by the end of 1784 after the insurance company where he was working went bankrupt because of the complaints of a Jamaican hurricane .
Being unemployed , Walter decided to set a new business up .
It was in that time when Henry Johnson invented the logography , a new typography that was faster and more precise -LRB- three years later , it was proved that it was not as efficient as had been said -RRB- .
Walter bought the logography 's patent and to use it , he decided to open a printing house , where he would daily produce an advertising sheet .
In 1803 , Walter handed ownership and editorship to his son of the same name .
For much of its early life , the profits of The Times were very large and the competition minimal , so it could pay far better than its rivals for information or writers .
.
Distribution via steam trains to rapidly growing concentrations of urban populations helped ensure the profitability of the paper and its growing influence .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Philby was admired for his courage in obtaining high-quality reporting from the front lines of the bloody conflict .
Management were left with no choice but to find a buyer who was in a position to guarantee the survival of both titles , and also one who had the resources and was committed to funding the introduction of modern printing methods .
Robert Holmes à Court , another Australian magnate had previously tried to buy The Times in 1980 .
One of his most important changes was the introduction of new technology and efficiency measures .
However , direct input of text by journalists -LRB- `` single stroke '' input -RRB- was still not achieved , and this was to remain an interim measure until the Wapping dispute of 1986 , when The Times moved from New Printing House Square in Gray 's Inn Road -LRB- near Fleet Street -RRB- to new offices in Wapping .
Published letters were long regarded as one of the paper 's key constituents .
It was discontinued on 1 March 2010 but reintroduced on 11 October 2010 after negative feedback .
Its previous incarnation began on 5 September 2005 , before which it was called T2 and previously Times 2 .
Regular features include columns by a different columnist each weekday .
There was a column by Marcus du Sautoy each Wednesday , for example .
The Saturday edition of The Times contains a variety of supplements .
co.uk and sunday-times .
There are also iPad and Android editions of both newspapers .
By November 2005 The Times sold an average of 691,283 copies per day , the second-highest of any British `` quality '' newspaper -LRB- after The Daily Telegraph , which had a circulation of 903,405 copies in the period -RRB- , and the highest in terms of full-rate sales .
By March 2014 , average daily circulation of The Times had fallen to 394,448 copies , compared to The Daily Telegraph 's 523,048 , with the two retaining respectively the second-highest and highest circulations among British `` quality '' newspapers .
The font was supervised by Morison and drawn by Victor Lardent , an artist from the advertising department of The Times .
Times New Roman made its debut in the issue of 3 October 1932 .
After one year , the design was released for commercial sale .
However , all the new fonts have been variants of the original New Roman font :
However , the newspaper reverted to the Tories for the next election five years later .
It supported Labour again in 2005 , when Labour achieved a third successive win , though with a reduced majority .
This makes it the most varied newspaper in terms of political support in British history .
The Times occasionally makes endorsements for foreign elections .
The contract was given to Sobha Singh -LRB- later Sir Sobha Singh -RRB- .
Construction really began after World War I and was completed by 1931 .
Lutyens designed the central administrative area of the city as a testament to Britain 's imperial aspirations .
Soon Lutyens started considering other places .
Indeed , the Delhi Town Planning Committee , set up to plan the new imperial capital , with George Swinton as chairman and John A. Brodie and Lutyens as members , submitted reports for both North and South sites .
The central axis of New Delhi , which today faces east at India Gate , was previously meant to be a north-south axis linking the Viceroy 's House at one end with Paharganj at the other .
During the project 's early years , many tourists believed it was a gate from Earth to Heaven itself .
A site atop the Raisina Hill , formerly Raisina Village , a Meo village , was chosen for the Rashtrapati Bhawan , then known as the Viceroy 's House .
Subsequently , the foundation stone was shifted from the site of Delhi Durbar of 1911 -- 1912 , where the Coronation Pillar stood , and embedded in the walls of the forecourt of the Secretariat .
In the south , land up to Safdarjung 's Tomb was acquired in order to create what is today known as Lutyens ' Bungalow Zone .
The last stumbling block was the Agra-Delhi railway line that cut right through the site earmarked for the hexagonal All-India War Memorial -LRB- India Gate -RRB- and Kingsway -LRB- Rajpath -RRB- , which was a problem because the Old Delhi Railway Station served the entire city at that time .
Named after Prince Arthur , 1st Duke of Connaught -LRB- 1850 -- 1942 -RRB- , it was designed by Robert Tor Russell , chief architect to the Public Works Department -LRB- PWD -RRB- .
Many employees were brought into the new capital from distant parts of India , including the Bengal Presidency and Madras Presidency .
A system was introduced under which the elected Government was given wide powers , excluding law and order which remained with the Central Government .
East of the river is the urban area of Shahdara .
The temperature varies from 46 °C -LRB- 115 °F -RRB- in summers to around 0 °C -LRB- 32 °F -RRB- in winters .
The area 's version of a humid subtropical climate is noticeably different from many other cities with this climate classification in that it features long and very hot summers , relatively dry and mild winters , a monsoonal period , and dust storms .
Winter starts in November and peaks in January .
Those for Delhi metropolis stand at 49.9 °C -LRB- 121.8 °F -RRB- and − 3.2 °C -LRB- 26.2 °F -RRB- respectively .
The average annual rainfall is 784 millimetres -LRB- 30.9 in -RRB- , most of which is during the monsoons in July and August .
Public transportation service will be increased during the restriction period .
The Rajpath , or King 's Way , stretches from the Rashtrapati Bhavan to the India Gate .
The Secretariat , which houses ministries of the Government of India , flanks out of the Rashtrapati Bhavan .
The Parliament House , designed by Herbert Baker , is located at the Sansad Marg , which runs parallel to the Rajpath .
Since then , the club only carries out aircraft maintenance courses , and is used for helicopter rides to Indira Gandhi International Airport for VIP including the president and the prime minister .
New Delhi has one of India 's largest bus transport systems .
Personal vehicles especially cars also form a major chunk of vehicles plying on New Delhi roads .
New Delhi has one of the highest road density in India .
It carries millions of passengers every day .
In addition to the Delhi Metro , a suburban railway , the Delhi Suburban Railway exists .
Delhi Metro is the world 's 12th largest metro system in terms of length .
Delhi Metro was India 's first modern public transportation system , which had revolutionised travel by providing a fast , reliable , safe , and comfortable means of transport .
All stations have escalators , elevators , and tactile tiles to guide the visually impaired from station entrances to trains .
It has a combination of elevated , at-grade , and underground lines , and uses both broad gauge and standard gauge rolling stock .
Four types of rolling stock are used : Mitsubishi-ROTEM Broad gauge , Bombardier MOVIA , Mitsubishi-ROTEM Standard gauge , and CAF Beasain Standard gauge .
Besides construction and operation of Delhi metro , DMRC is also involved in the planning and implementation of metro rail , monorail and high-speed rail projects in India and providing consultancy services to other metro projects in the country as well as abroad .
He famously resigned from DMRC , taking moral responsibility for a metro bridge collapse which took five lives .
Other religious groups -LRB- 2.5 % -RRB- include Parsis , Buddhists and Jews .
New Delhi is a cosmopolitan city due to the multi-ethnic and multi-cultural presence of the vast Indian bureaucracy and political system .
The city 's capital status has amplified the importance of national events and holidays .
New Delhi is home to several historic sites and museums .
Later it was to form a permanent National Museum .
and Supreme Court of India Museum .
In addition , there are the gardens in the Presidential Estate , the gardens along the Rajpath and India Gate , the gardens along Shanti Path , the Rose Garden , Nehru Park and the Railway Garden in Chanakya Puri .
New Delhi is the largest commercial city in northern India .
As of 2013 , the per capita income of Delhi was Rs .
Adjoining areas such as Barakhamba Road , ITO are also major commercial centres .
According to the Economic Survey of Delhi , the metropolis has a net State Domestic Product -LRB- SDP -RRB- of Rs .
53,976 -LRB- $ 1,200 -RRB- .
The tertiary sector contributes 78.4 % of Delhi 's gross SDP followed by secondary and primary sectors with 20.2 % and 1.4 % contribution respectively .
The city is home to numerous international organisations .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- According to Ali al-Ridha , since it is obligatory to obey him , there should be a sign to clearly indicate the Divine Leader .
Otherwise others are nobler than Muhammad 's offspring and they are to be followed and obeyed ; and the offspring of Muhammad are obedient and subject to the offspring of Muhammad 's enemies such as Abi Jahl or Ibn Abi Ma'eet .
-LSB- original research ? -RSB-
However , Muhammad is much nobler than others to be in charge and to be obeyed .
Moreover , once the prophethood of Muhammad is testified they would obey him , no one would hesitate to follow his offspring and this would not be hard for anyone .
While to follow the offspring of the corrupted families is difficult .
-LSB- original research ? -RSB-
-LSB- original research ? -RSB-
For none of them , it is said , were originated from a disgraced family .
-LSB- b -RSB- -LSB- improper synthesis ? -RSB-
At the end of each seven `` Sāmad '' silsila , one great `` Nātıq '' -LRB- Spoken -RRB- has ben sent in order to reimprove the Dīn of Islam .
After Adam and his son Seth , and after six `` Nātıq '' -LRB- Spoken -RRB- -- `` Sāmad '' -LRB- Silent -RRB- silsila -LRB- Noah -- Shem -RRB- , -LRB- Abraham -- Ishmael -RRB- , -LRB- Moses -- Aaron -RRB- , -LRB- Jesus -- Simeon -RRB- , -LRB- Muhammad bin ʿAbd Allāh -- Ali ibn Abu Tālib -RRB- ; the silsila of `` Nātıqs and Sāmads have been completed with -LRB- Muhammad bin Ismā ` īl as-ṣaghīr -LRB- Maymûn ' ûl-Qaddāh -RRB- -- ʿAbd Allāh Ibn-i Maymûn and his sons -RRB- .
The Druze tariqah -LRB- very small in number today -RRB- initially were of the Fatimid Ismailis and separated from them -LRB- the Fatimid Ismailis -RRB- after the death of the Fatimid Imam and Caliph Hakim Bi Amrillah .
an-nuwāb al-arbaʻa or `` the Four Leaders '' -RRB- .
Thus , their line of imams is as follows -LRB- the years of their individual imamats during the Common Era are given in brackets -RRB- :
Furthermore , there has been a split in the Dawoodi Bohra sect which has led to the formation of Qutbi Bohra sect which was formed and led by Khuzaima Qutbuddin .
This hadith has also been narrated by the collector of hadiths , al-Tirmidhi , 3713 ; -LSB- citation needed -RSB- as well as Ibn Maajah , 121 ; -LSB- citation needed -RSB- etc. .
Thus , when Muhammad actually -LRB- by speech -RRB- and physically -LRB- by way of having his closest companions including Abu Bakr , Umar and Uthman -LSB- the three future Caliphs who had preceded Ali as Caliph -RSB- publicly accept Ali as their Lord and Master by taking Ali 's hand in both of theirs as token of their allegiance to Ali -RRB- transferred this title and manner of addressing Ali as the Mawla for all Muslims at Ghadiri Khum Oasis just a few months before his death , the people that came to look upon Ali as Muhammad 's immediate successor even before Muhamamd 's death came to be known as the Shia .
So , according to the upper verse 1 .
According to the majority of Shī ` a , namely the Twelvers -LRB- Ithnā ` ashariyya -RRB- , the following is a listing of the rightful successors to Muḥammad .
-LSB- original research ? -RSB-
The author of Jeremiah -LRB- 8:7 -RRB- wrote : `` Even the stork in the heavens knows its seasons , and the turtle dove , the swift and the crane keep the time of their arrival . ''
However , he also writes that `` as to swallows being found in a torpid state during the winter in the Isle of Wight or any part of this country , I never heard any such account worth attending to '' , and that if early swallows `` happen to find frost and snow they immediately withdraw for a time -- a circumstance this much more in favour of hiding than migration '' , since he doubts they would `` return for a week or two to warmer latitudes '' .
He concludes :
Sometimes , journeys are not termed `` true migration '' because they are irregular -LRB- nomadism , invasions , irruptions -RRB- or in only one direction -LRB- dispersal , movement of young away from natal area -RRB- .
Migration is marked by its annual seasonality .
Of course , in the southern hemisphere the directions are reversed , but there is less land area in the far south to support long-distance migration .
These advantages offset the high stress , physical exertion costs , and other risks of the migration .
In some species , the population at higher latitudes tends to be migratory and will often winter at lower latitude .
The migrating birds bypass the latitudes where other populations may be sedentary , where suitable wintering habitats may already be occupied .
This is an example of leap-frog migration .
Within a population , it is common for different ages and/or sexes to have different patterns of timing and distance .
The specific routes may be genetically programmed or learned to varying degrees .
The routes taken on forward and return migration are often different .
Birds fly at varying altitudes during migration .
Anecdotal reports of them flying much higher have yet to be corroborated with any direct evidence .
Bird migration is not limited to birds that can fly .
The typical image of migration is of northern landbirds , such as swallows -LRB- Hirundinidae -RRB- and birds of prey , making long flights to the tropics .
However , many Holarctic wildfowl and finch -LRB- Fringillidae -RRB- species winter in the North Temperate Zone , in regions with milder winters than their summer breeding grounds .
Some ducks , such as the garganey Anas querquedula , move completely or partially into the tropics .
Often , the migration route of a long-distance migrator bird does n't follow a straight line between breeding and wintering grounds .
This gives the migrants an opportunity to refuel for the next leg of the voyage .
Seabird migration is similar in pattern to those of the waders and waterfowl .
Some , such as the black guillemot Cepphus grylle and some gulls , are quite sedentary ; others , such as most terns and auks breeding in the temperate northern hemisphere , move varying distances south in the northern winter .
The tubenoses spread widely over large areas of open ocean , but congregate when food becomes available .
Some Manx shearwaters Puffinus puffinus do this same journey in reverse .
These include many birds of prey such as vultures , eagles , and buzzards , but also storks .
Migratory species in these groups have great difficulty crossing large bodies of water , since thermals only form over land , and these birds can not maintain active flight for long distances .
Mediterranean and other seas present a major obstacle to soaring birds , which must cross at the narrowest points .
Massive numbers of large raptors and storks pass through areas such as the Strait of Messina , Gibraltar , Falsterbo , and the Bosphorus at migration times .
More common species , such as the European honey buzzard Pernis apivorus , can be counted in hundreds of thousands in autumn .
Other barriers , such as mountain ranges , can also cause funnelling , particularly of large diurnal migrants .
This is a notable factor in the Central American migratory bottleneck .
These changes are also related to hormonal changes in the birds .
The occurrence of Zugunruhe even in cage-raised birds with no environmental cues -LRB- e.g. shortening of day and falling temperature -RRB- has pointed to the role of circannual endogenous programs in controlling bird migrations .
The ability of birds to navigate during migrations can not be fully explained by endogenous programming , even with the help of responses to environmental cues .
A young bird on its first migration flies in the correct direction according to the Earth 's magnetic field , but does not know how far the journey will be .
It does this through a radical pair mechanism whereby chemical reactions in special photo pigments sensitive to long wavelengths are affected by the field .
Although this only works during daylight hours , it does not use the position of the sun in any way .
With experience it learns various landmarks and this `` mapping '' is done by magnetites in the trigeminal system , which tell the bird how strong the field is .
Migrating birds can lose their way and appear outside their normal ranges .
Certain areas , because of their location , have become famous as watchpoints for such birds .
Apart from physiological adaptations , migration sometimes requires behavioural changes such as flying in flocks to reduce the energy used in migration or the risk of predation .
This explains the rapid appearance of migratory behavior after the most recent glacial maximum .
However some species show circuitous migratory routes that reflect historical range expansions and are far from optimal in ecological terms .
Detours may also be caused by differential wind conditions , predation risk , or other factors .
Some predators take advantage of the concentration of birds during migration .
For example , in the East Asian -- Australasian Flyway , up to 65 % of key intertidal habitat at the Yellow Sea migration bottleneck has been destroyed since the 1950s .
The city was incorporated in 1854 , the same year in which the Camden and Atlantic Railroad train service began .
Businesses were restricted and the boardwalk was removed each year at the end of the peak season .
Because of its effectiveness and popularity , the boardwalk was expanded in length and width , and modified several times in subsequent years .
These hotels were not only impressive in size , but featured the most updated amenities , and were considered quite luxurious for their time .
The hotel was a hit and , in 1905 -- 06 , he chose to expand the hotel and bought another parcel of land next door to his Marlborough House .
In an effort to make his new hotel a source of conversation , White hired the architectural firm of Price and McLanahan .
The hotel 's Spanish and Moorish themes , capped off with its signature dome and chimneys , represented a step forward from other hotels that had a classically designed influence .
Bally 's Atlantic City was later constructed at this location .
The hotel made use of ocean-facing hotel rooms by jutting its wings farther from the main portion of the hotel along Pacific Avenue .
One by one , additional large hotels were constructed along the boardwalk , including the Brighton , Chelsea , Shelburne , Ambassador , Ritz Carlton , Mayflower , Madison House , and the Breakers .
Their original wood-frame structures would be enlarged , and even moved closer to the beach , over the years .
The modern Haddon Hall was built in stages and was completed in 1929 , at eleven stories .
By 1930 , the Claridge , the city 's last large hotel before the casinos , opened its doors .
The 400-room Claridge was built by a partnership that included renowned Philadelphia contractor John McShain .
The city became known as the `` The World 's Playground .
Bradley 's mother was in the back of the store when the sale was made , and loved the name , and so salt water taffy was born .
It was during Prohibition that racketeer and political boss Enoch L. `` Nucky '' Johnson rose to power .
Prohibition was largely unenforced in Atlantic City , and , because alcohol that had been smuggled into the city with the acquiescence of local officials could be readily obtained at restaurants and other establishments , the resort 's popularity grew further .
Despite the opposition of many others , he purchased land that became the city 's municipal airport and high school football stadium , both of which were later named Bader Field in his honor .
Bader , in November 1923 , initiated a public referendum , during the general election , at which time residents approved the construction of a Convention Center .
Bader was also a driving force behind the creation of the Miss America competition .
Like many older east coast cities after World War II , Atlantic City became plagued with poverty , crime , corruption , and general economic decline in the mid-to-late 20th century .
The reasons for the resort 's decline were multi-layered .
Atlantic City had initially relied upon visitors coming by train and staying for a couple of weeks .
The car allowed them to come and go as they pleased , and many people would spend only a few days , rather than weeks .
Also , the advent of suburbia played a huge role .
The convention and the press coverage it generated , however , cast a harsh light on Atlantic City , which by then was in the midst of a long period of economic decline .
Most of them were either shut down , converted to cheap apartments , or converted to nursing home facilities by the end of the decade .
Of the many pre-casino resorts that bordered the boardwalk , only the Claridge , the Dennis , the Ritz-Carlton , and the Haddon Hall survive to this day as parts of Bally 's Atlantic City , a condo complex , and Resorts Atlantic City .
Smaller hotels off the boardwalk , such as the Madison also survived .
The introduction of gambling did not , however , quickly eliminate many of the urban problems that plagued Atlantic City .
Many people have suggested that it only served to exacerbate those problems , as attested to by the stark contrast between tourism intensive areas and the adjacent impoverished working-class neighborhoods .
In addition , Atlantic City has been less popular than Las Vegas , as a gambling city in the United States .
Donald Trump helped bring big name boxing bouts to the city to attract customers to his casinos .
The boxer Mike Tyson had most of his fights in Atlantic City in the 1980s , which helped Atlantic City achieve nationwide attention as a gambling resort .
Numerous highrise condominiums were built for use as permanent residences or second homes .
By end of the decade it was one of the most popular tourist destinations in the United States .
The biggest disappointment was when MGM Resorts International announced that it would pull out of all development for Atlantic City , effectively ending their plans for the MGM Grand Atlantic City .
Early in 2010 the New Jersey state legislature passed a bill offering tax incentives to attract new investors and complete the job , but a poll by Fairleigh Dickinson University 's PublicMind released in March 2010 showed that three of five voters -LRB- 60 % -RRB- opposed the legislation , and two of three of those who opposed it `` strongly '' opposed it .
As of March 2011 -LSB- update -RSB- , Revel had completed all of the exterior work and had continued work on the interior after finally receiving the funding necessary to complete construction .
It had a soft opening in April 2012 , and was fully open by May 2012 .
Ten months later , in February 2013 , after serious losses and a write-down in the value of the resort from $ 2.4 billion to $ 450 million , Revel filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy .
It was restructured but still could not carry on and re-entered bankruptcy on June 19 , 2014 .
It was put up for sale , however as no suitable bids were received the resort closed its doors on September 2 , 2014 .
Average highs even just a few miles west of Atlantic City exceed 85 °F -LRB- 29 °C -RRB- in July .
Spring and autumn are erratic , although they are usually mild with low humidity .
-LSB- b -RSB-
The population density was 3,680.8 per square mile -LRB- 1,421.2 / km2 -RRB- .
19.44 % of the population was non-Hispanic whites .
Males had a median income of $ 25,471 versus $ 23,863 for females .
Fairleigh Dickinson University 's PublicMind poll surveyed New Jersey voters ' attitudes on the takeover .
Interestingly , the poll also found that even South Jersey voters expressed opposition to the plan ; 40 % reported they opposed the measure and 37 % reported they were in favor of it .
The tourism district would comprise several key areas in the city ; the Marina District , Ducktown , Chelsea , South Inlet , Bader Field , and Gardner 's Basin .
Both the Boardwalk Hall and Convention Center are operated by the Atlantic City Convention & Visitors Authority .
Once born , a child 's immune system responds favorably to protein antigens while not as well to glycoproteins and polysaccharides .
In neonates , opsonic activity and the ability to activate the complement cascade is very limited .
For example , the mean level of C3 in a newborn is approximately 65 % of that found in the adult .
Phagocytic activity is also greatly impaired in newborns .
This is due to lower opsonic activity , as well as diminished up-regulation of integrin and selectin receptors , which limit the ability of neutrophils to interact with adhesion molecules in the endothelium .
Although , the number of total lymphocytes is significantly higher than in adults , the cellular and humoral immunity is also impaired .
Also , T cells of a newborn proliferate poorly and produce very small amounts of cytokines like IL-2 , IL-4 , IL-5 , IL-12 , and IFN-g which limits their capacity to activate the humoral response as well as the phagocitic activity of macrophage .
B cells develop early during gestation but are not fully active .
At birth , most of the immunoglobulin present is maternal IgG .
Because IgM , IgD , IgE and IgA do n't cross the placenta , they are almost undetectable at birth .
These antibodies can also produce a negative response .
If a child is exposed to the antibody for a particular antigen before being exposed to the antigen itself then the child will produce a dampened response .
Passively acquired maternal antibodies can suppress the antibody response to active immunization .
Similarly the response of T-cells to vaccination differs in children compared to adults , and vaccines that induce Th1 responses in adults do not readily elicit these same responses in neonates .
Oestradiol usually begins to act around the age of 10 and testosterone some months later .
Many theories have been suggested in immunology from the end of the nineteenth century up to the present time .
The self/nonself theory of immunity and the self/nonself vocabulary have been criticized , but remain very influential .
In addition , this Introductory Course gives students more information to complement general biology or science training .
On the other hand , the Advanced Course is another course for those who are willing to expand or update their understanding of immunology .
Most schools require students to take electives in other to complete their degrees .
Ratio : 1,411,200 / 128,000 = 11.025 -RRB- .
An MP3 file can also be constructed at higher or lower bit rates , with higher or lower resulting quality .
The first subgroup for audio was formed by several teams of engineers at Fraunhofer IIS , University of Hannover , AT&T - Bell Labs , Thomson-Brandt , CCETT , and others .
Ernst Terhardt et al. created an algorithm describing auditory masking with high accuracy .
Both Krasner and Schroeder built upon the work performed by Eberhard F. Zwicker in the areas of tuning and masking of critical bands , that in turn built on the fundamental research in the area from Bell Labs of Harvey Fletcher and his collaborators .
That journal reported in February 1988 on a wide range of established , working audio bit compression technologies , some of them using auditory masking as part of their fundamental design , and several showing real-time hardware implementations .
He completed his doctoral work in 1989 .
MP3 is directly descended from OCF and PXFM , representing the outcome of the collaboration of Brandenburg -- working as a postdoc at AT&T - Bell Labs with James D. Johnston -LRB- `` JJ '' -RRB- of AT&T - Bell Labs -- with the Fraunhofer Institut for Integrated Circuits , Erlangen , with relatively minor contributions from the MP2 branch of psychoacoustic sub-band coders .
MPEG-2 Part 3 -LRB- ISO/IEC 13818-3 -RRB- defined additional bit rates and sample rates for MPEG-1 Audio Layer I , II and III .
Like MPEG-2 , MPEG-2 .5 adds new sampling rates exactly half of that previously possible with MPEG-2 .
A sample rate comparison between MPEG-1 , 2 and 2.5 is given further down .
MPEG-2 .5 was not developed by MPEG and was never approved as an international standard .
Compression ratios with this latter reference are higher , which demonstrates the problem with use of the term compression ratio for lossy encoders .
This particular track has an interesting property in that the two channels are almost , but not completely , the same , leading to a case where Binaural Masking Level Depression causes spatial unmasking of noise artifacts unless the encoder properly recognizes the situation and applies corrections similar to those detailed in the MPEG-2 AAC psychoacoustic model .
The reference software in C language was later published as a freely available ISO standard .
Some other real time implementation of MPEG Audio encoders were available for the purpose of digital broadcasting -LRB- radio DAB , television DVB -RRB- towards consumer receivers and set top boxes .
The filename extension .
mp3 was chosen by the Fraunhofer team on 14 July 1995 -LRB- previously , the files had been named .
bit -RRB- .
Due to the `` byte reservoir '' , frames are not independent items and can not usually be extracted on arbitrary frame boundaries .
The MP3 Data blocks contain the -LRB- compressed -RRB- audio information in terms of frequencies and amplitudes .
The diagram shows that the MP3 Header consists of a sync word , which is used to identify the beginning of a valid frame .
After this , the values will differ , depending on the MP3 file .
ISO/IEC 11172-3 defines the range of values for each section of the header along with the specification of the header .
At present , these suggested implementations are quite dated .
As a result , there are many different MP3 encoders available , each producing files of differing quality .
-LRB- See psychoacoustics . -RRB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Using a constant bit rate makes encoding simpler and faster .
However , it is also possible to create files where the bit rate changes throughout the file .
So , the overall quality of the file may be increased by using a lower bit rate for the less complex passages and a higher one for the more complex parts .
With some encoders , it is possible to specify a given quality , and the encoder will vary the bit rate accordingly .
Several bit rates are specified in the MPEG-1 Audio Layer III standard : 32 , 40 , 48 , 56 , 64 , 80 , 96 , 112 , 128 , 160 , 192 , 224 , 256 and 320 kbit/s , with available sampling frequencies of 32 , 44.1 and 48 kHz .
MPEG-2 Audio Layer III allows bit rates of 8 , 16 , 24 , 32 , 40 , 48 , 56 , 64 , 80 , 96 , 112 , 128 , 144 , 160 kbit/s with sampling frequencies of 16 , 22.05 and 24 kHz .
MPEG-2 .5 Audio Layer III is restricted to bit rates of 8 , 16 , 24 , 32 , 40 , 48 , 56 and 64 kbit/s with sampling frequencies of 8 , 11.025 , and 12 kHz .
VBR is used when the goal is to achieve a fixed level of quality .
Although an MP3 decoder must support VBR to be standards compliant , historically some decoders have bugs with VBR decoding , particularly before VBR encoders became widespread .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
However , several de facto standards for tag formats exist .
In the past , many organizations have claimed ownership of patents related to MP3 decoding or encoding .
If only the known MP3 patents filed by December 1992 are considered , then MP3 decoding has been patent-free in the US since 22 September 2015 when U.S. Patent 5,812,672 expired which had a PCT filing in October 1992 .
Motorola followed soon after , and signed with Sisvel to license MP3-related patents in December 2005 .
April 2017 .
That defense judgment was upheld on appeal in 2008 .
See Alcatel-Lucent v. Microsoft for more information .
Other lossy formats exist .
House music quickly spread to other American cities such as Detroit , New York City , and Newark -- all of which developed their own regional scenes .
In the mid-to-late 1980s , house music became popular in Europe as well as major cities in South America , and Australia .
Since the early to mid-1990s , house music has been infused in mainstream pop and dance music worldwide .
House music in the 2010s , while keeping several of these core elements , notably the prominent kick drum on every beat , varies widely in style and influence , ranging from the soulful and atmospheric deep house to the more minimalistic microhouse .
In the late 1980s , many local Chicago house music artists suddenly found themselves presented with major label deals .
Artists and groups such as Madonna , Janet Jackson , Paula Abdul , Aretha Franklin , Bananarama , Diana Ross , Tina Turner , Whitney Houston , Steps , Kylie Minogue , Bjork , and C+C Music Factoryhave all incorporated the genre into some of their work .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Records as an important connection between the ever-changing underground sounds of Chicago .
In this era ,
`` On and On '' is sometimes cited as the ` first house record ' , though other examples from around that time , such as J.M. Silk 's `` Music is the Key '' -LRB- 1985 -RRB- , have also been cited .
These compositions used newly affordable electronic instruments to emulate not just Saunders ' song , but the edited , enhanced styles of disco and other dance music they already favored .
According to author Richie Unterberger , it moved house music away from its `` posthuman tendencies back towards the lush '' soulful sound of early disco music .
Hardy once played it four times over the course of an evening until the crowd responded favorably .
Later , visiting DJs & producers from Detroit fell into the genre .
After the Warehouse closed in 1983 , the crowds went to Knuckles ' new club , The Power Plant .
In the Channel 4 documentary Pump Up The Volume , Knuckles remarks that the first time he heard the term `` house music '' was upon seeing `` we play house music '' on a sign in the window of a bar on Chicago 's South Side .
One of the people in the car with him joked , `` you know , that 's the kind of music you play down at the Warehouse ! ''
, and then everybody laughed .
South-Side Chicago DJ Leonard `` Remix '' Roy , in self-published statements , claims he put such a sign in a tavern window because it was where he played music that one might find in one 's home ; in his case , it referred to his mother 's soul & disco records , which he worked into his sets .
Farley Jackmaster Funk was quoted as saying `` In 1982 , I was DJing at a club called The Playground and there was this kid named Leonard ` Remix ' Roy who was a DJ at a rival club called The Rink .
He came over to my club one night , and into the DJ booth and said to me , ` I 've got the gimmick that 's gon na take all the people out of your club and into mine -- it 's called House music . '
Now , where he got that name from or what made him think of it I do n't know , so the answer lies with him . ''
Patrons later asked for new music for the bins , which Chip E. implies was a demand the shop tried to meet by stocking newer local club hits .
In an effort to maintain such exclusives , the DJs were inspired to create their own `` house '' records .
The music appealed to those who did n't fit into mainstream American society and was especially celebrated by many black males .
Detroit techno is an offshoot of Chicago house music .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- A year later , Transmat released what was to become one of techno and house music 's classic anthems -- the seminal track `` Strings of Life '' .
These tracks were well received in Chicago and played on Chicago radio and in clubs .
Each EP / 12 inch single sported remixes by Mike `` Hitman '' Wilson and Steve `` Silk '' Hurley of Chicago and Derrick `` Mayday '' May and Juan Atkins of Detroit .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
With house music already massive on the '80s dance-scene it was only a matter of time before it would penetrate the UK pop charts .
Key labels in the rise of house music in the UK included :
By the mid-1980s a distinct Balearic mix of house was discernible .
These clubs , fueled by their distinctive sound and Ecstasy , began to have an influence on the British scene .
The Midlands also embraced the late 1980s house scene with illegal parties and more legal dance clubs such as The Hummingbird .
Back in America the scene had still not progressed beyond a small number of clubs in Chicago , Detroit , Newark and New York City .
However , many independent Chicago-based record labels were making appearances on the Dance Chart with their releases .
In the UK , any house song released by a Chicago-based label was routinely considered a must play at many clubs playing house music .
Their 30 + releases on this label alone seems to support that fact .
By the late 80s , House had moved West , particularly to San Francisco , Oakland , Los Angeles , Fresno , San Diego and Seattle .
The single is credited as helping to bring house music to the US mainstream .
Cajmere started the Cajual and Relief labels -LRB- amongst others -RRB- .
Ghetto house and acid house were other house music styles that were also started in Chicago .
In Britain , further experiments in the genre boosted its appeal .
House and rave clubs such as Lakota and Cream emerged across Britain , hosting house and dance scene events .
The Godskitchen superclub brand also began in the midst of the early 90 's rave scene .
After initially hosting small nights in Cambridge and Northampton , the associated events scaled up in Milton Keynes , Birmingham and Leeds .
A new indie dance scene also emerged in the 90 's .
In England , one of the few licensed venues The Eclipse attracted people from up and down the country as it was open until the early hours .
There were a number of abortive `` Kill the Bill '' demonstrations .
These superclubs entered into sponsorship deals initially with fast food , soft drinks , and clothing companies .
Flyers in clubs in Ibiza often sported many corporate logos .
These 3 producers are often considered `` ahead of their time '' since many of the sounds they engineered during the late 20th century became more prominent during the 21st century .
Together , they laid the groundwork for what would be known as the French house movement .
By combining the harder-edged-yet-soulful philosophy of Chicago house with the melodies of obscure funk , state-of-the-art production techniques and the sound of analog synthesizers , they began to create the standards that would shape all house music .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- This fusion is apparent in the crossover of musical styles by artists such as Dennis Ferrer and Booka Shade , with the former 's production style having evolved from the New York soulful house scene and the latter 's roots in techno .
2010s saw multiple new sounds in house music developed by numerous DJs .
Elsewhere , fusion genres derivative of 2000s progressive house returned to prominence , especially with the help of DJs Calvin Harris , Eric Prydz , Mat Zo , Above & Beyond and Fonzerelli in Europe , Deadmau5 , Kaskade , Steve Aoki , Porter Robinson and Wolfgang Gartner in the US and Canada .
Similar developments have taken place in other alphabets .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The modern practice of capitalising the first letter of every sentence seems to be imported -LRB- and is rarely used when printing Ancient Greek materials even today -RRB- .
Here is a comparison of the upper and lower case versions of each letter included in the English alphabet -LRB- the exact representation will vary according to the font used -RRB- :
-LRB- Informal communication , such as texting , instant messaging or a handwritten sticky note , may not bother , but that is because its users usually do not expect it to be formal . -RRB-
There are a few pairs of words of different meanings whose only difference is capitalisation of the first letter .
Other words normally start with a lower-case letter .
There are , however , situations where further capitalisation may be used to give added emphasis , for example in headings and titles -LRB- see below -RRB- .
It is from these that the first minuscule hands developed , the half-uncials and cursive minuscule , which no longer stayed bound between a pair of lines .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In mathematics , letter case may indicate the relationship between objects with uppercase letters often representing `` superior '' objects -LRB- e.g. X could be a set containing the generic member x -RRB- .
This includes most syllabic and other non-alphabetic scripts .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
This is an old form of emphasis , similar to the more modern practice of using a larger or boldface font for titles .
When the Spanish explorers reached this area they found their descendants , Suma and Manso tribes .
Hidalgo built a large support among intellectuals , liberal priests and many poor people .
Hidalgo fought to protect the rights of the poor and indigenous population .
He started on a march to the capital , Mexico City , but retreated back north when faced with the elite of the royal forces at the outskirts of the capital .
He established a liberal government from Guadalajara , Jalisco but was soon forced to flee north by the royal forces that recaptured the city .
HIdalgo reached Saltillo , Coahuila where he publicly resigned his military post and rejected a pardon offered by Viceroy Francisco Venegas in return for Hidalgo 's surrender .
Hidalgo forced the Bishop of Valladolid , Manuel Abad y Queipo , to rescind the excommunication order he had circulated against him on September 24 , 1810 .
Later , the Inquisition issued an excommunication edict on October 13 , 1810 condemning Miguel Hidalgo as a seditionary , apostate , and heretic .
A new election brought a new legislature , and conforming governors .
As news of peace negotiations reached the state , new call to arms began to flare among the people of the state .
But as the Mexican officials in Chihuahua heard that General Price was heading back to Mexico with a large force comprising several companies of infantry and three companies of cavalry and one division of light artillery from Santa Fe on February 8 , 1848 , Ángel Trías sent a message to Sacramento Pass to ask for succession of the area as they understood the war had concluded .
On March 16 , 1848 Price began negotiations with Ángel Trías , but the Mexican leader responded with an ultimatum to General Price .
The American forces engaged with the Mexican forces near Santa Cruz de los Rosales on March 16 , 1848 .
The Battle of Santa Cruz de los Rosales was the last battle of the Mexican -- American War and it occurred after the peace treaty was signed .
The American presence served to delay the possible succession of the state which had been discussed at the end of 1847 , and the state remained under United States occupation until May 22 , 1848 .
Spain , England , and France did not accept the moratorium by Mexico ; they united at the Convention of the Triple Alliance on October 31 , 1861 in which they agreed to take possession of several custom stations within Mexico as payment .
A delegation of the Triple Alliance arrived in Veracruz in December 1861 .
By January 31 , 1866 Billaut was ordered to leave Chihuahua , but he left behind 500 men to maintain control .
Lerdeo de Tejada won the election , but lost popularity after he announced his intent to run for re-election .
On March 21 , 1876 , Don Porfirio Díaz rebelled against President Sebastian Lerdo de Tejada .
On June 2 , 1876 the garrisons in the state of Chihuahua surrendered to the authority of General Porfirio Díaz ; Governor Antonio Ochoa was arrested until all the Lerdista forces were suppressed throughout the state .
Porfirio Díaz then helped Tíras regain the governorship of the state of Chihuahua allowing for the Plan of Tuxtepec to be implemented .
The victory of the Plan of Tuxtepec , gave the interim presidency to Jose Maria Iglesias and later , as the only candidate , the General Porfirio Díaz assumed the presidency on May 5 , 1877 .
During the first years of the Porfiriato -LRB- Porfirio Díaz Era -RRB- , the Díaz administration had to combat several attacks from the Lerdista forces and the Apache .
During 1877 the northern parts of the state suffered through a spell of extreme drought which were responsible for many deaths in El Paso del Norte .
Immediately President Francisco Madero commanded Gen. Victoriano Huerta of the Federal Army , to put down the Orozco revolt .
The governor of Chihuahua mobilized the state militia led by Colonel Pancho Villa to supplement General Huerta .
Huerta became furious and ordered that Villa be executed .
Jailed in Mexico City , Villa fled to the United States .
Due to its variant climate , the state has a large variety of fauna and flora .
The state is mostly characterized by rugged mountainous terrain and wide river valleys .
On the slope of the Sierra Madre Occidental mountains -LRB- around the regions of Casas Grandes , Cuauhtémoc and Parral -RRB- , there are vast prairies of short yellow grass , the source of the bulk of the state 's agricultural production .
It was known as the Punitive Expedition .
The American intervention had been limited to the western sierras of Chihuahua .
Villa had the advantage of intimately knowing the inhospitable terrain of the Sonoran Desert and the almost impassable Sierra Madre mountains and always managed to stay one step ahead of his pursuers .
and Camargo .
On December 8 , 1659 Fray García de San Francisco founded the mission of Nuestra Señora de Guadalupe de Mansos del Paso del Río del Norte and founded the town El Paso Del Norte -LRB- present day Ciudad Juárez -RRB- in 1667 .
The Spanish society that developed in the region replaced the sparse population of indigenous peoples .
The absence of servants and workers forged the spirit of northern people as self-dependent , creative people that defended their European heritage .
.
It is thought that these inhabitants were hunter gatherers .
Some 82,000 people are thought to have immigrated to the state from 2000 -- 2005 mainly coming from Veracruz -LRB- 17.6 % -RRB- , United States -LRB- 16.2 % -RRB- , Durango -LRB- 13.2 % -RRB- , Coahuila -LRB- 8.0 % -RRB- and Chiapas -LRB- 4.5 % -RRB- .
According to the 2005 census , the population grew 1.06 % from 2000 to 2005 .
Only three other cities have populations over 100,000 : Parral 101,147 , Cuauhtémoc 105,725 , and Delicias 108,187 .
This was promptly stopped with the aid of informers , and more strenuous measures were taken against the conservatives .
A few years later in 1569 Franciscan missionaries led by Fray Agustín Rodríguez from the coast of Sinaloa and the state of Durango founded the first mission in the state in Valle de San Bartolomé -LRB- present-day Valle de Allende -RRB- .
Fray Agustín Rodríguez evangelized the native population until 1581 .
Average schooling is 8.5 years , which means that in general the average citizen over 15 years of age has gone as far as a second year in secondary education .
Chihuahua has the fifth highest manufacturing GDP in Mexico and ranks second for the most factories funded by foreign investment in the country .
Manufacturing sector was the principal foreign investment in the state followed by the mining sector .
The general features of the preceding occurrence applied also to Chihuahua , although in a modified form .
José Antonio Arcé took his place as ruler in Chihuahua .
Arcé was less of a yorkino than his confrere of Durango .
Supplies of weapons were sent to fully equip the military and took steps to improve efficiency at the presidios .
During the beginning of the 1840s , private citizens took it upon themselves to stop the commercial caravans of supplies from the United States , but being so far away from the large suppliers in central Mexico the caravan was allowed to continue in March 1844 .
Trías took the opportunity to dedicate important state resources to gain economic concessions from the people and loans from many municipalities in preparation to defend the state ; he used all the money he received to equip and organize a large volunteer militia .
Several expeditions were led to find a shorter route from Santa Barbara to New Mexico .
Shortly after gaining independence , the day to celebrate it varied between September 16 , the day of Hidalgo 's Grito , and September 27 , the day Iturbide rode into Mexico City to end the war .
The reason for this is that Hidalgo is considered to be `` precursor and creator of the rest of the heroes of the -LRB- Mexican War of -RRB- Independence . ''
Hidalgo has become an icon for Mexicans who resist tyranny in the country .
José Clemente Orozco depicted him with a flaming torch of liberty and considered the painting among his best work .
David Alfaro Siqueiros was commissioned by San Nicolas University in Morelia to paint a mural for a celebration commemorating the 200th anniversary of Hidalgo 's birth .
The town of his parish was renamed Dolores Hidalgo in his honor and the state of Hidalgo was created in 1869 .
Every year on the night of 15 -- 16 September , the president of Mexico re-enacts the Grito from the balcony of the National Palace .
This scene is repeated by the heads of cities and towns all over Mexico .
Next to it is a lamp lit to represent the sacrifice of those who gave their lives for Mexican Independence .
Meanwhile , the Mexican forces in the state had time to prepare a defense against the Americans .
The battle ended quickly because of some devastating defensive errors from the Mexican forces and the ingenious strategic moves by the American forces .
After their loss at the Battle of Sacramento , the remaining Mexican soldiers retreated south , leaving the city to American occupation .
The Americans also confiscated large amounts of Mexican supplies and took 400 Mexican soldiers prisoners of war .
American forces maintained an occupation of the state capital for the rest of the Mexican -- American War .
On July 20 , Governor Elorriaga was reinstated , and Baca along with the legislative minority were brought back to form a new legislature , which met on September 1 .
The entry of General Santa Anna into Mexico brought calm , as the leaders waited for clarity .
Meanwhile , Maximilian von Habsburg , a younger brother of the Emperor of Austria , was proclaimed Emperor Maximilian I of Mexico on April 10 , 1864 with the backing of Napoleon III and a group of Mexican conservatives .
At the same time , the state liberals and conservatives compromised to allow the popular Ángel Trías take the governorship ; by this time the French forces had taken control over the central portions of the country and were making preparations to invade the northern states .
In August 1859 , Zuloaga and his forces were defeated by the liberal Orozco and his forces ; Orozco soon after deposed the state governor , but had to flee to Durango two months later .
In the late 1860s the conservative General Cajen briefly entered the state after his campaign through the state of Jalisco and helped establish conservative politicians and ran out the liberal leaders Jesús González Ortega and José María Patoni .
Cajen attained several advantages over the liberals within the state , but soon lost his standing due to a strong resurgence of the liberal forces within the state .
The successful liberal leaders José María Patoni of Durango and J.E. Muñoz of Chihuahua quickly strengthened their standing by limiting the political rights of the clergy implementing the presidential decree .
The state elected General Luis Terrazas , a liberal leader , as governor ; he would continue to fight small battles within the state to suppress conservative uprisings during 1861 .
On July 8 , 1865 Brincourt crossed the Nazas River in northern Durango , heading toward Chihuahua .
On July 22 Brincourt crossed the banks of Río Florido into Ciudad Jiménez ; one day later he arrived at Valle de Allende where he sent Colonel Pyot with a garrison to take control of Hidalgo del Parral .
Brincourt continued through Santa Rosalia de Camargo and Santa Cruz de Rosales .
On the same day , the President named General Manuel Ojinaga the new governor and placed him in charge of all the republican forces .
At the Battle of Parral , the French lost 55 men to the Republican forces .
On August 13 , 1865 , the French forces with an estimated 2,500 men arrived at the outskirts of Chihuahua City , and on August 15 , 1865 , General Brincourt defeated the republican forces , taking control of the state capital .
Brincourt designated Tomás Zuloaga as Prefect of Chihuahua .
Fearing the French would continue their campaign to El Paso del Norte , President Juárez relocated to El Carrizal , a secluded place in the mountains near El Paso del Norte , in August 1865 , .
It would have been easy for the French forces to continue in pursuit of President Juárez across the border , but they feared altercations with American forces .
General François Achille Bazaine ordered the French troops to retreat back to the state of Durango after only reaching a point one days travel north of Chihuahua City .
General Brincourt asked for 1,000 men to be left behind to help maintain control over the state , but his request was denied .
The French left the state on October 29 , 1865 .
President Juárez returned to Chihuahua City on November 20 , 1865 and remained in the city until December 9 , 1865 when he returned to El Paso del Norte .
Shortly after the president left Chihuahua City , Terrazas was restored as governor of the state on December 11 , 1865 .
On June 17 , 1866 , President Juárez arrived in Chihuahua City and remained in the capital until December 10 , 1866 .
The distance of the French forces and their allies allowed the Ministry of War , led by General Negrete , to reorganize the state 's national guard into the Patriotic Battalion of Chihuahua , which was deployed to fight in the battle of Matamoros , Tamaulipas against the French .
After a series of major defeats and an escalating threat from Prussia , France began pulling troops out of Mexico in late 1866 .
Disillusioned with the liberal political views of Maximilian , the Mexican conservatives abandoned him , and in 1867 the last of the Emperor 's forces were defeated .
Maximilian was sentenced to death by a military court ; despite national and international pleas for amnesty , Juárez refused to commute the sentence .
Although President José Mariano Paredes 's issuance of a manifesto on May 23 is sometimes considered the declaration of war , Mexico officially declared war by Congress on July 7 .
The Mexican forces being impatient to confront the American forces passed beyond El Paso del Norte about 20 miles -LRB- 32 km -RRB- north along the Rio Grande .
The battle ended badly by the Mexican forces that were then forced to retreat back into the state of Chihuahua .
By December 27 , 1846 , the American forces occupied El Paso Del Norte .
During October 1875 several locations were controlled by rebel forces , but the government finally regained control on November 25 , 1875 .
In 1901 the Heroes Theater -LRB- Teatro de los Héroes -RRB- opened in Chihuahua City .
On August 18 , 1904 , Governor Terrazas was replaced by Governor Enrique C. Creel .
From 1907 to 1911 , the Creel administration succeeded in advancing the state 's legal system , modernizing the mining industry , and raising public education standards .
During the same time , the streets of Chihuahua City were paved and numerous monuments were built in Chihuahua City and Ciudad Juárez .
Eventually backtracking on many of his initial political positions Díaz became a de facto dictator .
Díaz became increasingly unpopular due to brutal suppression of political dissidents by using the Rurales and manipulating the elections to solidify his political machine .
The peasants felt disenfranchised by the policies that promoted the unfair distribution of land where 95 % of the land was owned by the top 5 % .
After militias loyal to Madero defeated the Mexican federal army , on May 21 , 1911 , Madero signed the Treaty of Ciudad Juárez with Díaz .
It required that Díaz abdicate his rule and be replaced by Madero .
Orozco eventually became disappointed with the Madero 's government and led a rebellion against him .
The rural working class , which had supported Madero , now took up arms against him in support of Orozco .
The state is made up of three geologic regions : Mountains , Plains-Valleys , and Desert , which occur in large bands from west to east .
Because of the different geologic regions there are contrasting climates and ecosystems .
According to Köppen climate classification the state has five major climate zones .
There are some microclimates in the state due to the varying topology mostly found in the western side of the state .
In the winter of 1914 Villa 's and Zapata 's troops entered and occupied Mexico City .
With the defeat of Villa , Carranza seized power .
A short time later the United States recognized Carranza as president of Mexico .
Even though Villa 's forces were badly depleted by his loss at Celaya , he continued his fight against the Carranza government .
Finally , in 1920 , Obregón -- who had defeated him at Celaya -- finally reached an agreement with Villa end his rebellion .
The steppe zone accounts for a third of the state 's area , and it experiences pronounced dry and wet seasons .
The steppe zone is the most populated area of the state .
Pine -LRB- Pinus -RRB- and oak -LRB- Quercus -RRB- species are usually found at an elevation of 2,000 m -LRB- 6,560 ft -RRB- above sea level .
The most common species of flora found in the mountains are : Pinus , Quercus , Abies , Ficus , Vachellia , Ipomoea , Acacia , Lysiloma , Bursera , Vitex , Tabebuia , Sideroxylon , Cordia , Fouquieria , Pithecellobium .
The lower elevations have a steppe vegetation with a variety of grasses and small bushes .
Chihuahua -LRB- along with Baja California -RRB- is the only state in Mexico to have two cities ranked in the top 20 most populated .
In fact , Ciudad Juárez is one of the fastest growing cities in the world in spite of the fact that it is `` the most violent zone in the world outside of declared war zones '' .
For instance , a few years ago the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas published that in Ciudad Juárez `` the average annual growth over the 10-year period 1990 -- 2000 was 5.3 percent .
Juárez experienced much higher population growth than the state of Chihuahua and than Mexico as a whole '' .
The growth rate is 2.4 % .
Juárez stopped in Ciudad Jiménez , Valle de Allende , and Hidalgo de Parral , in turn .
He decreed Parral the capital of Mexico from October 2 -- 5 , 1864 .
On October 15 , 1864 the city of Chihuahua was declared the temporary capital of Mexico .
But soon after the election , President Juárez had another crisis on his hands ; the Juárez administration was suspected to be involved in the assassination of the military chief José María Patoni executed by General Canto in August 1868 .
Canto was sentenced to death , but later his sentence changed to 10 years imprisonment .
The sense of injustice gave rise to a new rebellion in 1869 that threatened the federal government .
In response , the Juárez administration took drastic measures by temporarily suspending constitutional rights , but the governor of Chihuahua did not support this action .
A new popular leader arose among the rebels , Porfirio Díaz .
The federal government was successful in quelling rebellions in Durango an Chihuahua .
On July 18 , 1872 , President Juárez died from a heart attack ; soon after , many of his supporters ceased the fighting .
Peace returned to Chihuahua and the new government was led by Governor Antonio Ochoa -LRB- formerly a co-owner of the Batopilas silver mines -RRB- in 1873 after Luis Terrazas finished his term in 1872 .
The Díaz administration helped Governor Luis Terrazas by funding the Municipal Public Library in Chihuahua City and passing a federal initiative for the construction of the railroad from Chihuahua City to Ciudad Júarez .
By 1881 , the Central Mexican Railroad was completed which connected Mexico City to Ciudad Juárez .
By 1888 the telephone services were extended from the capital to the cites of Julimes , Meoqui , and Hidalgo del Parral ; the telecommunication network in the state covered an estimated 3,500 kilometers .
The need of laborers to construct the extensive infrastructure projects resulted in a significant Asian immigration , mostly from China .
By the end of the Terrazas term , the state experienced an increase in commerce , mining , and banking .
When the banks were nationalized , Chihuahua became the most important banking state in Mexico .
During the campaign Díaz incarcerated Madero on election day in 1910 .
Díaz was announced the winner of the election by a landslide , triggering the revolution .
Carranza -LRB- supported by Obregón -RRB- was now the strongest candidate to fill the power vacuum and set himself up as head of the new government .
This government successfully printed money , passed laws , etc. .
Mountains account for one third of the state 's surface area which include large coniferous forests .
Between the months of November and March snow storms are possible in the lower elevations and are frequent in the higher elevations .
There are several watersheds located in the Sierra Madre Occidental all of the water that flows through the state ; most of the rivers finally empty into the Río Grande .
Temperatures in some canyons in the state reach over 100 °F in the summer while the same areas rarely drop below 32 °F in the winter .
La Barranca del Cobre , or Copper Canyon , a spectacular canyon system larger and deeper than the Grand Canyon ; the canyon also contains Mexico 's two tallest waterfalls : Basaseachic Falls and Piedra Volada .
There are two national parks found in the mountainous area of the state : Cumbres de Majalca National Park and Basaseachic Falls National Park .
By the late 1920s , some 7,000 had immigrated to Chihuahua State and Durango State , almost all from Canada , only a few from the U.S. and Russia .
Mennonites in the country stand out because of their light skin , hair , and eyes .
Delicias is home to Alpura , the second-largest dairy company in Mexico .
The mining industry is a small but continues to produce large amounts of minerals .
The state ranked first place in the country for the production of lead with 53,169 metric tons .
Before his execution , he thanked his jailers , Private Soldiers Ortega and Melchor , in letters for their humane treatment .
At his execution , Hidalgo placed his right hand over his heart to show the riflemen where they should aim .
His body , along with the bodies of Allende , Aldama and José Mariano Jiménez were decapitated , and the heads were put on display on the four corners of the Alhóndiga de Granaditas in Guanajuato .
The heads remained there for ten years until the end of the Mexican War of Independence to serve as a warning to other insurgents .
Those remains would later be transferred in 1824 to Mexico City .
He then summoned the legislature , which had been dissolved by Baca .
During the American occupation of the state , the number of Indian attacks was drastically reduced , but in 1848 the attacks resumed to such a degree that the Mexican officials had no choice but to resume military projects to protect Mexican settlements in the state .
Through the next three decades the state faced constant attacks from indigenous on Mexican settlements .
After the defeat of the army in Puebla , the Juárez administration was forced to abandon Mexico City ; the president retreated further north seeking refuge in the state of Chihuahua .
Being completely caught off guard , the French imperial forces sought refuge by bunkering themselves in the Cathedral of the Holy Cross , Our Lady of Regla , and St Fancis of Assisi and made it almost impossible to penetrate their defenses .
The first cannon fired hit a bell in the tower of the church , instantly breaking it in half ; soon after , 200 men of the imperial army forces surrendered .
The republican forces had recovered control over the state capital .
By April 1866 , the state government had established a vital trading route from Chihuahua City to San Antonio , Texas ; the government began to replenish their supplies and reinforce their fight against the Imperial forces .
Shortly afterwards , the federal government sent an entourage led by Treviño ; Casavantes was immediately ordered to resign his position .
Casavantes declared political victory as he was able to publicly accuse and depose Governor Trías .
Later a dispute ensued again among the states of Coahuila , Durango , and Chihuahua over the mountain range area known as Sierra Mojada , when large deposits of gold ore was discovered .
The state of Chihuahua officially submitted a declaration of protest in May 1880 that shortly after was amicably settled .
However , by 1913 his forces had swelled into an army of thousands , called the División del Norte -LRB- Northern Division -RRB- .
Villa and his army , along with Emiliano Zapata and Álvaro Obregón , united with Carranza to fight against Huerta .
In April 1914 U.S. opposition to Huerta had reached its peak , blockading the regime 's ability to resupply from abroad .
In his spontaneous response to U.S. President Woodrow Wilson Carranza asked `` that the president withdraw American troops from Mexico . ''
The desert in the state varies slightly with a small variant in climate .
The Samalayuca dunes cover an area of about 150 km2 ; it is an impressive site of the Chihuahuan Desert and is a protected area by the state due to unique species of plants and animals .
The fauna in the state is just as diverse as the flora and varies greatly due to the large contrast in climates .
The Mexican wolf , once abundant , has been extirpated .
The third-largest group was the `` pure indigenous '' population , constituting 12.76 % of the population .
The remaining 0.82 % of the population of Chihuahua was considered `` other '' , i.e. , neither Mestizo , indigenous , nor white .
The most important indigenous tribes of the state of Chihuahua are :
There are more than 406 companies operating under the federal IMMEX or Prosec program in Chihuahua .
While export-driven manufacturing is one of the most important components of the state 's economy , the industrial sector is quite diverse and can be broken down into several sectors , which are : electronics , agro-industrial , wood base manufacturing , mineral , and biotech .
Similar to the rest of the country , small businesses continue to be the foundation of the state 's economy .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Frequency is an objective , scientific attribute that can be measured .
However , this does not necessarily mean that most people wo n't agree on which notes are higher and lower .
-LRB- See Frequencies of notes . -RRB-
Distance in this space corresponds to musical intervals as understood by musicians .
The system is flexible enough to include `` microtones '' not found on standard piano keyboards .
The relative pitches of individual notes in a scale may be determined by one of a number of tuning systems .
In well-tempered systems -LRB- as used in the time of Johann Sebastian Bach , for example -RRB- , different methods of musical tuning were used .
For example , if the A above middle C is 440 Hz , the A an octave above that is 880 Hz -LRB- info -RRB- .
Despite that , the idiom relating vertical height to sound pitch is shared by most languages .
At least in English , it is just one of many deep conceptual metaphors that involve up/down .
The exact etymological history of the musical sense of high and low pitch is still unclear .
There is evidence that humans do actually perceive that the source of a sound is slightly higher or lower in vertical space when the sound frequency is increased or decreased .
The vibration with the lowest frequency is called the fundamental frequency ; the other frequencies are overtones .
When the actual fundamental frequency can be precisely determined through physical measurement , it may differ from the perceived pitch because of overtones , also known as upper partials , harmonic or otherwise .
Below 500 Hz , the jnd is about 3 Hz for sine waves , and 1 Hz for complex tones ; above 1000 Hz , the jnd for sine waves is about 0.6 % -LRB- about 10 cents -RRB- .
The jnd becomes smaller if the two tones are played simultaneously as the listener is then able to discern beat frequencies .
It is still possible for two sounds of indefinite pitch to clearly be higher or lower than one another .
A special type of pitch often occurs in free nature when sound reaches the ear of an observer directly from the source , and also after reflecting off a sound-reflecting surface .
For example , one might refer to the A above middle C as a ' , A4 , or 440 Hz .
For example , one can adopt the widely used MIDI standard to map fundamental frequency , f , to a real number , p , as follows
Temporal theories offer an alternative that appeals to the temporal structure of action potentials , mostly the phase-locking and mode-locking of action potentials to frequencies in a stimulus .
However , it has long been noted that a neural mechanism that may accomplish a delay -- a necessary operation of a true autocorrelation -- has not been found .
To be a more complete model , autocorrelation must therefore apply to signals that represent the output of the cochlea , as via auditory-nerve interspike-interval histograms .
The lions , often blue , have had minor changes to colour and appearance .
A 6 -- 3 loss in 1953 to Hungary , was their second defeat by a foreign team at Wembley .
This still stands as England 's worst ever defeat .
Following this , there was media speculation that Harry Redknapp would take the job .
To begin with , England had no permanent home stadium .
The team has also reached the quarter-final on two recent occasions in 2004 and 2012 .
Despite controversial press coverage of his personal life , Eriksson was consistently popular with the majority of fans .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- He guided England to the quarter-finals of the 2002 FIFA World Cup , UEFA Euro 2004 , and the 2006 FIFA World Cup .
His contract was extended by the Football Association by two years , to include UEFA Euro 2008 .
England 's away qualifiers for the 2010 World Cup were shown on Setanta Sports until that company 's collapse .
This one-off event was the first time an England game had been screened in such a way .
The national team is one of eight national teams to have won at least one FIFA World Cup title .
The tournament was played on home soil and England defeated Germany 4 -- 2 in the final .
The team has also reached the quarter-final on two recent occasions in 2002 and 2006 .
Previously , they reached this stage in 1954 , 1962 , 1970 and 1986 .
The great majority of slaves in Texas came with their owners from the older slave states .
Sizable numbers , however , came through the domestic slave trade .
New Orleans was the center of this trade in the Deep South , but there were slave dealers in Houston .
Thousands of enslaved African-Americans lived near the city before the Civil War .
Many of them near the city worked on sugar and cotton plantations , while most of those in the city limits had domestic and artisan jobs .
A few slaves , perhaps as many as 2,000 between 1835 and 1865 , came through the illegal African trade .
Post-war Texas grew rapidly as migrants poured into the cotton lands of the state .
Economic gains of blacks who entered defense industries continued in the postwar years .
There was a cutback in some activities for a period .
The porous layers were compressed over time and forced upward .
As it pushed upward , the salt dragged surrounding sediments into salt dome formations , often trapping oil and gas that seeped from the surrounding porous sands .
Downtown was on the threshold of an energy industry -- led boom in 1970 .
Based on highest architectural feature , it is the 17th tallest in the United States and the 95th tallest in the world .
Many annual events celebrate the diverse cultures of Houston .
Wet 'n' Wild SplashTown is a water park located north of Houston .
The Houston -- The Woodlands -- Sugar Land metropolitan area is served by one public television station and two public radio stations .
After the Civil War , Houston businessmen initiated efforts to widen the city 's extensive system of bayous so the city could accept more commerce between downtown and the nearby port of Galveston .
Such restrictions have had mixed results .
Unlike most places , high oil and gasoline prices are beneficial for Houston 's economy , as many of its residents are employed in the energy industry .
Houston is also home to folk artists , art groups and various small progressive arts organizations .
Houston attracts many touring Broadway acts , concerts , shows , and exhibitions for a variety of interests .
Bayou Place is a large multilevel building containing full-service restaurants , bars , live music , billiards , and Sundance Cinema .
Minute Maid Park is also a retractable-roof stadium .
Toyota Center also has the largest screen for an indoor arena in the United States built to coincide with the arena 's hosting of the 2013 NBA All-Star Game .
Other sports facilities include Hofheinz Pavilion -LRB- Houston Cougars basketball -RRB- , Rice Stadium -LRB- Rice Owls football -RRB- , and Reliant Arena .
TDECU Stadium is where the University of Houston Houston Cougars football team plays .
Houston has hosted several major sports events : the 1968 , 1986 and 2004 Major League Baseball All-Star Games ; the 1989 , 2006 and 2013 NBA All-Star Games ; Super Bowl VIII and Super Bowl XXXVIII , as well as hosting the 2005 World Series and 1981 , 1986 , 1994 and 1995 NBA Finals , winning the latter two .
Super Bowl LI is currently slated to be hosted in NRG Stadium in 2017 .
Houston Baptist University , affiliated with the Baptist General Convention of Texas , offers bachelor 's and graduate degrees .
They provide patient and preventive care , research , education , and local , national , and international community well-being .
More heart surgeries are performed at the Texas Medical Center than anywhere else in the world .
Houston 's economy has a broad industrial base in energy , manufacturing , aeronautics , and transportation .
It is home to many cultural institutions and exhibits , which attract more than 7 million visitors a year to the Museum District .
Houston has an active visual and performing arts scene in the Theater District and offers year-round resident companies in all major performing arts .
Recent snow events in Houston include a storm on December 24 , 2004 when one inch -LRB- 2.5 cm -RRB- of snow accumulated in parts of the metro area .
Falls of at least one inch on both December 10 , 2008 and December 4 , 2009 marked the first time measurable snowfall had occurred in two consecutive years in the city 's recorded history .
Localized flooding often occurs , owing to the extremely flat topography and widespread typical clay-silt prairie soils , which do not drain quickly .
The burgeoning port and railroad industry , combined with oil discovery in 1901 , has induced continual surges in the city 's population .
In the mid-twentieth century , Houston became the home of the Texas Medical Center -- the world 's largest concentration of healthcare and research institutions -- and NASA 's Johnson Space Center , where the Mission Control Center is located .
The city is home to the nation 's third-largest concentration of consular offices , representing 86 countries .
African-Americans formed a large part of the city 's population , numbering 23,929 people , or nearly one-third of the residents .
The Piney Woods is north of Houston .
Much of the city was built on forested land , marshes , swamp , or prairie which resembles the Deep South , and are all still visible in surrounding areas .
Downtown stands about 50 feet -LRB- 15 m -RRB- above sea level , and the highest point in far northwest Houston is about 125 feet -LRB- 38 m -RRB- in elevation .
The city once relied on groundwater for its needs , but land subsidence forced the city to turn to ground-level water sources such as Lake Houston , Lake Conroe and Lake Livingston .
The city owns surface water rights for 1.20 billion gallons of water a day in addition to 150 million gallons a day worth of groundwater .
Summer mornings average over 90 percent relative humidity .
To cope with the strong humidity and heat , people use air conditioning in nearly every vehicle and building .
In 1980 , Houston was described as the `` most air-conditioned place on earth '' .
The city has often been known to be the most politically diverse city in Texas , a state known for being generally conservative .
As a result , the city is often a contested area in statewide elections .
In 2009 , Houston became the first US city with a population over 1 million citizens to elect a gay mayor , by electing Annise Parker .
American Indians made up 0.7 % of the population .
Individuals from some other race made up 15.2 % of the city 's population , of which 0.2 % were non-Hispanic .
Individuals from two or more races made up 3.3 % of the city .
The racial makeup of the city was 49.3 % White , 25.3 % African American , 5.3 % Asian , 0.7 % American Indian , 0.1 % Pacific Islander , 16.5 % from some other race , and 3.1 % from two or more races .
Economist and vice president of research at the Greater Houston Partnership Patrick Jankowski attributed Houston 's success to the ability of the region 's real estate and energy industries to learn from historical mistakes .
and expand the current Red Line .
Amtrak , the national passenger rail system , provides service three times a week to Houston via the Sunset Limited -LRB- Los Angeles -- New Orleans -RRB- , which stops at a train station on the north side of the downtown area .
The station saw 14,891 boardings and alightings in fiscal year 2008 .
These were the first international flights flown from Hobby since 1969 .
Houston 's aviation history is showcased in the 1940 Air Terminal Museum located in the old terminal building on the west side of the airport .
There have been no significant historically recorded earthquakes in Houston , but researchers do not discount the possibility of such quakes having occurred in the deeper past , nor occurring in the future .
It may be associated with slip along the faults ; however , the slippage is slow and not considered an earthquake , where stationary faults must slip suddenly enough to create seismic waves .
More recently , high-density residential areas have been developed within the loop .
The city 's outlying areas , suburbs and enclaves are located outside of the loop .
Uptown became one of the most prominent instances of an edge city .
At the time of construction , it was believed to be the world 's tallest skyscraper outside of a central business district .
The new 20-story Skanska building and BBVA Compass Plaza are the newest office buildings built in Uptown after 30 years .
The Uptown District is also home to buildings designed by noted architects I. M. Pei , César Pelli , and Philip Johnson .
In the late 1990s and early 2000s decade , there was a mini-boom of mid-rise and high-rise residential tower construction , with several over 30 stories tall .
Since 2000 more than 30 high-rise buildings have gone up in Houston ; all told , 72 high-rises tower over the city , which adds up to about 8,300 units .
Renewable energy sources -- wind and solar -- are also growing economic bases in the city .
Petroleum products , chemicals , and oil and gas extraction equipment accounted for approximately two-thirds of the metropolitan area 's exports last year .
The Top 3 destinations for exports were Mexico , Canada , and Brazil .
They have won two NBA Championships : in 1994 and 1995 under star players Hakeem Olajuwon , Otis Thorpe , Clyde Drexler , Vernon Maxwell , and Kenny Smith .
The Houston Texans are a National Football League -LRB- NFL -RRB- expansion team formed in 2002 .
The Houston Dynamo are a Major League Soccer -LRB- MLS -RRB- franchise that has been based in Houston since 2006 after they won two MLS Cup titles in 2006 and 2007 .
The Houston Dash play in the National Women 's Soccer League -LRB- NWSL -RRB- .
The Scrap Yard Dawgs , a women 's pro softball team , is expected to play in the National Pro Fastpitch -LRB- NPF -RRB- from 2016 .
The University of Houston is a nationally recognized Tier One research university , and is the flagship institution of the University of Houston System .
The University of Houston -- Clear Lake and the University of Houston -- Downtown are stand-alone universities ; they are not branch campuses of the University of Houston .
A proposed highway project , State Highway 99 -LRB- Grand Parkway -RRB- , will form a third loop outside of Houston , totaling 180 miles in length and making an almost-complete circumference , with the exception of crossing the ship channel .
As of June 2014 , two of eleven segments of State Highway 99 have been completed to the west of Houston , and three northern segments , totaling 38 miles , are actively under construction and scheduled to open to traffic late in 2015 .
In addition to the Sam Houston Tollway loop mentioned above , the Harris County Toll Road Authority currently operates four spoke tollways : The Katy Managed Lanes of Interstate 10 , the Hardy Toll Road , the Westpark Tollway , and the Fort Bend Parkway Extension .
Other spoke roads either planned or under construction include Crosby Freeway , and the future Alvin Freeway .
Decorative art prominently features copper , both by itself and in the form of pigments .
Copper occurs naturally as native copper and was known to some of the oldest civilizations on record .
There is evidence that gold and meteoric iron -LRB- but not iron smelting -RRB- were the only metals used by humans before copper .
The history of copper metallurgy is thought to have followed the following sequence : 1 -RRB- cold working of native copper , 2 -RRB- annealing , 3 -RRB- smelting , and 4 -RRB- the lost wax method .
In southeastern Anatolia , all four of these metallurgical techniques appears more or less simultaneously at the beginning of the Neolithic c. 7500 BC .
However , just as agriculture was independently invented in several parts of the world , copper smelting was invented locally in several different places .
Investment casting was invented in 4500 -- 4000 BC in Southeast Asia and carbon dating has established mining at Alderley Edge in Cheshire , UK at 2280 to 1890 BC .
Ötzi the Iceman , a male dated from 3300 -- 3200 BC , was found with an axe with a copper head 99.7 % pure ; high levels of arsenic in his hair suggest his involvement in copper smelting .
Production in the Old Copper Complex in Michigan and Wisconsin is dated between 6000 and 3000 BC .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Ancient Egyptians -LRB- ~ 2400 BC -RRB- used copper for sterilizing wounds and drinking water , and later on for headaches , burns , and itching .
Copper wire is used in power generation , power transmission , power distribution , telecommunications , electronics circuitry , and countless types of electrical equipment .
This includes building wire , communications cable , power distribution cable , appliance wire , automotive wire and cable , and magnet wire .
The filled d-shells in these elements do not contribute much to the interatomic interactions , which are dominated by the s-electrons through metallic bonds .
Unlike metals with incomplete d-shells , metallic bonds in copper are lacking a covalent character and are relatively weak .
This explains the low hardness and high ductility of single crystals of copper .
At the macroscopic scale , introduction of extended defects to the crystal lattice , such as grain boundaries , hinders flow of the material under applied stress , thereby increasing its hardness .
It was an important resource for the Romans , Greeks and other ancient peoples .
The phrase was simplified to cuprum , hence the English copper .
The seven heavenly bodies known to the ancients were associated with the seven metals known in antiquity , and Venus was assigned to copper .
Conjugate addition to enones and carbocupration of alkynes can also be achieved with organocopper compounds .
Copper -LRB- I -RRB- forms a variety of weak complexes with alkenes and carbon monoxide , especially in the presence of amine ligands .
The Norddeutsche Affinerie in Hamburg was the first modern electroplating plant starting its production in 1876 .
Flash smelting was developed by Outokumpu in Finland and first applied at Harjavalta in 1949 ; the energy-efficient process accounts for 50 % of the world 's primary copper production .
Increasing the mass and cross section of copper in a coil increases the electrical energy efficiency of the motor .
The fungus also plays a role in the solubilization of heavy metal sulfides .
Copper-alloy touch surfaces have natural intrinsic properties to destroy a wide range of microorganisms -LRB- e.g. , E. coli O157 : H7 , methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus -LRB- MRSA -RRB- , Staphylococcus , Clostridium difficile , influenza A virus , adenovirus , and fungi -RRB- .
In addition , the EPA has approved a long list of antimicrobial copper products made from these alloys , such as bedrails , handrails , over-bed tables , sinks , faucets , door knobs , toilet hardware , computer keyboards , health club equipment , shopping cart handles , etc. -LRB- for a comprehensive list of products , see : Antimicrobial copper-alloy touch surfaces #Approved products -RRB- .
Antimicrobial copper alloy products are now being installed in healthcare facilities in the U.K. , Ireland , Japan , Korea , France , Denmark , and Brazil -LSB- citation needed -RSB- and in the subway transit system in Santiago , Chile , where copper-zinc alloy handrails will be installed in some 30 stations between 2011 -- 2014 .
However , only a tiny fraction of these reserves is economically viable , given present-day prices and technologies .
Various estimates of existing copper reserves available for mining vary from 25 years to 60 years , depending on core assumptions such as the growth rate .
Because of these and other factors , the future of copper production and supply is the subject of much debate , including the concept of peak copper , analogous to peak oil .
The cultural role of copper has been important , particularly in currency .
A small part of copper supply is used in production of compounds for nutritional supplements and fungicides in agriculture .
Machining of copper is possible , although it is usually necessary to use an alloy for intricate parts to get good machinability characteristics .
This is because the resistivity to electron transport in metals at room temperature mostly originates from scattering of electrons on thermal vibrations of the lattice , which are relatively weak for a soft metal .
Examples include Chuquicamata in Chile , Bingham Canyon Mine in Utah , United States and El Chino Mine in New Mexico , United States .
Several sites in the state of Arizona are considered prime candidates for this method .
The amount of copper in use is increasing and the quantity available is barely sufficient to allow all countries to reach developed world levels of usage .
Much of this is in more-developed countries -LRB- 140 -- 300 kg per capita -RRB- rather than less-developed countries -LRB- 30 -- 40 kg per capita -RRB- .
Finishes include mechanical surface treatments , chemical coloring , and coatings .
Isotopes with a mass number above 64 decay by β − , whereas those with a mass number below 64 decay by β + .
64Cu , which has a half-life of 12.7 hours , decays both ways .
Some lead-free solders consist of tin alloyed with a small proportion of copper and other metals .
Amino acids form very stable chelate complexes with copper -LRB- II -RRB- .
Many wet-chemical tests for copper ions exist , one involving potassium ferrocyanide , which gives a brown precipitate with copper -LRB- II -RRB- salts .
Sumerian and Egyptian artifacts of copper and bronze alloys date to 3000 BC .
It ended with the beginning of the Iron Age , 2000 -- 1000 BC in the Near East , 600 BC in Northern Europe .
This term has gradually fallen out of favor because in some parts of the world the Chalcolithic and Neolithic are coterminous at both ends .
It was known to the Greeks , but became a significant supplement to bronze during the Roman Empire .
Copper is an essential trace element in plants and animals , but not some microorganisms .
Stated differently , the RDA for copper in normal healthy adults is quoted as 0.97 mg/day and as 3.0 mg/day .
After processing in the liver , copper is distributed to other tissues in a second phase .
Copper transport here involves the protein ceruloplasmin , which carries the majority of copper in blood .
These minerals are concentrated from crushed ores to the level of 10 -- 15 % copper by froth flotation or bioleaching .
The same mechanism accounts for the yellow color of gold and caesium .
How should one describe the identity of another , in ways which encompass both their idiosyncratic qualities and their group memberships or identifications , both of which can shift according to circumstance ?
Using constructs drawn from the salient discourses of the individual , the group and cultural norms , the practical operationalisation of ISA provides a methodology that maps how these are used by the individual , applied across time and milieus by the `` situated self '' to appraise self and other agents and institutions -LRB- for example , resulting in the individual 's evaluation of self and significant others and institutions -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LRB- Weinreich & Saunderson , 2003 , pp 65 -- 67 ; 105-106 -RRB- .
Hence , though there is continuity , there is also development and change .
-LRB- Weinreich & Saunderson , 2003 , pp 22 -- 23 -RRB- .
They concentrated on how the idea of community belonging is differently constructed by individual members and how individuals within the group conceive ethnic boundaries .
-LRB- Weinreich & Saunderson , -LRB- eds -RRB- 2003 , pp 26 -- 34 -RRB- .
This was reinforced by an appreciation , following the trend in sociological thought , of the manner in which the individual is affected by and contributes to the overall social context .
At the same time , however , an inclusive boundary will also impose restrictions on the people it has included by limiting their inclusion within other boundaries .
An example of this is the use of a particular language by a newcomer in a room full of people speaking various languages .
Some people may understand the language used by this person while others may not .
But they might also perceive it as imposing an exclusive boundary that is meant to mark them off from her .
On the other hand , those who do understand the newcomer 's language could take it as an inclusive boundary , through which the newcomer associates herself with them to the exclusion of the other people present .
Equally , however , it is possible that people who do understand the newcomer but who also speak another language may not want to speak the newcomer 's language and so see her marker as an imposition and a negative boundary .
It is possible that the newcomer is either aware or unaware of this , depending on whether she herself knows other languages or is conscious of the plurilingual quality of the people there and is respectful of it or not .
, driven largely by the work of James Marcia .
It follows that the core of the research in this paradigm investigates the degrees to which a person has made certain explorations , and the degree to which he or she displays a commitment to those explorations .
In so doing , it questions the idea that identity is a natural given , characterised by fixed , supposedly objective criteria .
While they have been criticized , they continue to exert an influence on approaches to the conceptualisation of identity today .
The implications are multiple as various research traditions are now -LSB- when ? -RSB-
This becomes increasing challenging in stigmatized jobs or `` dirty work '' -LRB- Hughes , 1951 -RRB- .
Tracy and Trethewey -LRB- 2005 -RRB- state that `` individuals gravitate toward and turn away from particular jobs depending in part , on the extent to which they validate a `` preferred organizational self '' -LRB- Tracy & Tretheway 2005 , p. 169 -RRB- .
Some jobs carry different stigmas or acclaims .
`` The process by which people arrive at justifications of and values for various occupational choices . ''
`` Crafting a positive sense of self at work is more challenging when one 's work is considered `` dirty '' by societal standards '' -LRB- Tracy & Scott 2006 , p. 7 -RRB- .
`` In other words , doing taint management is not just about allowing the employee to feel good in that job .
`` If employees must navigate discourses that question the viability of their work , and / or experience obstacles in managing taint through transforming dirty work into a badge of honor , it is likely they will find blaming the client to be an efficacious route in affirming their identity '' -LRB- Tracy & Scott 2006 , p. 33 -RRB- .
Diffusion is when a person lacks both exploration in life and interest in committing even to those unchosen roles that he or she occupies .
Foreclosure is when a person has not chosen extensively in the past , but seems willing to commit to some relevant values , goals , or roles in the future .
Moratorium is when a person displays a kind of flightiness , ready to make choices but unable to commit to them .
Finally , achievement is when a person makes identity choices and commits to them .
These different explorations of ` identity ' demonstrate how difficult a concept it is to pin down .
Discussions of identity use the term with different meanings , from fundamental and abiding sameness , to fluidity , contingency , negotiated and so on .
In this environment , some analysts , such as Brubaker and Cooper , have suggested doing away with the concept completely -LRB- Brubaker & Cooper 2000 , p. 1 -RRB- .
Hall -LRB- 1992 , 1996 -RRB- , for example , suggests treating identity as a process , to take into account the reality of diverse and ever-changing social experience .
The construction of an individual sense of self is achieved by personal choices regarding who and what to associate with .
Such approaches are liberating in their recognition of the role of the individual in social interaction and the construction of identity .
-LRB- Leary & Tangney 2003 , p. 3 -RRB-
Progressive strength in the ego identity , for example , can be charted in terms of a series of stages in which identity is formed in response to increasingly sophisticated challenges .
The process of forming a viable sense of identity for the culture is conceptualized as an adolescent task , and those who do not manage a resynthesis of childhood identifications are seen as being in a state of ` identity diffusion ' whereas those who retain their initially given identities unquestioned have ` foreclosed ' identities -LRB- Weinreich & Saunderson 2003 p7-8 -RRB- .
On some readings of Erikson , the development of a strong ego identity , along with the proper integration into a stable society and culture , lead to a stronger sense of identity in general .
Accordingly , a deficiency in either of these factors may increase the chance of an identity crisis or confusion -LRB- Cote & Levine 2002 , p. 22 -RRB- .
-LRB- Saunderson and O'Kane , 2005 -RRB- .
In a social context , misunderstandings can arise due to a misinterpretation of the significance of specific markers .
This has made it one of the wealthiest places in the entire South Asia .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The State of Bilaspur was merged in the Himachal Pradesh on 1 April 1954 by the Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur -LRB- New State -RRB- Act , 1954 .
Himachal became a part C state on 26 January 1950 with the implementation of the Constitution of India and the Lt. Governor was appointed .
Legislative Assembly was elected in 1952 .
Following area of Punjab State namely Simla , Kangra , Kulu and Lahul and Spiti Districts , Nalagarh tehsil of Ambala District , Lohara , Amb and Una kanungo circles , some area of Santokhgarh kanungo circle and some other specified area of Una tehsil of Hoshiarpur District besides some parts of Dhar Kalan Kanungo circle of Pathankot tehsil of Gurdaspur District ; were merged with Himachal Pradesh on 1 November 1966 on enactment of Punjab Reorganisation Act , 1966 by the Parliament .
Thus Himachal emerged as the 18th state of the Indian Union .
The state has about 25 % of the national potential in this respect .
The state is also the first state in India to achieve the goal of having a bank account for every family .
The recent years witnessed quick establishment of International Entrepreneurship .
The carpets , leather works , shawls , metalware , woodwork and paintings are worth appreciating .
Pashmina shawls are a product that is highly in demand in Himachal and all over the country .
Himachali caps are famous art work of the people .
Extreme cold winters of Himachal necessitated wool weaving .
The well-known woven object is the shawl , ranging from fine pashmina to the coarse desar .
During the Vedic period , several small republics known as `` Janapada '' existed which were later conquered by the Gupta Empire .
After a brief period of supremacy by King Harshavardhana , the region was once again divided into several local powers headed by chieftains , including some Rajput principalities .
These kingdoms enjoyed a large degree of independence and were invaded by Delhi Sultanate a number of times .
Several hill states acknowledged Mughal suzerainty and paid regular tribute to the Mughals .
The district magistrate or the deputy commissioner is assisted by a number of officers belonging to Himachal Administrative Service and other Himachal state services .
Each district is subdivided into Sub-Divisions , governed by a sub-divisional magistrate , and again into Blocks .
Blocks consists of panchayats -LRB- village councils -RRB- and town municipalities .
For example , they form 10 % of the population in Una District adjoining the state of Punjab and 17 % in Shimla , the state capital .
The Buddhists constitute 1.15 % are mainly natives and tribals from Lahaul and Spiti , where they form majority of 60 % and Kinnaur where they form 40 % , however the bulk are refugees from Tibet .
They consolidated their military power and began to expand their territory .
Gradually , the Gorkhas annexed Sirmour and Shimla .
However , Gurkhas could not capture Kangra fort which came under Maharaja Ranjeet Singh in 1809 .
After the defeat , the Gurkhas began to expand towards the south of the state .
However , Raja Ram Singh , Raja of Siba State managed to capture the fort of Siba from the remnants of Lahore Darbar in Samvat 1846 , during the First Anglo-Sikh War .
They came into direct conflict with the British along the tarai belt after which the British expelled them from the provinces of the Satluj .
The British gradually emerged as the paramount power .
In the revolt of 1857 , or first Indian war of independence , arising from a number of grievances against the British , the people of the hill states were not as politically active as were those in other parts of the country .
They and their rulers , with the exception of Bushahr , remained more or less inactive .
The state has areas like Dharamsala that receive very heavy rainfall , as well as those like Lahaul and Spiti that are cold and almost rainless .
Snowfall is common in alpine tracts -LRB- generally above 2,200 metres -LRB- 7,218 ft -RRB- i.e. in the higher and trans-Himalayan region -RRB- .
Himachal Pradesh is governed through a parliamentary system of representative democracy , a feature the state shares with other Indian states .
Universal suffrage is granted to residents .
Executive authority is vested in the Council of Ministers headed by the Chief Minister , although the titular head of government is the Governor .
The leader of the party or coalition with a majority in the Legislative Assembly is appointed as the Chief Minister by the Governor , and the Council of Ministers are appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister .
The Council of Ministers reports to the Legislative Assembly .
The Assembly is unicameral with 68 Members of the Legislative Assembly -LRB- MLA -RRB- .
Auxiliary authorities known as panchayats , for which local body elections are regularly held , govern local affairs .
Kalka-Shimla Railway track passes through many tunnels , while Pathankot -- Jogindernagar gently meanders through a maze of hills and valleys .
It also has standard gauge railway track which connect Amb -LRB- Una district -RRB- to Delhi .
In 1950 , Himachal was declared a union territory , but after the State of Himachal Pradesh Act 1971 , Himachal emerged as the 18th state of the Republic of India .
Judging by the number of people writing to these media , there is a very large media-aware population in the state .
Governments have seen alternates between Bharatiya Janata Party -LRB- BJP -RRB- and Indian National Congress -LRB- INC -RRB- , no third front ever has become significant .
Special efforts are being made to promote cultivation of crops like olives , figs , hops , mushrooms , flowers , pistachio nuts , sarda melon and saffron .
Doordarshan Shimla also provides programs in Pahari language.Multi system operators provide a mix of Nepali , Hindi , English , and international channels via cable .
Broadband internet is available in select towns and cities and is provided by the state-run BSNL and by other private companies .
Shimla district has maximum urban population of 25 % .
The government has successfully imposed environmental protection and tourism development , meeting European standards , and it is the only state which forbids the use of polyethylene and tobacco products .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Nonverbal communication also relates to intent of a message .
Speech also contains nonverbal elements known as paralanguage , e.g. rhythm , intonation , tempo , and stress .
There may even be a pheromone component .
It affects communication most at the subconscious level and establishes trust .
Likewise , written texts include nonverbal elements such as handwriting style , spatial arrangement of words and the use of emoticons to convey emotion .
The biochemicals trigger the fungal organism to react in a specific manner , while if the same chemical molecules are not part of biotic messages , they do not trigger the fungal organism to react .
This implies that fungal organisms can differentiate between molecules taking part in biotic messages and similar molecules being irrelevant in the situation .
These acts may take many forms , in one of the various manners of communication .
Together , communication content and form make messages that are sent towards a destination .
Effective verbal or spoken communication is dependent on a number of factors and can not be fully isolated from other important interpersonal skills such as non-verbal communication , listening skills and clarification .
The word `` language '' also refers to common properties of languages .
Languages tend to share certain properties , although there are exceptions .
There is no defined line between a language and a dialect .
Communication is two-way process not merely one-way .
Researchers develop theories to understand communication behaviors .
The broad field of animal communication encompasses most of the issues in ethology .
Shannon and Weaver also recognized that often there is static that interferes with one listening to a telephone conversation , which they deemed noise .
This common conception of communication simply views communication as a means of sending and receiving information .
Claude Shannon and Warren Weaver structured this model based on the following elements :
A particular instance of communication is called a speech act .
One problem with this encode-transmit-receive-decode model is that the processes of encoding and decoding imply that the sender and receiver each possess something that functions as a codebook , and that these two code books are , at the very least , similar if not identical .
Although something like code books is implied by the model , they are nowhere represented in the model , which creates many conceptual difficulties .
In parallel they produce other volatiles to attract parasites which attack these herbivores .
In stress situations plants can overwrite the genomes they inherited from their parents and revert to that of their grand - or great-grandparents .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The other is stone and ` Time Binding ' , through the construction of temples and the pyramids can sustain their authority generation to generation , through this media they can change and shape communication in their society -LRB- Wark , McKenzie 1997 -RRB- .
Anthocyanins and other pigment chemicals of the larger family of polyphenols in purple grapes are responsible for the varying shades of purple in red wines .
The earliest archeological evidence for a dominant position of wine-making in human culture dates from 8,000 years ago in Georgia .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- By the 9th century AD the city of Shiraz was known to produce some of the finest wines in the Middle East .
The growing of grapes would later spread to other regions in Europe , as well as North Africa , and eventually in North America .
Grape juice that has been pasteurized , removing any naturally occurring yeast , will not ferment if kept sterile , and thus contains no alcohol .
In the wine industry , grape juice that contains 7 -- 23 % of pulp , skins , stems and seeds is often referred to as `` must '' .
The amount of fermentation time a wine spends in contact with grape skins is an important determinant of its resveratrol content .
Wine grapes are smaller , usually seeded , and have relatively thick skins -LRB- a desirable characteristic in winemaking , since much of the aroma in wine comes from the skin -RRB- .
By comparison , commercially produced `` 100 % grape juice '' , made from table grapes , is usually around 15 % sugar by weight .
Instructions concerning wine are given in the book of Proverbs and in the book of Isaiah , such as in Proverbs 20:1 and Isaiah 5:20 -- 25 .
Grapes are especially significant for Christians , who since the Early Church have used wine in their celebration of the Eucharist .
Views on the significance of the wine vary between denominations .
It is these anthocyanins that are attracting the efforts of scientists to define their properties for human health .
Wine is used -LRB- not grape juice -RRB- both due to its strong Scriptural roots , and also to follow the tradition set by the early Christian Church .
Computerized engine timing , cruise control , anti-lock brakes , seat belt tensioners , door locks , airbags and advanced driver assistance systems make these disruptions possible , and self-driving cars go even further .
The leadership team is tasked with national security and long-term development and co-ordination of major issues related to network security and information technology .
Economic , political , cultural , social and military fields as related to network security and information technology strategy , planning and major macroeconomic policy are being researched .
It has also been shown that the promise of ACLs of giving access to an object to only one person can never be guaranteed in practice .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The group claimed that they had taken not only company data but user data as well .
The other websites may stay online . ''
The question of whether the government should intervene or not in the regulation of the cyberspace is a very polemical one .
Where everyone agree that an improvement on cybersecurity is more than vital , is the government the best actor to solve this issue ?
If industry does n't respond -LRB- to the threat -RRB- , you have to follow through . ''
The aim of the strategy is to strengthen Canada 's `` cyber systems and critical infrastructure sectors , support economic growth and protect Canadians as they connect to each other and to the world . ''
Three main pillars define the strategy : securing government systems , partnering to secure vital cyber systems outside the federal government , and helping Canadians to be secure online .
The strategy involves multiple departments and agencies across the Government of Canada .
Computers control functions at many utilities , including coordination of telecommunications , the power grid , nuclear power plants , and valve opening and closing in water and gas networks .
Each of these is covered in more detail below .
The CCIRC provides support to mitigate cyber threats , technical support to respond and recover from targeted cyber attacks , and provides online tools for members of Canada 's critical infrastructure sectors .
The CCIRC also operates an online reporting tool where individuals and organizations can report a cyber incident .
This has led to new terms such as cyberwarfare and cyberterrorism .
The test will be to see if governments and corporations that control critical systems such as energy , communications and other information will be able to prevent attacks before they occur .
Public Safety Canada aims to begin an evaluation of Canada 's Cyber Security Strategy in early 2015 .
A similar technique can be used to hijack keystrokes .
The size of the thefts has resulted in major attention from state and Federal United States authorities and the investigation is ongoing .
These texts were subsequently developed and applied by later authorities , known as the Gaonim , Rishonim , and Acharonim .
The Star-Ledger was the first mainstream newspaper to drop the term .
Several local Jewish papers , including New York 's Jewish Week and Philadelphia 's Jewish Exponent have also dropped use of the term .
In general , Modern Orthodoxy holds that Jewish law is normative and binding , while simultaneously attaching a positive value to interaction with contemporary society .
Externally , Orthodox Jews can be identified by their manner of dress and family lifestyle .
However , Modern Orthodox Jews are commonly indistinguishable in their dress from those around them .
As such , Orthodox Jews believe that one must be extremely careful in interpreting Jewish law .
In reaction to the emergence of Reform Judaism , a group of traditionalist German Jews emerged in support of some of the values of the Haskalah , but also wanted to defend the classic , traditional interpretation of Jewish law and tradition .
This group was led by those who opposed the establishment of a new temple in Hamburg , as reflected in the booklet `` Ele Divrei HaBerit '' .
At this time the first Orthodox Jewish periodical , `` Der Treue Zions Waechter '' , was launched with the Hebrew supplement `` Shomer Zion HaNe'eman '' -LSB- 1845 - 1855 -RSB- .
Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch commented in 1854 :
Jewish historians also note that certain customs of today 's Orthodox are not continuations of past practice , but instead represent innovations that would have been unknown to prior generations .
It is characterised by its focus on community-wide Torah study .
Haredi Orthodoxy 's differences with Modern Orthodoxy usually lie in interpretation of the nature of traditional halakhic concepts and in acceptable application of these concepts .
Academic interest is instead to be directed toward the religious education found in the yeshiva .
Both boys and girls attend school and may proceed to higher Torah study , starting anywhere between the ages of 13 and 18 .
Most Orthodox men -LRB- including many Modern Orthodox -RRB- , even those not in Kollel , will study Torah daily .
Furthermore , the Oral law includes principles designed to create new rules .
A Jew is someone who was born to a Jewish mother , or who converts to Judaism in accordance with Jewish law and tradition .
However , some Orthodox Jewish organizations do reach out to intermarried Jews .
As a general rule , Haredi Jews believe that when at all possible the law should be maintained as it was understood by their authorities at the haskalah , believing that it had never changed .
Modern Orthodox authorities are more willing to assume that under scrupulous examination , identical principles may lead to different applications in the context of modern life .
It includes codes of behaviour applicable to a broad range of circumstances -LRB- and many hypothetical ones -RRB- .
There are though a number of halakhic meta-principles that guide the halakhic process and in an instance of opposition between a specific halakha and a meta-principle , the meta-principle often wins out .
It precedes the later and differs in its genesis and emerged focus .
The movement originated in Eastern Europe -LRB- what is now Belarus and Ukraine -RRB- in the 18th century .
In addition to bridging this class gap , Hasidic teachings sought to reintroduce joy in the performance of the commandments and in prayer through the popularisation of Jewish mysticism -LRB- this joy had been suppressed in the intense intellectual study of the Talmud -RRB- .
In a practical sense , what distinguishes Hasidic Judaism from other forms of Haredi Judaism is the close-knit organization of Hasidic communities centered on a Rebbe -LRB- sometimes translated as `` Grand Rabbi '' -RRB- , and various customs and modes of dress particular to each community .
In some cases , there are religious ideological distinctions between Hasidic groups , as well .
In contrast to the general American Jewish community , which is dwindling due to low fertility and high intermarriage and assimilation rates , the Orthodox Jewish community of the United States is growing rapidly .
According to The New York Times , the high growth rate of Orthodox Jews will eventually render them the dominant demographic force in New York Jewry .
However , the Orthodox claim to absolute fidelity to past tradition has been challenged by scholars who contend that the Judaism of the Middle Ages bore little resemblance to that practiced by today 's Orthodox .
-LRB- see Reform Judaism -RRB- .
Politically , Orthodox Jews , given their variety of movements and affiliations , tend not to conform easily to the standard left-right political spectrum , with one of the key differences between the movements stemming from the groups ' attitudes to Zionism .
Nevertheless , this strategy has proved successful and the number of adherents to Orthodox Judaism , especially Haredi and Chassidic communities , has grown rapidly .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Two of the main Orthodox communities in the United States are located in New York City and Rockland County .
In New York City , the neighborhoods of Borough Park , Midwood , Williamsburg , and Crown Heights , located in the borough of Brooklyn , have particularly large Orthodox communities .
-LSB- See Torah im Derech Eretz and Torah Umadda `` Relationship with Torah im Derech Eretz '' for a more extensive listing . -RSB-
Concerning the details , however , there is often variance : decisions may be based on various of the standardized codes of Jewish Law that have been developed over the centuries , as well as on the various responsa .
This pattern of religious and secular involvement has been evident at many times in Jewish history .
Scholars -LSB- who ? -RSB-
believe it was characteristic of the Jews in Babylon during the Amoraic and Geonic periods , and likewise in early medieval Spain , shown by their engagement with both Muslim and Christian society .
It appeared as the traditional response to cultural and scientific innovation .
During development , it forms a relatively flexible framework upon which cells can move about and be reorganized , making complex structures possible .
Both have distinct tissues , but they are not organized into organs .
Animals have several characteristics that set them apart from other living things .
All animals are motile , if only at certain life stages .
In most other groups , the blastula undergoes more complicated rearrangement .
For the most part , they are bilaterally symmetric , and often have a specialized head with feeding and sensory organs .
The body is triploblastic , i.e. all three germ layers are well-developed , and tissues form distinct organs .
There are exceptions to each of these characteristics , however -- for instance adult echinoderms are radially symmetric , and certain parasitic worms have extremely simplified body structures .
The latter are further classified based on a major division between Deuterostomes and Protostomes .
Current understanding of the relationships among the major groups of animals is summarized by the following cladogram :
Roundworms are typically microscopic , and occur in nearly every environment where there is water .
A number are important parasites .
Smaller phyla related to them are the Nematomorpha or horsehair worms , and the Kinorhyncha , Priapulida , and Loricifera .
These groups have a reduced coelom , called a pseudocoelom .
This was facilitated by the severely reduced state of their genomes , but as many genes , introns , and linkages lost , these ecdysozoans can teach us little about the origins of animals in general .
The extent of this type of evolution within the superphylum will be revealed by the crustacean , annelid , and molluscan genome projects currently in progress .
Now , this is generally considered convergent evolution , owing to many morphological and genetic differences between the two phyla .
These were traditionally grouped together as the lophophorates .
but it now appears that the lophophorate group may be paraphyletic , with some closer to the nemerteans and some to the molluscs and annelids .
They include the Brachiopoda or lamp shells , which are prominent in the fossil record , the Entoprocta , the Phoronida , and possibly the Bryozoa or moss animals .
They lack the complex organization found in most other phyla .
Their cells are differentiated , but in most cases not organized into distinct tissues .
This result has been controversial , since it would imply that that sponges may not be so primitive , but may instead be secondarily simplified .
Other researchers have argued that the placement of Ctenophora as the earliest-diverging animal phylum is a statistical anomaly caused by the high rate of evolution in ctenophore genomes .
Deuterostomes differ from protostomes in several ways .
However , in protostomes , the first opening of the gut to appear in embryological development -LRB- the archenteron -RRB- develops into the mouth , with the anus forming secondarily .
These were originally considered some of the most primitive Bilateria , but it now appears they developed from more complex ancestors .
The other platyzoan phyla are mostly microscopic and pseudocoelomate .
They also include the Acanthocephala or spiny-headed worms , the Gnathostomulida , Micrognathozoa , and possibly the Cycliophora .
These groups share the presence of complex jaws , from which they are called the Gnathifera .
These sugars are then used as the building blocks for plant growth , including the production of other biomolecules .
Brewing beer is subject to legislation and taxation in developed countries , which from the late 19th century largely restricted brewing to a commercial operation only .
In addition to producing ethanol , fine particulate matter suspended in the wort settles during fermentation .
This is because its fibrous hull remains attached to the grain during threshing .
Other malted and unmalted grains -LRB- including wheat , rice , oats , and rye , and less frequently , corn and sorghum -RRB- may be used .
The highest density of breweries in the world , most of them microbreweries , exists in the German Region of Franconia , especially in the district of Upper Franconia , which has about 200 breweries .
The Benedictine Weihenstephan Brewery in Bavaria , Germany , can trace its roots to the year 768 , as a document from that year refers to a hop garden in the area paying a tithe to the monastery .
The quantity of fermentable sugars in the wort and the variety of yeast used to ferment the wort are the primary factors that determine the amount of alcohol in the final beer .
These beers are termed `` real ale '' by the CAMRA organisation .
Different concentrations of alcohol in the human body have different effects on a person .
The effects of alcohol depend on the amount an individual has drunk , the percentage of alcohol in the beer and the timespan that the consumption took place , the amount of food eaten and whether an individual has taken other prescription , over-the-counter or street drugs , among other factors .
A BAC of 0.09 % to 0.25 % causes lethargy , sedation , balance problems and blurred vision .
A BAC from 0.18 % to 0.30 % causes profound confusion , impaired speech -LRB- e.g. , slurred speech -RRB- , staggering , dizziness and vomiting .
As with all alcoholic drinks , drinking while driving , operating an aircraft or heavy machinery increases the risk of an accident ; many countries have penalties against drunk driving .
The brewing industry is a global business , consisting of several dominant multinational companies and many thousands of smaller producers ranging from brewpubs to regional breweries .
Regions have water with different mineral components ; as a result , different regions were originally better suited to making certain types of beer , thus giving them a regional character .
Beer produced before the Industrial Revolution continued to be made and sold on a domestic scale , although by the 7th century AD , beer was also being produced and sold by European monasteries .
During the Industrial Revolution , the production of beer moved from artisanal manufacture to industrial manufacture , and domestic manufacture ceased to be significant by the end of the 19th century .
The development of hydrometers and thermometers changed brewing by allowing the brewer more control of the process and greater knowledge of the results .
Hops contain several characteristics that brewers desire in beer .
Hops contribute floral , citrus , and herbal aromas and flavours to beer .
The grains are now washed in a process known as `` sparging '' .
This washing allows the brewer to gather as much of the fermentable liquid from the grains as possible .
The process of filtering the spent grain from the wort and sparge water is called wort separation .
Some modern breweries prefer the use of filter frames which allow a more finely ground grist .
A mixture of starch sources may be used , with a secondary starch source , such as maize -LRB- corn -RRB- , rice or sugar , often being termed an adjunct , especially when used as a lower-cost substitute for malted barley .
Some beers today , such as Fraoch ' by the Scottish Heather Ales company and Cervoise Lancelot by the French Brasserie-Lancelot company , use plants other than hops for flavouring .
There are a number of variations including Baltic porter , dry stout , and Imperial stout .
The history and development of stout and porter are intertwined .
Many beers are sold in cans , though there is considerable variation in the proportion between different countries .
People either drink from the can or pour the beer into a glass .
Plastic -LRB- PET -RRB- bottles are used by some breweries .
The same company had previously made Sink The Bismarck !
The German brewery Schorschbräu 's Schorschbock , a 31 % abv eisbock , and Hair of the Dog 's Dave , a 29 % abv barley wine made in 1994 , used the same fractional freezing method .
A 60 % abv blend of beer with whiskey was jokingly claimed as the strongest beer by a Dutch brewery in July 2010 .
Most beers are cleared of yeast by filtering when packaged in bottles and cans .
Typically , when serving a hefeweizen wheat beer , 90 % of the contents are poured , and the remainder is swirled to suspend the sediment before pouring it into the glass .
Alternatively , the bottle may be inverted prior to opening .
But with most overconsumption , it is more a problem of improper exercise and overconsumption of carbohydrates than the product itself .
Around the world , there are many traditional and ancient starch-based drinks classed as beer .
Bhutan , Nepal , Tibet and Sikkim also use millet in Chhaang , a popular semi-fermented rice/millet drink in the eastern Himalayas .
Some of the earliest Sumerian writings contain references to beer ; examples include a prayer to the goddess Ninkasi , known as `` The Hymn to Ninkasi '' , which served as both a prayer as well as a method of remembering the recipe for beer in a culture with few literate people , and the ancient advice -LRB- Fill your belly .
Day and night make merry -RRB- to Gilgamesh , recorded in the Epic of Gilgamesh , by the ale-wife Siduri may , at least in part , have referred to the consumption of beer .
A fermented beverage using rice and fruit was made in China around 7000 BC .
During boiling , water in the wort evaporates , but the sugars and other components of the wort remain ; this allows more efficient use of the starch sources in the beer .
Hops are added during boiling as a source of bitterness , flavour and aroma .
Hops may be added at more than one point during the boil .
The starch source in a beer provides the fermentable material and is a key determinant of the strength and flavour of the beer .
Different roasting times and temperatures are used to produce different colours of malt from the same grain .
Darker malts will produce darker beers .
The brewing industry is a global business , consisting of several dominant multinational companies and many thousands of smaller producers ranging from brewpubs to regional breweries .
The history of breweries has been one of absorbing smaller breweries in order to ensure economy of scale .
In 2004 the Belgian Interbrew was the third largest brewery by volume and the Brazilian AmBev was the fifth largest .
They merged into InBev , becoming the largest brewery .
In 2007 , SABMiller surpassed InBev and Anheuser-Bush when it acquired Royal Grolsch , brewer of Dutch premium beer brand Grolsch in 2007 .
The alcohol content of beer varies by local practice or beer style .
The customary strength of British ales is quite low , with many session beers being around 4 % abv .
Most beer is flavoured with hops , which add bitterness and act as a natural preservative , though other flavourings such as herbs or fruit may occasionally be included .
Beer was spread through Europe by Germanic and Celtic tribes as far back as 3000 BC , and it was mainly brewed on a domestic scale .
The product that the early Europeans drank might not be recognised as beer by most people today .
Alongside the basic starch source , the early European beers might contain fruits , honey , numerous types of plants , spices and other substances such as narcotic herbs .
The strength of beers has climbed during the later years of the 20th century .
The strongest beer brewed in Britain was Baz 's Super Brew by Parish Brewery , a 23 % abv beer .
Downstream emissions from distribution , retail , storage and disposal of waste can be over 45 % of a bottled micro-brew beer 's CO2 emissions .
Consumption of small quantities of alcohol -LRB- less than one drink in women and two in men -RRB- is associated with a decreased risk of cardiac disease , stroke and diabetes mellitus .
Test results indicated that the flavour of the beer triggered a dopamine release , even though alcohol content in the spray was insufficient for the purpose of becoming intoxicated .
The biggest change in this year 's census was in racial classification .
Instead , they were given special instructions for reporting the race of interracial persons .
A person with both White and American Indian ancestry was to be recorded as an Indian , unless his American Indian ancestry was small , and he was accepted as white within the community .
In all situations in which a person had White and some other racial ancestry , he was to be reported as that other race .
Use of caution is therefore recommended when interpreting changes in the racial composition of the US population over time .
The Interagency Committee agreed , stating that `` race '' and `` ethnicity '' were not sufficiently defined and `` that many respondents conceptualize ` race ' and ` ethnicity ' as one in the same -LSB- sic -RSB- underscor -LSB- ing -RSB- the need to consolidate these terms into one category , using a term that is more meaningful to the American people . ''
The racial categories represent a social-political construct for the race or races that respondents consider themselves to be and `` generally reflect a social definition of race recognized in this country . ''
Race and ethnicity are considered separate and distinct identities , with Hispanic or Latino origin asked as a separate question .
This policy encouraged the League of United Latin American Citizens in its quest to minimize discrimination by asserting their whiteness .
The development of the data standards stem in large measure from new responsibilities to enforce civil rights laws . ''
There were two questionnaires : one for free inhabitants and one for slaves .
This census also marked the beginning of the term `` race '' in the questionnaires .
Enumerators were instructed to write `` White , '' `` Black , '' `` Mulatto , '' `` Quadroon , '' `` Octoroon , '' `` Chinese , '' `` Japanese , '' or `` Indian . ''
For discussion of the meaning and scope of the Hispanic or Latino ethnicity , see the Hispanic and Latino Americans and Racial and ethnic demographics of the United States articles .
However , only cents are in everyday use as divisions of the dollar ; `` dime '' is used solely as the name of the coin with the value of 10 cents , while `` eagle '' and `` mill '' are largely unknown to the general public , though mills are sometimes used in matters of tax levies , and gasoline prices are usually in the form of $ X.XX9 per gallon , e.g. , $ 3.599 , sometimes written as $ 3.599 ⁄ 10 .
When currently issued in circulating form , denominations equal to or less than a dollar are emitted as U.S. coins while denominations equal to or greater than a dollar are emitted as Federal Reserve notes -LRB- with the exception of gold , silver and platinum coins valued up to $ 100 as legal tender , but worth far more as bullion -RRB- .
Both one-dollar coins and notes are produced today , although the note form is significantly more common .
Paper currency less than one dollar in denomination , known as `` fractional currency '' , was also sometimes pejoratively referred to as `` shinplasters '' .
In 1854 , James Guthrie , then Secretary of the Treasury , proposed creating $ 100 , $ 50 and $ 25 gold coins , which were referred to as a `` Union '' , `` Half Union '' , and `` Quarter Union '' , thus implying a denomination of 1 Union = $ 100 .
The p and the s eventually came to be written over each other giving rise to $ .
Laws implementing this power are currently codified at 31 U.S.C. § 5112 .
Section 5112 also provides for the minting and issuance of other coins , which have values ranging from one cent to 50 dollars .
These other coins are more fully described in Coins of the United States dollar .
Silver and gold coins continued to be issued and in 1878 the link between paper money and coins was reinstated .
Based on the success of the `` 50 State Quarters '' series , the new coin features a sequence of presidents in order of their inaugurations , starting with George Washington , on the obverse side .
This feature , similar to the edge inscriptions seen on the British # 1 coin , is not usually associated with U.S. coin designs .
In addition , due to the nature of U.S. coins , this will be the first time there will be circulating U.S. coins of different denominations with the same president featured on the obverse -LRB- heads -RRB- side -LRB- Lincoln/penny , Jefferson/nickel , Franklin D. Roosevelt/dime , Washington/quarter , Kennedy/half dollar , and Eisenhower/dollar -RRB- .
This money is not transferred from any existing funds -- it is at this point that the Federal Reserve has created new high-powered money .
The word `` dollar '' is one of the words in the first paragraph of Section 9 of Article 1 of the U.S. Constitution .
In 1792 the U.S. Congress adopted legislation titled An act establishing a mint , and regulating the Coins of the United States .
Section 20 of the act provided , `` That the money of account of the United States shall be expressed in dollars , or units ... and that all accounts in the public offices and all proceedings in the courts of the United States shall be kept and had in conformity to this regulation '' .
In other words , this act designated the United States dollar as the unit of currency of the United States .
The suffix `` K '' or `` k '' -LRB- from `` kilo - '' -RRB- is also commonly used to denote this amount -LRB- such as `` $ 10k '' to mean $ 10,000 -RRB- .
However , the $ 1,000 note is no longer in general use .
The $ 20 note is referred to as a `` double sawbuck '' , `` Jackson '' -LRB- after Andrew Jackson -RRB- , or `` double eagle '' .
The $ 10 note is referred to as a `` sawbuck '' , `` ten-spot '' or `` Hamilton '' -LRB- after Alexander Hamilton -RRB- .
The $ 5 note as `` Lincoln '' , `` fin '' , `` fiver '' or `` five-spot '' .
The infrequently-used $ 2 note is sometimes called `` deuce '' , `` Tom '' , or `` Jefferson '' -LRB- after Thomas Jefferson -RRB- .
The $ 1 note as a `` single '' or `` buck '' .
The dollar has also been , referred to as a `` bone '' and `` bones '' in plural -LRB- e.g. `` twenty bones '' is equal to $ 20 -RRB- .
Hamilton got the treasury to weigh a sample of Spanish dollars and the average weight came out to be 371 grains .
Future minting of such coins will be made solely for collectors .
With the advent of electronic banking , they became less necessary .
Notes in denominations of $ 500 , $ 1,000 , $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 and $ 100,000 were all produced at one time ; see large denomination bills in U.S. currency for details .
These notes are now collectors ' items and are worth more than their face value to collectors .
It may also have originated from a poker term .
It is still used to refer to the U.S. dollar -LRB- but not to the dollars of other countries -RRB- .
Other well-known names of the dollar as a whole in denominations include `` greenmail '' , `` green '' and `` dead presidents '' -LRB- the last because deceased presidents are pictured on most bills -RRB- .
The coinage of various English colonies also circulated .
The lion dollar was popular in the Dutch New Netherland Colony -LRB- New York -RRB- , but the lion dollar also circulated throughout the English colonies during the 17th century and early 18th century .
Examples circulating in the colonies were usually worn so that the design was not fully distinguishable , thus they were sometimes referred to as `` dog dollars '' .
Silver half dollars were last issued for circulation in 1970 .
The gold standard was changed to 13.71 grains -LRB- 0.888 g -RRB- , equivalent to setting the price of 1 troy ounce of gold at $ 35 .
This standard persisted until 1968 .
Highly sought after by collectors , and trading for as much as $ 850 each within a week of discovery , the error coins were identified by the absence of the edge impressions `` E PLURIBUS UNUM IN GOD WE TRUST 2007 P '' .
The mint of origin is generally accepted to be mostly Philadelphia , although identifying the source mint is impossible without opening a mint pack also containing marked units .
The fallacy of this argument arises because new notes printed to replace worn out notes , which have been withdrawn from circulation , bring in no net revenue to the government to offset the costs of printing new notes and destroying the old ones .
Federal Reserve Notes are designated by law as `` legal tender '' for the payment of debts .
Congress has also authorized the issuance of more than 10 other types of banknotes , including the United States Note and the Federal Reserve Bank Note .
In other instances , monetary policy might instead entail the targeting of a specific exchange rate relative to some foreign currency or else relative to gold .
It is the currency most used in international transactions and is the world 's most dominant reserve currency .
U.S. coins are produced by the United States Mint .
Many historians -LSB- who ? -RSB-
erroneously assume gold was standardized at a fixed rate in parity with silver ; however , there is no evidence of Congress making this law .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
However , since 1992 , the U.S. Mint has produced special Silver Proof Sets in addition to the regular yearly proof sets with silver dimes , quarters , and half dollars in place of the standard copper-nickel versions .
Dollar coins have not been very popular in the United States .
Minting of these dollars for circulation was suspended in 1980 -LRB- collectors ' pieces were struck in 1981 -RRB- , but , as with all past U.S. coins , they remain legal tender .
As the number of Anthony dollars held by the Federal Reserve and dispensed primarily to make change in postal and transit vending machines had been virtually exhausted , additional Anthony dollars were struck in 1999 .
However , this new coin has failed to achieve the popularity of the still-existing $ 1 bill and is rarely used in daily transactions .
The failure to simultaneously withdraw the dollar bill and weak publicity efforts have been cited by coin proponents as primary reasons for the failure of the dollar coin to gain popular support .
The amount of cash in circulation is increased -LRB- or decreased -RRB- by the actions of the Federal Reserve System .
Every business day , the Federal Reserve System engages in Open market operations to carry out that monetary policy .
Conversely , it will sell securities to the banks in exchange for dollars , to take dollars out of circulation .
It reflects inflation as experienced by consumers in their day-to-day living expenses .
A graph showing the U.S. CPI relative to 1982 -- 1984 and the annual year-over-year change in CPI is shown at right .
One commentator observed that Imperial 's scheme reflected `` the state of democracy in Kent , the transformation of a renowned scientific college into a grasping , highly aggressive , neo-corporate institution , and the defence of the status of an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty -- throughout England , not just Wye -- against rampant greed backed by the connivance of two important local authorities .
The inquest on his death has not yet reported .
The club has been home to numerous National Squad oarsmen and women and is open to all rowers not just students of Imperial College London .
He created a school which laid the foundations for the teaching of science in the country , and which has its legacy today at Imperial .
The UK Energy Research Centre was also established in 2004 and opened its headquarters at Imperial College .
Nearby public attractions include the Kensington Palace , Hyde Park and the Kensington Gardens , the National Art Library , and the Brompton Oratory .
Courses exist in a wide range of topics including philosophy , ethics in science and technology , history , modern literature and drama , art in the 20th century , film studies .
Language courses are available in French , German , Japanese , Italian , Russian , Spanish , Arabic and Mandarin Chinese .
The department had bought an early AMPEX Type A 1-inch videotape recorder and this was used to produce an occasional short news programme which was then played to students by simply moving the VTR and a monitor into a common room .
Besides the news , early productions included a film of the Queen opening what was then called College Block and interview programmes with DJ Mike Raven , Richard O'Brian and Monty Python producer Ian MacNaughton .
Prince Albert 's vision built the Victoria and Albert Museum , Science Museum , Natural History Museum , Geological Museum , Royal College of Science , Royal College of Art , Royal School of Mines , Royal School of Music , Royal College of Organists , Royal School of Needlework , Royal Geographical Society , Institute of Recorded Sound , Royal Horticultural Gardens , Royal Albert Hall and the Imperial Institute .
The main campus of Imperial College was constructed beside the buildings of the Imperial Institute in South Kensington .
In the same year the Imperial College School of Medicine was formally established and all of the property of Charing Cross and Westminster Medical School , the National Heart and Lung Institute and the Royal Postgraduate Medical School were transferred to Imperial as the result of the Imperial College Act 1997 .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
It was said then that `` A spokesman for Imperial said the college was acting on the recommendations and had already made changes '' .
The Union also hosts sports-related clubs such as Imperial College Boat Club and Imperial College Gliding Club .
The college has expanded its coursework to medicine through mergers with St Mary 's Hospital .
In 2004 , Queen Elizabeth II opened the Imperial College Business School .
Imperial became an independent university from the University of London during its one hundred year anniversary .
It is considered the highest honour given in the industrial chemical industry .
On 29 January 1950 , the government announced that it was intended that Imperial should expand to meet the scientific and technological challenges of the 20th century and a major expansion of the College followed over the next decade .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
There are also group routines consisting of 5 gymnasts and 5 apparatuses of their choice .
A good performance is characterized by uniformity and simultaneity .
The competition program consists of versatile and varied body movements , such as body waves , swings , balances , pivots , jumps and leaps , dance steps , and lifts .
The rope should , when held down by the feet , reach both of the gymnasts ' armpits .
At the ends -LRB- to the exclusion of all other parts of the rope -RRB- an anti-slip material , either coloured or neutral may cover a maximum of 10 cm -LRB- 3.94 in -RRB- .
The fundamental requirements of a rope routine include leaps and skipping .
Other elements include swings , throws , circles , rotations and figures of eight .
From then on until the early 1950s , both national and international competitions involved a changing variety of exercises gathered under the rubric , gymnastics , that would seem strange to today 's audiences and that included for example , synchronized team floor calisthenics , rope climbing , high jumping , running , and horizontal ladder .
During the 1920s , women organized and participated in gymnastics events .
The first women 's Olympic competition was primitive , only involving synchronized calisthenics and track and field .
The post flight segment may include one or more multiple saltos or somersaults , and/or twisting movements .
From the roundoff position the gymnast travels backwards and executes a backhandspring so that the hands land on the vaulting table .
The gymnast then blocks off the vaulting platform into various twisting and/or somersaulting combinations .
The post flight segment brings the gymnast to her feet .
This score is called the E score .
The final score is calculated by taking deductions from the E score , and adding the result to the D score .
The Japanese version includes tumbling performed on a spring floor .
Points are awarded based a 10-point scale that measures the level of difficulty of the tumbling and apparatus handling .
The new medium of television has helped publicize and initiate a modern age of gymnastics .
Both men 's and women 's gymnastics now attract considerable international interest , and excellent gymnasts can be found on every continent .
She was coached in Romania by coach , -LRB- Hungarian ethnicity -RRB- , Béla Károlyi .
Comaneci scored four of her perfect tens on the uneven bars , two on the balance beam and one in the floor exercise .
Even with Nadia 's perfect scores , the Romanians lost the gold medal to the Soviet Union .
Nevertheless , Comaneci became an Olympic icon .
The gymnast swings both legs in a circular motion -LRB- clockwise or counterclockwise depending on preference -RRB- and performs such skills on all parts of the apparatus .
To make the exercise more challenging , gymnasts will often include variations on a typical circling skill by turning -LRB- moores and spindles -RRB- or by straddling their legs -LRB- Flares -RRB- .
This requires back muscles to do any sort of skill .
From handstands being easy to back or front flips being a little difficult .
Without the necessary magnitude of energy dissipation during impact , the risk of sustaining injuries during somersaulting increases .
`` The subsequent ground contact or impact landing phase must be achieved using a safe , aesthetic and well-executed double foot landing . ''
This is followed by a final routine which is optional .
Some competitions restart the score from zero for the finals , other add the final score to the preliminary results .
The width and height of the bars may be adjusted .
In the past , the uneven parallel bars were closer together .
At the Elite level , movements must pass through the handstand .
Chalk and grips -LRB- a leather strip with holes for fingers to protect hands and improve performance -RRB- may be used while doing this event .
The chalk helps take the moisture out of gymnast 's hands to decrease friction and prevent rips -LRB- tears to the skin of the hands -RRB- , dowel grips help gymnasts grip the bar .
Gymnasts can achieve this by increasing hip , knee and ankle amplitude .
With the increase of height , the amplitude in ankles knees and hips rise the bars .
From 2009 , all senior trios and mixed pairs were required to be on the larger floor -LRB- 10x10m -RRB- , all groups also perform on this floor .
General gymnastics enables people of all ages and abilities to participate in performance groups of 6 to more than 150 athletes .
Men 's events are floor exercise , pommel horse , still rings , vault , parallel bars , and the high bar .
Gymnastics evolved from exercises used by the ancient Greeks that included skills for mounting and dismounting a horse , and from circus performance skills .
He was a Spanish colonel , and the first person to introduce educative gymnastic in France .
The system is used in the US for elite level competition .
In the previous system , the `` execution score '' was the only score .
It was and still is out of 10.00 .
During the gymnast 's performance , the judges deduct this score only .
The introduction of the difficulty score is a significant change .
Connection bonuses are the most common deduction from a difficulty score , as it can be difficult to connect multiple flight elements .
It is very hard to connect skills if the first skill is not performed correctly .
The new code of points allows the gymnasts to gain higher scores based on the difficulty of the skills they perform as well as their execution .
There is no maximum score for difficulty , as it can keep increasing as the difficulty of the skills increase .
This provides a firm surface that provides extra bounce or spring when compressed , allowing gymnasts to achieve greater height and a softer landing after the composed skill .
In some gymnastic associations such as United States Association of Gymnastic Clubs -LRB- USAIGC -RRB- , gymnasts are allowed to have vocals in their music but at USA Gymnastics competitions a large deduction is taken from the score for having vocals in the music .
The routine should consist of tumbling lines , series of jumps , leaps , dance elements , acrobatic skills , and turns , or piviots , on one foot .
A gymnast can perform up to four tumbling lines that usually includes at least one flight element without hand support .
Each level of gymnastics requires the athlete to perform a different number of tumbling passes .
In level 7 in the United States , a gymnast is required to do 2 -- 3 , and in levels 8 -- 10 , at least 3 -- 4 tumbling passes are required .
Scoring is similar to trampolining .
From 1974 to 1998 it was included as an event for both genders at the Acrobatic Gymnastics World Championships .
The event has also been contested since 1976 at the Trampoline World Championships .
There are a growing number of participants , competing alone and on a team ; it is most popular in Asia , especially in Japan where high school and university teams compete fiercely .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Thus the principality was upgraded to the Electorate of Brunswick-Lüneburg , colloquially known as the Electorate of Hanover after Calenberg 's capital -LRB- see also : House of Hanover -RRB- .
The last British monarch who ruled in Hanover was William IV .
Semi-Salic law , which required succession by the male line if possible , forbade the accession of Queen Victoria in Hanover .
As a male-line descendant of George I , Queen Victoria was herself a member of the House of Hanover .
Her descendants , however , bore her husband 's titular name of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha .
Three kings of Great Britain , or the United Kingdom , were concurrently also Electoral Princes of Hanover .
Forced labourers were sometimes used from the Hannover-Misburg subcamp of the Neuengamme concentration camp .
After the war , the Aegidienkirche was not rebuilt and its ruins were left as a war memorial .
The zoo consists of several theme areas : Sambesi , Meyers Farm , Gorilla-Mountain , Jungle-Palace , and Mullewapp .
There is also a tropical house , a jungle house , and a show arena .
Some other famous cabaret-stages are the Variety Marlene , the Uhu-Theatre .
the theatre Die Hinterbühne , the Rampenlich Variety and the revue-stage TAK .
`` Hanover '' is the traditional English spelling .
A large Jewish population then existed in Hanover .
However , Poland refused to accept them , leaving them stranded at the border with thousands of other Polish-Jewish deportees , fed only intermittently by the Polish Red Cross and Jewish welfare organisations .
The Great Garden consists of several parts .
The historic Garden Theatre inter alia hosted the musicals of the German rock musician Heinz Rudolf Kunze .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
It is the longest procession in Europe .
Around 2 million people visit this fun fair every year .
The landmark of this Fun Fair is the biggest transportable Ferris Wheel in the world -LRB- 60 m or 197 ft high -RRB- .
Hanover could be inherited only by male heirs .
The city of Hanover became the capital of the Prussian Province of Hanover .
After the annexation , the people of Hanover generally opposed the Prussian government .
A total of 2,400 people were deported , and very few survived .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Today , a memorial at the Opera Square is a reminder of the persecution of the Jews in Hanover .
After the war a large group of Orthodox Jewish survivors of the nearby Bergen-Belsen concentration camp settled in Hanover .
As overland travel was relatively difficult , its position on the upper navigable reaches of the river helped it to grow by increasing trade .
Hanover was thus a gateway to the Rhine , Ruhr and Saar river valleys , their industrial areas which grew up to the southwest and the plains regions to the east and north , for overland traffic skirting the Harz between the Low Countries and Saxony or Thuringia .
The Convention also required disbanding the army of Hanover .
However , George III did not recognize the Convention of the Elbe .
It was the only German army to fight against France throughout the entire Napoleonic wars .
The Legion later played an important role in the Battle of Waterloo in 1815 .
The capital town Hanover expanded to the western bank of the Leine and since then has grown considerably .
The Mausoleum of the Guelphs is also located in the Berggarten .
Like the Great Garden , the Berggarten also consists of several parts , for example the Paradies and the Prairie Garden .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Various industrial businesses are located in Hannover .
Jointly with a factory of German tire and automobile parts manufacturer Continental AG , they have a coal-burning power plant .
Since 2008 a take-over is in progress : the Schaeffler Group from Herzogenaurach -LRB- Bavaria -RRB- holds the majority of the stock but were required due to the financial crisis to deposit the options as securities at banks .
Hanover is home to many insurance companies , many of which operate only in Germany .
The Neues Theater -LRB- New Theatre -RRB- is the Boulevard Theatre of Hanover .
Some of the most important Musical-Productions are the rock musicals of the German rock musician Heinz Rudolph Kunze , which take place at the Garden-Theatre in the Great Garden .
Arminia Hannover is another very traditional soccer team in Hanover that has played in the first league for years and plays now in the Niedersachsen-West Liga -LRB- Lower Saxony League West -RRB- .
Home matches are played in the Rudolf-Kalweit-Stadium .
Hanover also hosts annual commercial trade fairs such as the Hanover Fair and the CeBIT .
In 2000 , Hanover hosted the world fair Expo 2000 .
Hanover is of national importance because of its universities and medical school , its international airport and its large zoo .
In the centre are the large Marktkirche -LRB- Church St. Georgii et Jacobi , preaching venue of the bishop of the Lutheran Landeskirche Hannovers -RRB- and the Old Town Hall .
Nearby are the Leibniz House , the Nolte House , and the Beguine Tower .
A very nice quarter of the Old Town is the Kreuz-Church-Quarter around the Kreuz Church with many nice little lanes .
Near the Old Town is the district of Calenberger Neustadt where the Catholic Basilica Minor of St. Clemens , the Reformed Church and the Lutheran Neustädter Hof - und Stadtkirche St. Johannis are located .
Textiles from all over the world can be visited in the Museum for textile art .
The EXPOseeum is the museum of the world-exhibition `` EXPO 2000 Hannover '' .
The Museum of veterinary medicine is unique in Germany .
The Museum for Energy History describes the 150 years old history of the application of energy .
The Home Museum Ahlem shows the history of the district of Ahlem .
The Mahn - und Gedenkstätte Ahlem describes the history of the Jewish people in Hanover and the Stiftung Ahlers Pro Arte / Kestner Pro Arte shows modern art .
Emotions are complex .
Emotion is also linked to behavioral tendency .
Definition has been described as is a `` positive or negative experience that is associated with a particular pattern of physiological activity . ''
According to other theories , emotions are not causal forces but simply syndromes of components , which might include motivation , feeling , behavior , and physiological changes , but no one of these components is the emotion .
Nor is the emotion an entity that causes these components
Some basic emotions can be modified to form complex emotions .
The complex emotions could arise from cultural conditioning or association combined with the basic emotions .
Alternatively , similar to the way primary colors combine , primary emotions could blend to form the full spectrum of human emotional experience .
Relationships exist between basic emotions , resulting in positive or negative influences .
Darwin also detailed the virtues of experiencing emotions and the parallel experiences that occur in animals .
This led the way for animal research on emotions and the eventual determination of the neural underpinnings of emotion .
This theory is supported by experiments in which by manipulating the bodily state induces a desired emotional state .
Some people may believe that emotions give rise to emotion-specific actions : e.g. `` I 'm crying because I 'm sad , '' or `` I ran away because I was scared . ''
Theories dealing with perception either use one or multiples perceptions in order to find an emotion -LRB- Goldie , 2007 -RRB- .
This theory is neo-Jamesian in arguing that bodily responses are central to emotions , yet it emphasizes the meaningfulness of emotions or the idea that emotions are about something , as is recognized by cognitive theories .
The novel claim of this theory is that conceptually-based cognition is unnecessary for such meaning .
Rather the bodily changes themselves perceive the meaningful content of the emotion because of being causally triggered by certain situations .
In this respect , emotions are held to be analogous to faculties such as vision or touch , which provide information about the relation between the subject and the world in various ways .
Social sciences often examine emotion for the role that it plays in human culture and social interactions .
Some anthropology studies examine the role of emotions in human activities .
The University of Queensland hosts EmoNet , an e-mail distribution list representing a network of academics that facilitates scholarly discussion of all matters relating to the study of emotion in organizational settings .
Two of the key eliciting factors for the arousal of emotions within this theory are expectations states and sanctions .
When people enter a situation or encounter with certain expectations for how the encounter should unfold , they will experience different emotions depending on the extent to which expectations for Self , other and situation are met or not met .
People can also provide positive or negative sanctions directed at Self or other which also trigger different emotional experiences in individuals .
Turner analyzed a wide range of emotion theories across different fields of research including sociology , psychology , evolutionary science , and neuroscience .
These four categories are called primary emotions and there is some agreement amongst researchers that these primary emotions become combined to produce more elaborate and complex emotional experiences .
These more elaborate emotions are called first-order elaborations in Turner 's theory and they include sentiments such as pride , triumph , and awe .
Emotions can also be experienced at different levels of intensity so that feelings of concern are a low-intensity variation of the primary emotion aversion-fear whereas depression is a higher intensity variant .
The theory states that within human beings , as a response to experiences in the world , the autonomic nervous system creates physiological events such as muscular tension , a rise in heart rate , perspiration , and dryness of the mouth .
Emotions , then , are feelings which come about as a result of these physiological changes , rather than being their cause .
Current areas of research in the concept of emotion include the development of materials that stimulate and elicit emotion .
In addition PET scans and fMRI scans help study the affective processes in the brain .
For example , an irritable person is generally disposed to feel irritation more easily or quickly than others do .
According to this theory , an emotional episode consists of a set of components , each of which is an ongoing process and none of which is necessary or sufficient for the emotion to be instantiated .
The set of components is not fixed , either by human evolutionary history or by social norms and roles .
He also believed that the richness , variety , and temporal course of emotional experiences could not stem from physiological reactions , that reflected fairly undifferentiated fight or flight responses .
This theory is markedly different from both cognitivist and neo-Jamesian theories of emotion , both of which see emotion as a purely internal process , with the environment only acting as a stimulus to the emotion .
In contrast , a situationist perspective on emotion views emotion as the product of an organism investigating its environment , and observing the responses of other organisms .
Emotion stimulates the evolution of social relationships , acting as a signal to mediate the behavior of other organisms .
In some contexts , the expression of emotion -LRB- both voluntary and involuntary -RRB- could be seen as strategic moves in the transactions between different organisms .
The situated perspective on emotion states that conceptual thought is not an inherent part of emotion , since emotion is an action-oriented form of skillful engagement with the world .
Emotions are thought to be related to certain activities in brain areas that direct our attention , motivate our behavior , and determine the significance of what is going on around us .
More recent research has shown that some of these limbic structures are not as directly related to emotion as others are while some non-limbic structures have been found to be of greater emotional relevance .
In history , scholars examine documents and other sources to interpret and analyze past activities ; speculation on the emotional state of the authors of historical documents is one of the tools of interpretation .
In communication studies , scholars study the role that emotion plays in the dissemination of ideas and messages .
Ethologists often study one type of behavior -LRB- for example , aggression -RRB- in a number of unrelated animals .
Sociological attention to emotion has varied over time .
He explained how the heightened state of emotional energy achieved during totemic rituals transported individuals above themselves giving them the sense that they were in the presence of a higher power , a force , that was embedded in the sacred objects that were worshipped .
These feelings of exaltation , he argued , ultimately lead people to believe that there were forces that governed sacred objects .
Some of the most influential theorists on emotion from the 20th century have died in the last decade .
According to one dictionary , the earliest precursors of the word likely dates back to the very origins of language .
The modern word emotion is heterogeneous In some uses of the word , emotions are intense feelings that are directed at someone or something .
One line of research thus looks at the meaning of the word emotion in everyday language and this usage is rather different from that in academic discourse .
Another line of research asks about languages other than English , and one interesting finding is that many languages have a similar but not identical term
There are some theories on emotions arguing that cognitive activity in the form of judgments , evaluations , or thoughts are necessary in order for an emotion to occur .
Emotions can motivate social interactions and relationships and therefore are directly related with basic physiology , particularly with the stress systems .
This is important because emotions are related to the anti-stress complex , with an oxytocin-attachment system , which plays a major role in bonding .
These characteristics are shared with other species and taxa and are due to the effects of genes and their continuous transmission .
Information that is encoded in the DNA sequences provides the blueprint for assembling proteins that make up our cells .
This suggests that everything that separates us from chimpanzees must be encoded in that very small amount of DNA , including our behaviors .
Students that study animal behaviors have only identified intraspecific examples of gene-dependent behavioral phenotypes .
In voles -LRB- Microtus spp . -RRB-
minor genetic differences have been identified in a vasopressin receptor gene that corresponds to major species differences in social organization and the mating system -LRB- Hammock & Young 2005 -RRB- .
Another potential example with behavioral differences is the FOCP2 gene , which is involved in neural circuitry handling speech and language -LRB- Vargha-Khadem et al. 2005 -RRB- .
Speech , language , and social organization are all part of the basis for emotions .
Emotion , in everyday speech , is any relatively brief conscious experience characterized by intense mental activity and a high degree of pleasure or displeasure .
Scientific discourse has drifted to other meanings and there is no consensus on a definition .
Those acting primarily on emotion may seem as if they are not thinking , but mental processes are still essential , particularly in the interpretation of events .
Other theories , however , claim that emotion is separate from and can precede cognition .
Emotions have been described by some theorists as discrete and consistent responses to internal or external events which have a particular significance for the organism .
Emotions are brief in duration and consist of a coordinated set of responses , which may include verbal , physiological , behavioural , and neural mechanisms .
Emotions have also been described as biologically given and a result of evolution because they provided good solutions to ancient and recurring problems that faced our ancestors .
Ekman 's most influential work revolved around the finding that certain emotions appeared to be universally recognized , even in cultures that were preliterate and could not have learned associations for facial expressions through media .
Another classic study found that when participants contorted their facial muscles into distinct facial expressions -LRB- e.g. disgust -RRB- , they reported subjective and physiological experiences that matched the distinct facial expressions .
Western philosophy regarded emotion in varying ways .
In the 19th century emotions were considered adaptive and were studied more frequently from an empiricist psychiatric perspective .
In his theory , James proposed that the perception of what he called an `` exciting fact '' directly led to a physiological response , known as `` emotion . ''
James further claims that `` we feel sad because we cry , angry because we strike , afraid because we tremble , and neither we cry , strike , nor tremble because we are sorry , angry , or fearful , as the case may be . ''
Historians of emotion trace and analyse the changing norms and rules of feeling , while examining emotional regimes , codes , and lexicons from social , cultural or political history perspectives .
Others focus on the history of medicine , science or psychology .
What somebody can and may feel -LRB- and show -RRB- in a given situation , towards certain people or things , depends on social norms and rules .
It is thus historically variable and open to change .
Interestingly , Marañón found that most of these patients felt something but in the absence of an actual emotion-evoking stimulus , the patients were unable to interpret their physiological arousal as an experienced emotion .
Schachter did agree that physiological reactions played a big role in emotions .
He suggested that physiological reactions contributed to emotional experience by facilitating a focused cognitive appraisal of a given physiologically arousing event and that this appraisal was what defined the subjective emotional experience .
Emotions were thus a result of two-stage process : general physiological arousal , and experience of emotion .
For example , the physiological arousal , heart pounding , in a response to an evoking stimulus , the sight of a bear in the kitchen .
The brain then quickly scans the area , to explain the pounding , and notices the bear .
Consequently , the brain interprets the pounding heart as being the result of fearing the bear .
Subjects were observed to express either anger or amusement depending on whether another person in the situation -LRB- a confederate -RRB- displayed that emotion .
Hence , the combination of the appraisal of the situation -LRB- cognitive -RRB- and the participants ' reception of adrenaline or a placebo together determined the response .
During every encounter , he proposed that we monitor ourselves through the `` looking glass '' that the gestures and reactions of others provide .
Depending on these reactions , we either experience pride or shame and this results in particular paths of action .
The formation or disruption of social bonds is dependent on the emotions that people experience during interactions .
Depending on the particular school 's general emphasis on either cognitive components of emotion , physical energy discharging , or on symbolic movement and facial expression components of emotion , different schools of psychotherapy approach the regulation of emotion differently .
Many different disciplines have produced work on the emotions .
Psychology examines emotions from a scientific perspective by treating them as mental processes and behavior and they explore the underlying physiological and neurological processes .
In linguistics , the expression of emotion may change to the meaning of sounds .
Based on interaction ritual theory , we experience different levels or intensities of emotional energy during face-to-face interactions .
In the 2000s , research in computer science , engineering , psychology and neuroscience has been aimed at developing devices that recognize human affect display and model emotions .
It is an interdisciplinary field spanning computer sciences , psychology , and cognitive science .
The data gathered is analogous to the cues humans use to perceive emotions in others .
Another area within affective computing is the design of computational devices proposed to exhibit either innate emotional capabilities or that are capable of convincingly simulating emotions .
The detection and processing of facial expression or body gestures is achieved through detectors and sensors .
More recently , emotion is said to consist of all the components .
The different components of emotion are categorized somewhat differently depending on the academic discipline .
In psychology and philosophy , emotion typically includes a subjective , conscious experience characterized primarily by psychophysiological expressions , biological reactions , and mental states .
A similar multicomponential description of emotion is found in sociology .
Although the inclusion of cognitive appraisal as one of the elements is slightly controversial , since some theorists make the assumption that emotion and cognition are separate but interacting systems , the component processing model provides a sequence of events that effectively describes the coordination involved during an emotional episode .
A further step can be taken by looking at the map 's dimensions of the emotional experiences .
These two dimensions can be depicted on a 2D coordinate map .
Core affect is not the only component to emotion , but gives the emotion its hedonic and felt energy .
More contemporary views along the evolutionary psychology spectrum posit that both basic emotions and social emotions evolved to motivate -LRB- social -RRB- behaviors that were adaptive in the ancestral environment .
Current research -LSB- citation needed -RSB- suggests that emotion is an essential part of any human decision-making and planning , and the famous distinction made between reason and emotion is not as clear as it seems .
This theory suggests that emotions are influenced and caused by events which in turn influence attitudes and behaviors .
This theoretical frame also emphasizes time in that human beings experience what they call emotion episodes -- a `` series of emotional states extended over time and organized around an underlying theme . ''
Research that tested the competing hypotheses generated by all four models also supported the Action Tendency Model .
Attempts are frequently made to regulate emotion according to the conventions of the society and the situation based on many -LRB- sometimes conflicting -RRB- demands and expectations which originate from various entities .
Expectations attached to social roles , such as `` acting as man '' and not as a woman , and the accompanying `` feeling rules '' contribute to the differences in expression of certain emotions .
In advertising , such as health campaigns and political messages , emotional appeals are commonly found .
To kick off the match , local journalist and pilot Josep Canudas dropped the ball onto the pitch from his airplane .
Next to champions like Juan Manuel Asensi , Carles Rexach and Hugo Sotil , he helped the club win the 1973 -- 74 season for the first time since 1960 , defeating Real Madrid 5 -- 0 at the Bernabéu along the way .
On 4 January 2016 , Barcelona 's transfer ban ended .
Espanyol achieved a 2 -- 1 win against Barça during the 2008 -- 09 season , becoming the first team to defeat Barcelona at Camp Nou in their treble-winning season .
This Barcelona team , which reached a record six consecutive Champions League semi-finals and won 14 trophies in just four years under Pep Guardiola , is considered by some in the sport to be the greatest team of all time .
As of December 2015 -LSB- update -RSB- , Barcelona has won 23 La Liga , 27 Copa del Rey , 11 Supercopa de España , three Copa Eva Duarte -LSB- note 2 -RSB- and two Copa de la Liga trophies , as well as being the record holder for the latter four competitions .
A month after the Spanish Civil War began in 1936 , several players from Barcelona enlisted in the ranks of those who fought against the military uprising , along with players from Athletic Bilbao .
It was ten years after the inception of the youth program , La Masia , when the young players began to graduate and play for their first team .
One of the first graduates , who would later earn international acclaim , was previous Barcelona coach Pep Guardiola .
They beat Sampdoria in both the 1989 UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup final and the 1992 European Cup final at Wembley , with a free kick goal from Dutch international Ronald Koeman .
They also won a Copa del Rey in 1990 , the European Super Cup in 1992 and three Supercopa de España trophies .
Barcelona accomplished two new records in Spanish football in 2010 as they retained the La Liga trophy with 99 points and won the Spanish Super Cup trophy for a ninth time .
Ultimately Barcelona ended the season 15 points clear of rivals Real Madrid , despite losing 2 -- 1 to them at the beginning of March .
They reached the semifinal stage of both the Copa del Rey and the Champions League , going out to Real Madrid and Bayern Munich respectively .
On 19 July , it was announced that Vilanova was resigning as Barcelona manager because his throat cancer had returned , and he would be receiving treatment for the second time after a three-month medical leave in December 2012 .
The fan clubs promote Barcelona in their locality and receive beneficial offers when visiting Barcelona .
The rivalry was strengthened by what Catalonians saw as a provocative representative of Madrid .
Their original ground was in the affluent district of Sarrià .
Comamala 's suggestion became the crest that the club wears today , with some minor variations .
After the Spanish Civil War the club started attracting more members and a larger number of spectators at matches .
The Catalan flag was banned and the club were prohibited from using non-Spanish names .
However , Maradona 's time with Barcelona was short-lived and he soon left for Napoli .
Unlike many other football clubs , the supporters own and operate Barcelona .
FC Barcelona had a successful start in regional and national cups , competing in the Campionat de Catalunya and the Copa del Rey .
In 1943 , Barcelona faced rivals Real Madrid in the semi-finals of Copa del Generalísimo -LRB- now the Copa del Rey -RRB- .
According to football writer Sid Lowe , `` There have been relatively few mentions of the game -LSB- since -RSB- and it is not a result that has been particularly celebrated in Madrid .
Indeed , the 11 -- 1 occupies a far more prominent place in Barcelona 's history . ''
The completion of the Camp Nou , finished in 1957 , meant the club had little money to spend on new players .
There was open feuding as Eto'o publicly criticized coach Frank Rijkaard and Ronaldinho .
Ronaldinho also admitted that a lack of fitness affected his form .
They took part in the 2006 FIFA Club World Cup , but were beaten by a late goal in the final against Brazilian side Internacional .
A statement on FIFA 's website read `` With regard to the case in question , FC Barcelona has been found to be in breach of art. 19 of the Regulations in the case of ten minor players and to have committed several other concurrent infringements in the context of other players , including under Annexe 2 of the Regulations .
Additionally , the club was granted a period of 90 days in which to regularise the situation of all minor players concerned . ''
In the 2005 -- 06 season , Barcelona repeated their league and Supercup successes .
Trailing 1 -- 0 to a 10-man Arsenal and with less than 15 minutes remaining , they came back to win 2 -- 1 , with substitute Henrik Larsson , in his final appearance for the club , setting up goals for Samuel Eto'o and fellow substitute Juliano Belletti , for the club 's first European Cup victory in 14 years .
It was less risky than joining a clandestine anti-Franco movement , and allowed them to express their dissidence .
In the 2010 -- 11 season , Barcelona retained the La Liga trophy , their third title in succession , finishing with 96 points .
In April 2011 , the club reached the Copa del Rey final , losing 1 -- 0 to Real Madrid at the Mestalla in Valencia .
In May , Barcelona defeated Manchester United in the 2011 Champions League Final 3 -- 1 held at Wembley Stadium , a repeat of the 2009 final , winning their fourth European Cup .
In August 2011 , La Masia graduate Cesc Fàbregas was bought from Arsenal and he would help Barcelona defend the Spanish Supercup against Real Madrid .
The Supercup victory brought the total number of official trophies to 73 , matching the number of titles won by Real Madrid .
This was Barcelona 's seventh La Liga title in the last ten years .
On 30 May , the club defeated Athletic Bilbao in the Copa del Rey final at Camp Nou .
On 6 June , Barcelona won the UEFA Champions League final with a 3 -- 1 win against Juventus , which completed the treble , the club 's second in 6 years .
Prior to the 2011 -- 2012 season , Barcelona had a long history of avoiding corporate sponsorship on the playing shirts .
In 2004 , a company could become one of 25 `` Honorary members '' by contributing between # 40,000 -- 60,000 -LRB- # 54,800 -- 82,300 -RRB- per year .
There are also 48 associate memberships available for an annual fee of # 14,000 -LRB- # 19,200 -RRB- and an unlimited number of `` patronages '' for the cost of # 4,000 per year -LRB- # 5,500 -RRB- .
It is unclear whether the honorary members have any formal say in club policy , but according to the author Anthony King , it is `` unlikely that Honorary Membership would not involve at least some informal influence over the club '' .
In preparation for the 1992 Summer Olympics two tiers of seating were installed above the previous roofline .
Several competing theories have been put forth for the blue and red design of the Barcelona shirt .
The son of the first president , Arthur Witty , claimed it was the idea of his father as the colours were the same as the Merchant Taylor 's School team .
Another explanation , according to author Toni Strubell , is that the colours are from Robespierre 's First Republic .
After the construction was complete there was no further room for expansion at Les Corts .
The club began to make plans for a new stadium .
Construction took three years and ended on 24 September 1957 with a final cost of 288 million pesetas , 336 % over budget .
The contest was the most prestigious in that era .
The latter became the club 's first full-time coach in 1917 .
The process of electing a president of FC Barcelona was closely tied to Spain 's transition to democracy in 1974 and the end of Franco 's dictatorship .
The new president 's main objective was to develop Barcelona into a world-class club by giving it stability both on and off the pitch .
The departures of Núñez and van Gaal were hardly noticed by the fans when compared to that of Luís Figo , then club vice-captain .
Figo had become a cult hero , and was considered by Catalans to be one of their own .
Upon his first return , a piglet 's head and a full bottle of whiskey were thrown at him from the crowd .
van Gaal was replaced by Llorenç Serra Ferrer who , despite an extensive investment in players in the summer of 2000 , presided over a mediocre league campaign and a humiliating first-round Champions League exit , and was eventually dismissed late in the season .
Long-serving coach Carles Rexach was appointed as his replacement , initially on a temporary basis , and managed to at least steer the club to the last Champions League spot on the final day of the season .
Despite better form in La Liga and a good run to the semi-finals of the Champions League , Rexach was never viewed as a long-term solution and that summer Louis van Gaal returned to the club for a second spell as manager .
This led to van Gaal 's resignation and replacement for the rest of the campaign by Radomir Antić , though a sixth-place finish was the best that he could manage .
He was recommended by sporting director Andoni Zubizarreta , his former national teammate .
Throughout Europe , Barcelona is the favourite second-choice club .
In 2013 , Forbes magazine ranked Barcelona the third most valuable sports team in the world , behind Real Madrid and Manchester United , with a value of $ 2.6 billion .
Royle dragged Everton clear of relegation , leading the club to the FA Cup for the fifth time in its history , defeating Manchester United 1 -- 0 in the final .
The tower was accompanied by two laurel wreaths on either side and , according to the College of Arms in London , Kelly chose to include the laurels as they were the sign of winners .
The mid-1980s represented their most recent period of sustained success , with two League Championship successes , an FA Cup , and the 1985 European Cup Winners ' Cup .
Everton were relegated to the Second Division two years later during internal turmoil at the club .
However , the club was promoted at the first attempt scoring a record number of goals in the second division .
A fourth-place finish in 2004 -- 05 , ensured Everton qualified for the Champions League qualifying round .
The team failed to make it through to the Champions League group stage and were then eliminated from the UEFA Cup .
Critics -LSB- who ? -RSB-
Shortly afterwards , the Head of Marketing left the club .
A dispute between Houlding and the club 's committee over how the club should be run , led to Houlding attempting to gain full control of the club by registering the company , `` Everton F.C. and Athletic Grounds Ltd '' .
Houlding attempted to take over Everton 's name , colours , fixtures and league position , but was denied by The Football Association .
Instead , Houlding formed a new club , Liverpool F.C.
There have been indications since 1996 that Everton will move to a new stadium .
Late in 2004 , driven by Liverpool Council and the Northwest Development Corporation , the club entered talks with Liverpool F.C. about sharing a proposed stadium on Stanley Park .
Negotiations broke down as Everton failed to raise 50 % of the costs .
Within the city of Liverpool support for Everton and city rivals Liverpool is not determined by geographical basis with supporters mixed across the city .
However Everton 's support heartland is traditionally based in the North West of the city and in the southern parts of Sefton .
Everton also have many supporters ' clubs worldwide , in places such as North America , Singapore , Indonesia , Lebanon , Malaysia , Thailand , and Australia .
Two seasons later in 1969 -- 70 , Everton won the League championship , nine points clear of nearest rivals Leeds United .
During this period , Everton were the first English club to achieve five consecutive years in European competitions -- seasons 1961 -- 62 to 1966 -- 67 .
Everton regularly take large numbers away from home both domestically and in European fixtures .
Everton often sell out the full allocation in away grounds and tickets sell particularly well for North West England away matches .
The club 's most recent accounts , from May 2014 , show a net total debt of # 28.1 million , with a turnover of # 120.5 million and a profit of # 28.2 million .
Goodison Park is secured as collateral .
Recently on the field , matches tend to be extremely stormy affairs ; the derby has had more red cards than any other fixture in Premiership history .
The club 's top goalscorer , with 383 goals in all competitions , is Dixie Dean ; the second-highest goalscorer is Graeme Sharp with 159 .
Dean still holds the English national record of most goals in a season , with 60 .
Everton bought the player after he played the previous year with the team on loan .
The team was an amalgam of the Toxteth Tigers community youth programme which started in 1968 .
However Everton withdrew funding before the 2010 -- 11 season and the team was re launched as the Mersey Tigers .
When the club next reached the 2009 FA Cup Final , the tradition had passed into history and no song was released .
The cup triumph was also Everton 's passport to the Cup Winners ' Cup -- their first European campaign in the post-Heysel era .
Progress under Joe Royle continued in 1995 -- 96 as they climbed to sixth place in the Premiership .
Everton have had many other nicknames over the years .
The Kentish region , settled by the Jutes from Jutland , has the scantiest literary remains .
It is sometimes possible to give approximate dates for the borrowing of individual Latin words based on which patterns of sound change they have undergone .
Some Latin words had already been borrowed into the Germanic languages before the ancestral Angles and Saxons left continental Europe for Britain .
More entered the language when the Anglo-Saxons were converted to Christianity and Latin-speaking priests became influential .
Pronoun usage could reflect either natural or grammatical gender , when those conflicted -LRB- as in the case of wīf , a neuter noun referring to a female person -RRB- .
A few letter pairs were used as digraphs , representing a single sound .
Also used was the Tironian note ⟨ ⟩ -LRB- a character similar to the digit 7 -RRB- for the conjunction and , and a thorn with a crossbar through the ascender for the pronoun þæt .
Macrons over vowels were originally used not to mark long vowels -LRB- as in modern editions -RRB- , but to indicate stress , or as abbreviations for a following m or n.
The translation is literal and represents the original poetic word order .
As such , it is not typical of Old English prose .
The modern cognates of original words have been used whenever practical to give a close approximation of the feel of the original poem .
Like other old Germanic languages , it is very different from Modern English and difficult for Modern English speakers to understand without study .
It is considered to represent the `` classical '' form of Old English .
Some Mercian texts continued to be written , however , and the influence of Mercian is apparent in some of the translations produced under Alfred 's programme , many of which were produced by Mercian scholars .
Other dialects certainly continued to be spoken , as is evidenced by the continued variation between their successors in Middle and Modern English .
The change to Old English from Old Norse was substantive , pervasive , and of a democratic character .
The body of the word was so nearly the same in the two languages that only the endings would put obstacles in the way of mutual understanding .
In the mixed population which existed in the Danelaw these endings must have led to much confusion , tending gradually to become obscured and finally lost . ''
This blending of peoples and languages happily resulted in `` simplifying English grammar . ''
It was , after all , a salutary influence .
The gain was greater than the loss .
There was a gain in directness , in clarity , and in strength . ''
Old English also sometimes uses compound constructions to express other verbal aspects , the future and the passive voice ; in these we see the beginnings of the compound tenses of Modern English .
As in Modern English , and peculiar to the Germanic languages , the verbs formed two great classes : weak -LRB- regular -RRB- , and strong -LRB- irregular -RRB- .
Like today , Old English had fewer strong verbs , and many of these have over time decayed into weak forms .
Then , as now , dental suffixes indicated the past tense of the weak verbs , as in work and worked .
It came to be spoken over most of the territory of the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms which became the Kingdom of England .
Other parts of the island -- Wales and most of Scotland -- continued to use Celtic languages , except in the areas of Scandinavian settlements where Old Norse was spoken .
Norse was also widely spoken in the parts of England which fell under Danish law .
There are also a number of extant prose works , such as sermons and saints ' lives , biblical translations , and translated Latin works of the early Church Fathers , legal documents , such as laws and wills , and practical works on grammar , medicine , and geography .
Still , poetry is considered the heart of Old English literature .
Nearly all Anglo-Saxon authors are anonymous , with a few exceptions , such as Bede and Cædmon .
Old English had four main dialects , associated with particular Anglo-Saxon kingdoms : Mercian , Northumbrian , Kentish and West Saxon .
It was West Saxon that formed the basis for the literary standard of the later Old English period , although the dominant forms of Middle and Modern English would develop mainly from Mercian .
Each of these four dialects was associated with an independent kingdom on the island .
Norse borrowings are relatively rare in Old English literature , being mostly terms relating to government and administration .
The literary standard , however , was based on the West Saxon dialect , away from the main area of Scandinavian influence ; the impact of Norse may have been greater in the eastern and northern dialects .
Certainly in Middle English texts , which are more often based on eastern dialects , a strong Norse influence becomes apparent .
Modern English contains a great many , often everyday , words that were borrowed from Old Norse , and the grammatical simplification that occurred after the Old English period is also often attributed to Norse influence .
Modern editions of Old English manuscripts generally introduce some additional conventions .
Macrons are used to indicate long vowels , where usually no distinction was made between long and short vowels in the originals .
-LRB- In some older editions an acute accent mark was used for consistency with Old Norse conventions . -RRB-
Like other historical languages , Old English has been used by scholars and enthusiasts of later periods to create texts either imitating Anglo-Saxon literature or deliberately transferring it to a different cultural context .
These are the largest carriers capable of fast speeds .
They were smaller and slower with lower numbers of aircraft carried .
Light aircraft carriers were carriers that were fast enough to operate with the fleet but of smaller size with reduced aircraft capacity .
This new-found importance of naval aviation forced nations to create a number of carriers , in efforts to provide air superiority cover for every major fleet in order to ward off enemy aircraft .
This extensive usage required the construction of several new ` light ' carriers .
Emergencies also spurred the creation or conversion of highly unconventional aircraft carriers .
CAM ships , were cargo-carrying merchant ships that could launch -LRB- but not retrieve -RRB- a single fighter aircraft from a catapult to defend the convoy from long range German aircraft .
Aircraft launch forward , into the wind , and are recovered from astern .
This either requires a thrust boost , a vertical component to its velocity , or a reduced take-off load -LRB- to lower mass -RRB- .
The differing types of deck configuration , as above , influence the structure of the flight deck .
The form of launch assistance a carrier provides is strongly related to the types of aircraft embarked and the design of the carrier itself .
This allows heavily loaded and fueled aircraft a few more precious seconds to attain sufficient air velocity and lift to sustain normal flight .
Aircraft carriers are expensive to build and are critical assets .
On 9 May 1912 the first airplane take-off from a ship underway was made from the deck of the British Royal Navy 's HMS Hibernia .
Seaplane tender support ships came next , with the French Foudre of 1911 .
Seven Sopwith Camels launched from the converted battlecruiser HMS Furious damaged the German airbase at Tønder and destroyed two zeppelins .
Following the war , carrier operations continued to increase in size and importance .
Some are powered by nuclear reactors and form the core of a fleet designed to operate far from home .
Also known as `` commando carriers '' or `` helicopter carriers '' , many have the capability to operate VSTOL aircraft .
The Australian Defence Minister has publicly raised the possibility of procuring F-35B STOVL aircraft for the carrier , stating that it `` has been on the table since day one and stating the LHD 's are `` STOVL capable '' .
Their primary aircraft complement will be made up of F-35B Lightning IIs , and their ship 's company will number around 680 with the total complement rising to about 1,600 when the air group is embarked .
Defensive weapons will include the Phalanx Close-In Weapons System for anti-aircraft and anti-missile defence ; also 30 mm Automated Small Calibre Guns and miniguns for use against fast attack craft .
On the recovery side of the flight deck , the adaptation to the aircraft loadout is mirrored .
The `` air boss '' -LRB- usually a commander -RRB- occupies the top bridge -LRB- Primary Flight Control , also called primary or the tower -RRB- and has the overall responsibility for controlling launch , recovery and `` those aircraft in the air near the ship , and the movement of planes on the flight deck , which itself resembles a well-choreographed ballet . ''
Liaoning was commissioned on 25 September 2012 , and began service for testing and training .
On 24 or 25 November 2012 , Liaoning successfully launched and recovered several Shenyang J-15 jet fighter aircraft .
The new carrier will operate MiG-29K and naval HAL Tejas aircraft along with the Indian-made helicopter HAL Dhruv .
As well as the supercarrier fleet , the US Navy has nine amphibious assault ships used primarily for helicopters -LRB- sometimes called helicopter carriers -RRB- ; these can also carry up to 25 fighter jets , and in some cases , are as large as some other nations ' fixed-wing carriers .
These variants are sometimes categorized as sub-types of aircraft carriers , and sometimes as distinct types of naval aviation-capable ships .
This operation incapacitated three of the six battleships at a cost of two torpedo bombers .
World War II in the Pacific Ocean involved clashes between aircraft carrier fleets .
The 1941 Japanese surprise attack on Pearl Harbor was a clear illustration of the power projection capability afforded by a large force of modern carriers .
Concentrating six carriers in a single unit turned naval history about , as no other nation had fielded anything comparable .
Specialist carrier evolution was well underway , with several navies ordering and building warships that were purposefully designed to function as aircraft carriers by the mid-1920s , resulting in the commissioning of ships such as Hōshō -LRB- 1922 -RRB- , HMS Hermes -LRB- 1924 -RRB- , and Béarn -LRB- 1927 -RRB- .
During World War II , these ships would become known as fleet carriers .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In December 2009 , then Indian Navy chief Admiral Nirmal Kumar Verma said at his maiden navy week press conference that concepts currently being examined by the Directorate of Naval Design for the second indigenous aircraft carrier -LRB- IAC-2 -RRB- , are for a conventionally powered carrier displacing over 50,000 tons and equipped with steam catapults -LRB- rather than the ski-jump on the Gorshkov/Vikramaditya and the IAC -RRB- to launch fourth-generation aircraft .
Later on in August 2013 Vice Admiral RK Dhowan , while talking about the detailed study underway on the IAC-II project , said that nuclear propulsion was also being considered .
The ship is able to carry up to 14 helicopters ; however , only seven ASW helicopters and two SAR helicopters were planned for the initial aircraft complement .
The ship is equipped with two Phalanx CIWS and two SeaRAM for its defense .
The destroyers of this class were initially intended to replace the two ships of the Shirane class , which were originally scheduled to begin decommissioning in FY2014 .
It is expected that the ships will be more automated in an effort to reduce the amount of funding required to staff , maintain and operate its supercarriers .
On 24 July 2007 , the House Armed Services Seapower subcommittee recommended seven or eight new carriers -LRB- one every four years -RRB- .
The arrested-recovery system has used an angled deck since the 1950s because , in case the aircraft does not catch the arresting wire , the short deck allows easier take off by reducing the number of objects between the aircraft and the end of the runway .
Very few carriers have been designed or built without an island .
In addition , lack of an island meant difficulties managing the flight deck , performing air traffic control , a lack of radar housing placements and problems with navigating and controlling the ship itself .
At the end of 2010 , sea trials began , and as of 2011 -LSB- update -RSB- São Paulo had been evaluated by the CIASA -LRB- Inspection Commission and Training Advisory -RRB- .
Without catapults she can launch and recover lightly fueled naval fighters for air defense or anti-ship missions but not heavy conventional bombing strikes .
The ships are HMS Queen Elizabeth and HMS Prince of Wales .
The ships are due to become operational starting in 2020 .
Their primary aircraft complement will be made up of F-35B Lightning IIs , and their ship 's company will number around 680 with the total complement rising to about 1600 when the air group is embarked .
Audits of other airlines resulted in two airlines grounding hundreds of planes , causing thousands of flight cancellations .
The House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee held hearings in April 2008 .
Oberstar said there was a `` culture of coziness '' between senior FAA officials and the airlines and `` a systematic breakdown '' in the FAA 's culture that resulted in `` malfeasance , bordering on corruption . ''
The bill died in a Senate committee that year .
The FAA gradually assumed additional functions .
This expanded role eventually became permanent after the war .
During the following year , the agency unveiled a new plan for further automating its air traffic control facilities , but progress proved disappointing .
This landmark legislation was passed at the urging of the aviation industry , whose leaders believed the airplane could not reach its full commercial potential without federal action to improve and maintain safety standards .
Implementation will vary among airlines .
The FAA expects many carriers to show that their planes allow passengers to safely use their devices in airplane mode , gate-to-gate , by the end of 2013 .
If an air carrier provides Wi-Fi service during flight , passengers may use it .
As commercial flying increased , the Bureau encouraged a group of airlines to establish the first three centers for providing air traffic control -LRB- ATC -RRB- along the airways .
The move was made to increase flight traffic controller racial diversity .
Before the change , candidates who had completed coursework at participating colleges and universities could be `` fast-tracked '' for consideration .
The agency eliminated that program and instead switched to an open system to the general public , with no need for any experience or even a college degree .
The FAA has been cited as an example of regulatory capture , `` in which the airline industry openly dictates to its regulators its governing rules , arranging for not only beneficial regulation , but placing key people to head these regulators . ''
He also said the FAA is often too quick to bend to pressure from airlines and pilots . ''
Other experts have been critical of the constraints and expectations under which the FAA is expected to operate .
The dual role of encouraging aerospace travel and regulating aerospace travel are contradictory .
In Greater Manchester the successor boroughs were Bury , Bolton , Manchester , Oldham -LRB- part -RRB- , Rochdale , Salford , Tameside -LRB- part -RRB- , Trafford -LRB- part -RRB- and Wigan .
The urban districts of Barnoldswick and Earby , Bowland Rural District and the parishes of Bracewell and Brogden and Salterforth from Skipton Rural District in the West Riding of Yorkshire became part of the new Lancashire .
The Clitheroe area has secondary modern schools .
Sixth form provision is limited at most schools in most districts , with only Fylde and Lancaster districts having mostly sixth forms at schools .
The rest depend on FE colleges and sixth form colleges , where they exist .
Burnley 's schools have had a new broom and have essentially been knocked down and started again in 2006 .
There are many Church of England and Catholic faith schools in Lancashire .
Currently there are several rugby league teams that are based within the ceremonial county which include Blackpool Panthers , East Lancashire Lions , Blackpool Sea Eagles , Bamber Bridge , Leyland Warriors , Chorley Panthers , Blackpool Stanley , Blackpool Scorpions and Adlington Rangers .
Lancashire had a lively culture of choral and classical music , with very large numbers of local church choirs from the 17th century , leading to the foundation of local choral societies from the mid-18th century , often particularly focused on performances of the music of Handel and his contemporaries .
It also played a major part in the development of brass bands which emerged in the county , particularly in the textile and coalfield areas , in the 19th century .
The vibrant brass band culture of the area made an important contribution to the foundation and staffing of the Hallé Orchestra from 1857 , the oldest extant professional orchestra in the United Kingdom .
The same local musical tradition produced eminent figures such as Sir William Walton -LRB- 1902 -- 88 -RRB- , son of an Oldham choirmaster and music teacher , Sir Thomas Beecham -LRB- 1879 -- 1961 -RRB- , born in St. Helens , who began his career by conducting local orchestras and Alan Rawsthorne -LRB- 1905 -- 71 -RRB- born in Haslingden .
The county contained several mill towns and the collieries of the Lancashire Coalfield .
Accrington , Blackburn , Bolton , Burnley , Bury , Chorley , Colne , Darwen , Nelson , Oldham , Preston , Rochdale and Wigan were major cotton mill towns during this time .
The detached northern part of Lancashire in the Lake District , including the Furness Peninsula and Cartmel , was merged with Cumberland and Westmorland to form Cumbria .
The county boroughs also had many boundary extensions .
The borders around the Manchester area were particularly complicated , with narrow protrusions of the administrative county between the county boroughs -- Lees urban district formed a detached part of the administrative county , between Oldham county borough and the West Riding of Yorkshire .
To the east of the county are upland areas leading to the Pennines .
The valleys of the River Ribble and its tributary the Calder form a large gap to the west of the Pennines , overlooked by Pendle Hill .
Most of the larger Lancashire towns are in these valleys South of the Ribble are the West Pennine Moors and the Forest of Rossendale where former cotton mill towns are in deep valleys .
A separate court system for the county palatine was abolished by Courts Act 1971 .
A particular form of The Loyal Toast , ` The Queen , Duke of Lancaster ' is in regular use in the county palatine .
The M65 motorway from Colne , connects Burnley , Accrington , Blackburn to Preston .
The M61 from Preston via Chorley and the M66 starting 500 metres -LRB- 0.3 mi -RRB- inside the county boundary near Edenfield , provide links between Lancashire and Manchester -RSB- and the trans-Pennine M62 .
South of Preston are the towns of Leyland and Chorley ; the three formed part of the Central Lancashire New Town designated in 1970 .
Many Lancashire towns had vibrant skiffle scenes in the late 1950s , out of which by the early 1960s a flourishing culture of beat groups began to emerge , particularly around Liverpool and Manchester .
After their national success from 1962 , a number of Liverpool performers were able to follow them into the charts , including Gerry & the Pacemakers , the Searchers and Cilla Black .
Led by the Beatles , beat groups from the region spearheaded the British Invasion of the US , which made a major contribution to the development of rock music .
After the decline of beat groups in the late 1960s the centre of rock culture shifted to London and there were relatively few local bands who achieved national prominence until the growth of a disco funk scene and the punk rock revolution in the mid and late 1970s .
The county was also a common location for folk songs , including `` The Lancashire Miller '' , `` Warrington Ale '' and `` The soldier 's farewell to Manchester '' , while Liverpool , as a major seaport , was the subject of many sea shanties , including `` The Leaving of Liverpool '' and `` Maggie May '' , beside several local Wassailing songs .
In the Industrial Revolution changing social and economic patterns helped create new traditions and styles of folk song , often linked to migration and patterns of work .
These included processional dances , often associated with rushbearing or the Wakes Week festivities , and types of step dance , most famously clog dancing .
The towns of Manchester , Lancaster , Ribchester , Burrow , Elslack and Castleshaw grew around Roman forts .
The administrative county was also the most populous of its type outside London , with a population of 2,280,359 in 1961 .
The rose was a symbol of the House of Lancaster , immortalised in the verse `` In the battle for England 's head/York was white , Lancaster red '' -LRB- referring to the 15th-century Wars of the Roses -RRB- .
The most common life on earth were Lystrosaurus , Labyrinthodont , and Euparkeria along with many other creatures that managed to survive the Great Dying .
Towards the Late Cretaceous large volcanic eruptions are also believed to have contributed to the Cretaceous -- Paleogene extinction event .
Approximately 50 % of all genera became extinct , including all of the non-avian dinosaurs .
Dinosaurs still thrived as new species such as Tyrannosaurus , Ankylosaurus , Triceratops and Hadrosaurs dominated the food web .
In the oceans , Mosasaurs ruled the seas to fill the role of the Ichthyosaurs , and huge plesiosaurs , such as Elasmosaurus , evolved .
Also , the first flowering plants evolved .
At the end of the Cretaceous , the Deccan traps and other volcanic eruptions were poisoning the atmosphere .
Everything over 10 kilograms went extinct .
The age of the dinosaurs was over .
Average temperatures were also higher than today by about 10 °C .
The circulation of oxygen to the deep ocean may also have been disrupted .
The recent warming led to a boom of reptilian evolution on land as the first true dinosaurs evolve , as well as pterosaurs .
The cause is debatable .
Some island-hopping dinosaurs , like Eustreptospondylus , evolved to cope with the coastal shallows and small islands of ancient Europe .
Other dinosaurs rose up to fill the empty space that the Jurassic-Cretaceous extinction left behind , such as Carcharodontosaurus and Spinosaurus .
Seasons came back into effect and the poles got seasonally colder , but dinosaurs still inhabited this area like the Leaellynasaura which inhabited the polar forests year-round , and many dinosaurs migrated there during summer like Muttaburrasaurus .
Since it was too cold for crocodiles , it was the last stronghold for large amphibians , like Koolasuchus .
Pterosaurs got larger as species like Tapejara and Ornithocheirus evolved .
The first true crocodiles evolved , pushing out the large amphibians to near extinction .
All-in-all , reptiles rise to rule the world .
This orogeny was related to the opening of the Arctic Ocean and subduction of the North China and Siberian cratons under the Pacific Ocean .
Nevertheless , the era featured the dramatic rifting of the supercontinent Pangaea .
This created the passive continental margin that characterizes most of the Atlantic coastline -LRB- such as along the U.S. East Coast -RRB- today .
The era witnessed the gradual rifting of the supercontinent Pangaea into separate landmasses that would eventually move into their current positions .
The climate of the Mesozoic was varied , alternating between warming and cooling periods .
Overall , however , the Earth was hotter than it is today .
Non-avian dinosaurs appeared in the Late Triassic and became the dominant terrestrial vertebrates early in the Jurassic , occupying this position for about 135 million years until their demise at the end of the Cretaceous .
Birds first appeared in the Jurassic , having evolved from a branch of theropod dinosaurs .
New aquatic reptiles evolved such as Ichthyosaurs and Nothosaurs .
Meanwhile , on land , Pine forests flourished , bringing along mosquitoes and fruit flies .
The first ancient crocodilians evolved , which sparked competition with the large amphibians that had since ruled the freshwater world .
Ichthyosaurs went extinct whereas sauropods , as a whole , did not die out in the Jurassic ; in fact , some species , like the Titanosaurus , lived up to the K-T extinction .
The divided world would give opportunity for the diversification of new dinosaurs .
With its high specific heat capacity , water acts as a temperature-stabilizing heat reservoir , and land areas near large bodies of water -- especially the oceans -- experience less variation in temperature .
Most important humid episodes were the Carnian Pluvial Event and one in the Rhaetian , few million years before the Triassic -- Jurassic extinction event .
One particular plant genus , Ginkgo , is thought to have evolved at this time and is represented today by a single species , Ginkgo biloba .
During this time , there was also research into other forms of digital video and audio communication .
This component negotiates parameters with every endpoint in the network and controls conferencing resources .
Also , the hardware used for this technology has continued to improve in quality , and prices have dropped dramatically .
However that distinction has become increasingly blurred with technology improvements such as increased bandwidth and sophisticated software clients that can allow for multiple parties on a call .
Furthermore , teachers and lecturers worldwide can be brought to remote or otherwise isolated educational facilities .
Such students are able to explore , communicate , analyze and share information and ideas with one another .
Small schools can use these technologies to pool resources and provide courses , such as in foreign languages , which could not otherwise be offered .
Various universities and other organizations , including British Telecom 's Martlesham facility , have also conducted extensive research on signing via videotelephony .
The use of sign language via videotelephony was hampered for many years due to the difficulty of its use over slow analogue copper phone lines , coupled with the high cost of better quality ISDN -LRB- data -RRB- phone lines .
A videoconference system is generally higher cost than a videophone and deploys greater capabilities .
This is a bridge that interconnects calls from several sources -LRB- in a similar way to the audio conference call -RRB- .
All parties call the MCU , or the MCU can also call the parties which are going to participate , in sequence .
There are MCUs which are pure software , and others which are a combination of hardware and software .
At the Winter Olympics opening ceremony in Nagano , Japan , Seiji Ozawa conducted the Ode to Joy from Beethoven 's Ninth Symphony simultaneously across five continents in near-real time .
The core technology used in a videoconferencing system is digital compression of audio and video streams in real time .
.
With videoconferencing , patients may contact nurses and physicians in emergency or routine situations ; physicians and other paramedical professionals can discuss cases across large distances .
As of the 2010s , high definition resolution for videoconferencing became a popular feature , with most major suppliers in the videoconferencing market offering it .
Some systems are capable of multipoint conferencing with no MCU , stand-alone , embedded or otherwise .
Also , users can make ad-hoc multipoint calls without any concern for the availability or control of an MCU .
This continues the SSA 's effort to use video hearings as a means to clear its substantial hearing backlog .
Since 2007 , the SSA has also established NHCs in Albuquerque , New Mexico , Baltimore , Maryland , Falls Church , Virginia , and Chicago , Illinois .
The reform was adopted initially by the Catholic countries of Europe .
Protestants and Eastern Orthodox countries continued to use the traditional Julian calendar and adopted the Gregorian reform after a time , for the sake of convenience in international trade .
The last European country to adopt the reform was Greece , in 1923 .
In the modern period , it has become customary to number the days from the beginning of the month , and February 29th is often considered as the leap day .
Some churches , notably the Roman Catholic Church , delay February festivals after the 23rd by one day in leap years .
Lilius 's proposals had two components .
The mean tropical year is 365.24219 days long .
Lilius 's proposal resulted in an average year of 365.2425 days -LRB- see Accuracy -RRB- .
Lilius proposed that the 10-day drift should be corrected by deleting the Julian leap day on each of its ten occurrences over a period of forty years , thereby providing for a gradual return of the equinox to 21 March .
Later in 1752 in September the Gregorian calendar was introduced throughout Britain and the British colonies -LRB- see the section Adoption -RRB- .
Then , starting with January from the little knuckle of the left hand , count knuckle , space , knuckle , space through the months .
The junction between the hands is not counted , so the two index knuckles represent July and August .
The reform was a modification of a proposal made by Aloysius Lilius .
Lilius also produced an original and practical scheme for adjusting the epacts of the moon when calculating the annual date of Easter , solving a long-standing obstacle to calendar reform .
As the solar year is longer than the lunar year this originally entailed the use of `` escape years '' every so often when the number of the fiscal year would jump .
Remember to give February the appropriate number of days for the calendar you are converting into .
This would allow for a more consistent and accurate scheduling of the feast of Easter .
In 1577 , a Compendium was sent to expert mathematicians outside the reform commission for comments .
Even though the year used for dates changed , the civil year always displayed its months in the order January to December from the Roman Republican period until the present .
A physical or electronic calendar provides conversion from a given date to the weekday , and shows multiple dates for a given weekday and month .
In the Alexandrian system , since the 14th day of the Easter moon could fall at earliest on 21 March its first day could fall no earlier than 8 March and no later than 5 April .
This meant that Easter varied between 22 March and 25 April .
In Rome , Easter was not allowed to fall later than 21 April , that being the day of the Parilia or birthday of Rome and a pagan festival.The first day of the Easter moon could fall no earlier than 5 March and no later than 2 April .
Ancient tables provided the sun 's mean longitude .
He noted that it is consistent with the tropical year of the Alfonsine tables and with the mean tropical year of Copernicus -LRB- De revolutionibus -RRB- and Reinhold -LRB- Prutenic tables -RRB- .
The three mean tropical years in Babylonian sexagesimals as the excess over 365 days -LRB- the way they would have been extracted from the tables of mean longitude -RRB- were 14,33,9,57 -LRB- Alphonsine -RRB- , 14,33,11,12 -LRB- Copernicus -RRB- and 14,33,9,24 -LRB- Reinhold -RRB- .
All values are the same to two places -LRB- 14:33 -RRB- and this is also the mean length of the Gregorian year .
Thus Pitatus ' solution would have commended itself to the astronomers .
They can indicate that the start of the Julian year has been adjusted to start on 1 January -LRB- NS -RRB- even though contemporary documents use a different start of year -LRB- OS -RRB- ; or to indicate that a date conforms to the Julian calendar -LRB- OS -RRB- , formerly in use in many countries , rather than the Gregorian calendar -LRB- NS -RRB- .
Known during development as Xbox Next , Xenon , Xbox 2 , Xbox FS or NextBox , the Xbox 360 was conceived in early 2003 .
That month , Microsoft held an event for 400 developers in Bellevue , Washington to recruit support for the system .
The cores of the Xenon processor were developed using a slightly modified version of the PlayStation 3 's Cell Processor PPE architecture .
According to David Shippy and Mickie Phipps , the IBM employees were `` hiding '' their work from Sony and Toshiba , IBM 's partners in developing the Cell Processor .
Jeff Minter created the music visualization program Neon which is included with the Xbox 360 .
The original shipment of the Xbox 360 version included a cut-down version of the Media Remote as a promotion .
The Pro package was discontinued and marked down to US$ 249 on August 28 , 2009 to be sold until stock ran out , while the Elite was also marked down in price to US$ 299 .
Users may play back their own music while playing games or using the dashboard , and can play music with an interactive visual synthesizer .
Xbox Live Free is included with all SKUs of the console .
It allows users to create a user profile , join on message boards , and access Microsoft 's Xbox Live Arcade and Marketplace and talk to other members .
The Xbox 360 's advantage over its competitors was due to the release of high profile titles from both first party and third party developers .
The warranty extension is not granted for any other types of failures that do not generate these specific error codes .
Rather , it 's about the choices Microsoft made back in the original Xbox 's lifetime .
The PC-like architecture meant those early EA Sports titles ran at 60fps compared to only 30 on PS3 , Xbox Live meant every dedicated player had an existing friends list , and Halo meant Microsoft had the killer next-generation exclusive .
And when developers demo games on PC now they do it with a 360 pad -- another industry benchmark , and a critical one . ''
It could be launched automatically when the console booted without a disc in it , or when the disc tray was ejected , but the user had the option to select what the console does if a game is in the tray on start up , or if inserted when already on .
This simplified version showed the user 's gamercard , Xbox Live messages and friends list .
It also allowed for personal and music settings , in addition to voice or video chats , or returning to the Xbox Dashboard from the game .
Xbox Live Arcade is an online service operated by Microsoft that is used to distribute downloadable video games to Xbox and Xbox 360 owners .
The Xbox Live Arcade also features games from other consoles , such as the PlayStation game Castlevania : Symphony of the Night and PC games such as Zuma .
Items are purchased using Microsoft Points , a proprietary currency used to reduce credit card transaction charges .
The games are generally aimed toward more casual gamers ; examples of the more popular titles are Geometry Wars , Street Fighter II ' Hyper Fighting , and Uno .
On March 24 , 2010 , Microsoft introduced the Game Room to Xbox Live .
BT Vision 's DVR-based features would not be available on Xbox 360 due to limited hard drive capacity .
As of January 2010 , IPTV on Xbox 360 has yet to be deployed beyond limited trials .
The service offers movie and game trailers , game demos , Xbox Live Arcade games and Xbox 360 Dashboard themes as well as add-on game content -LRB- items , costumes , levels etc. -RRB- .
In order to download priced content , users are required to purchase Microsoft Points for use as scrip ; though some products -LRB- such as trailers and demos -RRB- are free to download .
Users are able to view items available to download on the service through a PC via the Xbox Live Marketplace website .
An estimated seventy percent of Xbox Live users have downloaded items from the Marketplace .
Although not the best-selling console of its generation , the Xbox 360 was deemed by TechRadar to be the most influential through its emphasis on digital media distribution and multiplayer gaming on Xbox Live .
Microsoft has stated they plan to support the Xbox 360 until 2016 .
The Xbox One is also backwards compatible with the Xbox 360 .
The Xbox 360 has sold a total of 870,000 units in Canada as of August 1 , 2008 .
During the console 's lifetime , the Xbox brand has grown from gaming-only to encompassing all multimedia , turning it into a hub for `` living-room computing environment '' .
The Kinect accessory is compatible with all Xbox 360 models , connecting to new models via a custom connector , and to older ones via a USB and mains power adapter .
During their CES 2010 keynote speech , Robbie Bach and Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer went on to say that Kinect will be released during the holiday period -LRB- November -- January -RRB- and it will work with every 360 console .
Its name and release date of 2010-11-04 were officially announced on 2010-06-13 , prior to Microsoft 's press conference at E3 2010 .
Since these problems surfaced , Microsoft has attempted to modify the console to improve its reliability .
With the release of the redesigned Xbox 360 S , the warranty for the newer models does not include the three-year extended coverage for `` General Hardware Failures '' .
With the exception of short clips , content is not currently available for streaming , and must be downloaded .
Movies are also available for rental .
Television episodes can be purchased to own , and are transferable to an unlimited number of consoles .
Television content is offered from MTV , VH1 , Comedy Central , Turner Broadcasting , and CBS ; and movie content is Warner Bros. , Paramount , and Disney , along with other publishers .
It also includes a proprietary port for use with the Kinect sensor .
The Xbox 360 E , a further streamlined variation of the 360 S with a two-tone rectangular case inspired by Xbox One , was released in 2013 .
Games targeted specifically for the region , such as Chromehounds , Ninety-Nine Nights , and Phantasy Star Universe , were also released in the console 's first year .
When users add an Xbox Live enabled profile to their console , they are required to provide the console with their passport account information and the last four digits of their credit card number , which is used for verification purposes and billing .
The United States sought to remain neutral while pursuing overseas trade .
Britain cut the trade and impressed seamen on American ships into the Royal Navy , despite intense protests .
The invasion of Canada was a debacle , though concurrent wars with Native Americans on the western front -LRB- Tecumseh 's War and the Creek War -RRB- were more successful .
After defeating Napoleon in 1814 , Britain sent large veteran armies to invade New York , raid Washington and capture the key control of the Mississippi River at New Orleans .
The New York invasion was a fiasco after the much larger British army retreated to Canada .
The raiders succeeded in the burning of Washington on 25 August 1814 , but were repulsed in their Chesapeake Bay Campaign at the Battle of Baltimore and the British commander killed .
The major invasion in Louisiana was stopped by a one-sided military battle that killed the top three British generals and thousands of soldiers .
The winners were the commanding general of the Battle of New Orleans , Major General Andrew Jackson , who became president and the Americans who basked in a victory over a much more powerful nation .
The peace treaty proved successful , and the U.S. and Britain never again went to war .
The losers were the Indians , who never gained the independent territory in the Midwest promised by Britain .
Root changed the procedures for promotions and organized schools for the special branches of the service .
However , it insisted on its right as a neutral party to immunity from German submarine attack , even though its ships carried food and raw materials to Britain .
When the U.S declared war , the U.S. army was still small by European standards and mobilization would take a year .
Industrial mobilization took longer than expected , so divisions were sent to Europe without equipment , relying instead on the British and French to supply them .
Memories and lessons from the war are still a major factor in American politics .
Fears of another quagmire have been major factors in foreign policy debates ever since .
That raised the issue of how well the professional military reflected overall American society and values ; the soldiers typically took the position that their service represented the highest and best American values .
The main battles were aerial and ground combat within Iraq , Kuwait and bordering areas of Saudi Arabia .
Land combat did not expand outside of the immediate Iraq/Kuwait/Saudi border region , although the coalition bombed cities and strategic targets across Iraq , and Iraq fired missiles on Israeli and Saudi cities .
Somali guerrillas paid a staggering toll at an estimated 1,000 -- 5,000 total casualties during the conflict .
After much public disapproval , American forces were quickly withdrawn by President Bill Clinton .
The incident profoundly affected US thinking about peacekeeping and intervention .
The majority of troops provide logistics .
However , there are special forces troops that are training and assisting in combat operations against the terrorist groups .
The British , for their part , lacked both a unified command and a clear strategy for winning .
With the use of the Royal Navy , the British were able to capture coastal cities , but control of the countryside eluded them .
The Netherlands later joined France , and the British were outnumbered on land and sea in a world war , as they had no major allies apart from Indian tribes .
French privateers began to seize U.S. vessels , which led to an undeclared `` Quasi-War '' between the two nations .
Because many of the tribes had fought as allies of the British , the United States compelled tribal leaders to sign away lands in postwar treaties , and began dividing these lands for settlement .
During the 1840s and 1850s , conflicts between the two sides became progressively more violent .
The Spanish -- American War was a short decisive war marked by quick , overwhelming American victories at sea and on land against Spain .
The Navy was well-prepared and won laurels , even as politicians tried -LRB- and failed -RRB- to have it redeployed to defend East Coast cities against potential threats from the feeble Spanish fleet .
However , it was too oriented to small posts in the West and not as well-prepared for an overseas conflict .
The United States freed Cuba -LRB- after an occupation by the U.S. Army -RRB- .
Defeated in the field and losing its capital in March 1899 , the poorly armed and poorly led rebels broke into armed bands .
Casualties included 1,037 Americans killed in action and 3,340 who died from disease ; 20,000 rebels were killed .
That led to the surrender of Nazi Germany in May 1945 .
In the Pacific , the U.S. experienced much success in naval campaigns during 1944 , but bloody battles at Iwo Jima and Okinawa in 1945 led the U.S. to look for a way to end the war with minimal loss of American lives .
Principal allies of South Korea included the United States , Canada , Australia , the United Kingdom , although many other nations sent troops under the aegis of the United Nations .
The war started badly for the US and UN .
Truman originally wanted a Rollback strategy to unify Korea ; after the Chinese successes he settled for a Containment policy to split the country .
MacArthur argued for rollback but was fired by President Harry Truman after disputes over the conduct of the war .
Peace negotiations dragged on for two years until President Dwight D. Eisenhower threatened China with nuclear weapons ; an armistice was quickly reached with the two Koreas remaining divided at the 38th parallel .
North and South Korea are still today in a state of war , having never signed a peace treaty , and American forces remain stationed in South Korea as part of American foreign policy .
The military history of the American side of the war involved different strategies over the years .
A UN agreement brought an international force of peacekeepers to occupy Beirut and guarantee security .
Subsequently the US Navy engaged in bombing of militia positions inside Lebanon .
However , the battle was one-sided almost from the beginning .
The reasons for this are the subject of continuing study by military strategists and academics .
The Iraqi air force was destroyed within a few days , with some planes fleeing to Iran , where they were interned for the duration of the conflict .
The overwhelming technological advantages of the US , such as stealth aircraft and infrared sights , quickly turned the air war into a `` turkey shoot '' .
The heat signature of any tank which started its engine made an easy target .
Air defense radars were quickly destroyed by radar-seeking missiles fired from wild weasel aircraft .
Grainy video clips , shot from the nose cameras of missiles as they aimed at impossibly small targets , were a staple of US news coverage and revealed to the world a new kind of war , compared by some to a video game .
Coalition forces also supported Iraqi Kurdish militia , estimated to number upwards of 50,000 .
The United States , along with Britain , France and several other nations , committed a coalition force against Gaddafi 's forces .
On 19 March , the first U.S. action was taken when 114 Tomahawk missiles launched by US and UK warships destroyed shoreline air defenses of the Gaddafi regime .
During the conflict , American drones were also deployed .
General George Washington -LRB- 1732 -- 99 -RRB- proved an excellent organizer and administrator , who worked successfully with Congress and the state governors , selecting and mentoring his senior officers , supporting and training his troops , and maintaining an idealistic Republican Army .
As a battlefield tactician Washington was often outmaneuvered by his British counterparts .
The British sent four invasion armies .
He limited the British control to New York and a few places while keeping Patriot control of the great majority of the population .
As the war ended , Washington watched proudly as the final British army quietly sailed out of New York City in November 1783 , taking the Loyalist leadership with them .
The other Barbary states continued to raid U.S. shipping , until the Second Barbary War in 1815 ended the practice .
The American Civil War caught both sides unprepared .
The war spilled across the continent , and even to the high seas .
It was designed to show the U.S. was keenly interested in the civil war and would not tolerate attacks on Americans , especially the April 9 , 1914 , `` Tampico Affair '' , which involved the arrest of American sailors by soldiers of the regime of Mexican President Victoriano Huerta .
Villa fled , with the Americans in pursuit deep into Mexico , thereby arousing Mexican nationalism .
By early 1917 President Venustiano Carranza had contained Villa and secured the border , so Wilson ordered Pershing to withdraw .
Manifestations of this include extensive basing of U.S. forces in the UK , shared intelligence , shared military technology -LRB- e.g. nuclear technology -RRB- , and shared procurement .
He drove the British out of Boston but in late summer 1776 they returned to New York and nearly captured Washington 's army .
Following the American Revolutionary War , the United States faced potential military conflict on the high seas as well as on the western frontier .
The last significant conflict came in 1891 .
Fiske wanted to centralize authority in a chief of naval operations and an expert staff that would develop new strategies , oversee the construction of a larger fleet , coordinate war planning including force structure , mobilization plans , and industrial base , and ensure that the US Navy possessed the best possible war machines .
Eventually , the Navy adopted his reforms and by 1915 started to reorganize for possible involvement in the World War then underway .
The failure of Germany 's spring offensive exhausted its reserves and they were unable to launch new offensives .
American involvement in World War II in 1940 -- 41 was limited to providing war material and financial support to Britain , the Soviet Union , and the Republic of China .
American advisors came in the late 1950s to help the RVN -LRB- Republic of Vietnam -RRB- combat Communist insurgents known as `` Viet Cong . ''
After nearly 50 years of proxy wars , and constant fears of another war in Europe between NATO and the Warsaw Pact , some thought the Persian Gulf War might finally answer the question of which military philosophy would have reigned supreme .
ISIL had perpetrated sectarian killings and war crimes in both Iraq and Syria .
Gains made in the Iraq war were rolled back as Iraqi army units abandoned their posts .
Groups that emerged from the American psychedelic scene about the same time included Iron Butterfly , MC5 , Blue Cheer and Vanilla Fudge .
Iron Butterfly 's In-A-Gadda-Da-Vida -LRB- 1968 -RRB- , with its 17-minute-long title track , using organs and with a lengthy drum solo , also prefigured later elements of the sound .
Their style , consisting of two duelling guitarists often playing leads in harmony , proved itself to be a large influence on later bands .
They reached their commercial , and arguably their artistic peak with Black Rose : A Rock Legend -LRB- 1979 -RRB- .
Australian-formed AC/DC , with a stripped back , riff heavy and abrasive style that also appealed to the punk generation , began to gain international attention from 1976 , culminating in the release of their multi-platinum albums Let There Be Rock -LRB- 1977 -RRB- and Highway to Hell -LRB- 1979 -RRB- .
Also influenced by a punk ethos were heavy metal bands like Motörhead , while Judas Priest abandoned the remaining elements of the blues in their music , further differentiating the hard rock and heavy metal styles and helping to create the New Wave of British Heavy Metal which was pursued by bands like Iron Maiden , Saxon and Venom .
The album has been credited with widening the audiences for the genre , particularly by appealing to women as well as the traditional male dominated audience , and opening the door to MTV and commercial success for other bands at the end of the decade .
This era also saw more glam-infused American hard rock bands come to the forefront , with both Poison and Cinderella releasing their multi-platinum début albums in 1986 .
By the second half of the decade , hard rock had become the most reliable form of commercial popular music in the United States .
Bon Jovi appealed to their hard rock audience with songs such as `` Keep the Faith '' -LRB- 1992 -RRB- , but also achieved success in adult contemporary radio , with the Top 10 ballads `` Bed of Roses '' -LRB- 1993 -RRB- and `` Always '' -LRB- 1994 -RRB- .
Metallica 's Load -LRB- 1996 -RRB- and ReLoad -LRB- 1997 -RRB- each sold in excess of 4 million copies in the US and saw the band develop a more melodic and blues rock sound .
As the initial impetus of grunge bands faltered in the middle years of the decade , post-grunge bands emerged .
They emulated the attitudes and music of grunge , particularly thick , distorted guitars , but with a more radio-friendly commercially oriented sound that drew more directly on traditional hard rock .
Similarly , some post-Britpop bands that followed in the wake of Oasis , including Feeder and Stereophonics , adopted a hard rock or `` pop-metal '' sound .
Initially receiving mixed reviews , according to critic Steve Erlewine it is now `` generally regarded as the Rolling Stones ' finest album '' .
They continued to pursue the riff-heavy sound on albums including It 's Only Rock 'n' Roll -LRB- 1974 -RRB- and Black and Blue -LRB- 1976 -RRB- .
The latter included the track `` Stairway to Heaven '' , which would become the most played song in the history of album-oriented radio .
1970 saw The Who release Live at Leeds , often seen as the archetypal hard rock live album , and the following year they released their highly acclaimed album Who 's Next , which mixed heavy rock with extensive use of synthesizers .
Whereas Zeppelin broke up almost immediately afterwards , AC/DC pressed on , recording the album Back in Black -LRB- 1980 -RRB- with their new lead singer , Brian Johnson .
It became the fifth-highest-selling album of all time in the US and the second-highest-selling album in the world .
Some bands , such as Queen , moved away from their hard rock roots and more towards pop rock , while others , including Rush with Moving Pictures -LRB- 1981 -RRB- , began to return to a hard rock sound .
Kiss moved away from their hard rock roots toward pop metal : firstly removing their makeup in 1983 for their Lick It Up album , and then adopting the visual and sound of glam metal for their 1984 release , Animalize , both of which marked a return to commercial success .
Pat Benatar was one of the first women to achieve commercial success in hard rock , with three successive Top 5 albums between 1980 and 1982 .
Hard rock entered the 1990s as one of the dominant forms of commercial music .
Wolfmother 's self-titled 2005 debut album combined elements of the sounds of Deep Purple and Led Zeppelin .
England 's The Darkness ' Permission to Land -LRB- 2003 -RRB- , described as an `` eerily realistic simulation of '80s metal and '70s glam '' , topped the UK charts , going quintuple platinum .
In the 1960s , American and British blues and rock bands began to modify rock and roll by adding harder sounds , heavier guitar riffs , bombastic drumming , and louder vocals , from electric blues .
From the late 1960s , it became common to divide mainstream rock music that emerged from psychedelia into soft and hard rock .
Soft rock was often derived from folk rock , using acoustic instruments and putting more emphasis on melody and harmonies .
In contrast , hard rock was most often derived from blues rock and was played louder and with more intensity .
Emerging British acts included Free , who released their signature song `` All Right Now '' -LRB- 1970 -RRB- , which has received extensive radio airplay in both the UK and US .
The mixture of hard rock and progressive rock , evident in the works of Deep Purple , was pursued more directly by bands like Uriah Heep and Argent .
Having enjoyed some national success in the early 1970s , Queen , after the release of Sheer Heart Attack -LRB- 1974 -RRB- and A Night at the Opera -LRB- 1975 -RRB- , gained international recognition with a sound that used layered vocals and guitars and mixed hard rock with heavy metal , progressive rock , and even opera .
It was widely emulated , particularly by the emerging Californian glam metal scene .
However , all grunge bands shunned the macho , anthemic and fashion-focused aesthetics particularly associated with glam metal .
Acts like Creed , Staind , Puddle of Mudd and Nickelback took the genre into the 2000s with considerable commercial success , abandoning most of the angst and anger of the original movement for more conventional anthems , narratives and romantic songs .
They were followed in this vein by new acts including Shinedown and Seether .
Hard rock is a form of loud , aggressive rock music .
Vocals are often growling , raspy , or involve screaming or wailing , sometimes in a high range , or even falsetto voice .
Blues rock acts that pioneered the sound included Cream , The Jimi Hendrix Experience , and The Jeff Beck Group .
Jimi Hendrix produced a form of blues-influenced psychedelic rock , which combined elements of jazz , blues and rock and roll .
From 1967 Jeff Beck brought lead guitar to new heights of technical virtuosity and moved blues rock in the direction of heavy rock with his band , The Jeff Beck Group .
Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic has described the `` proto-metal roar '' of `` Helter Skelter , '' while Ian MacDonald argued that `` their attempts at emulating the heavy style were without exception embarrassing . ''
Kiss built on the theatrics of Alice Cooper and the look of the New York Dolls to produce a unique band persona , achieving their commercial breakthrough with the double live album Alive !
In the mid-1970s Aerosmith achieved their commercial and artistic breakthrough with Toys in the Attic -LRB- 1975 -RRB- , which reached number 11 in the American album chart , and Rocks -LRB- 1976 -RRB- , which peaked at number three .
Journey released their eponymous debut in 1975 and the next year Boston released their highly successful début album .
In the same year , hard rock bands featuring women saw commercial success as Heart released Dreamboat Annie and The Runaways débuted with their self-titled album .
While Heart had a more folk-oriented hard rock sound , the Runaways leaned more towards a mix of punk-influenced music and hard rock .
The Amboy Dukes , having emerged from the Detroit garage rock scene and most famous for their Top 20 psychedelic hit `` Journey to the Center of the Mind '' -LRB- 1968 -RRB- , were dissolved by their guitarist Ted Nugent , who embarked on a solo career that resulted in four successive multi-platinum albums between Ted Nugent -LRB- 1975 -RRB- and his best selling Double Live Gonzo -LRB- 1978 -RRB- .
Established bands made something of a comeback in the mid-1980s .
It reached number two on the Billboard album chart and provided the track `` Jump '' , which reached number one on the singles chart and remained there for several weeks .
Heart , after floundering during the first half of the decade , made a comeback with their eponymous ninth studio album which hit number one and contained four Top 10 singles including their first number one hit .
The new medium of video channels was used with considerable success by bands formed in previous decades .
In the new commercial climate glam metal bands like Europe , Ratt , White Lion and Cinderella broke up , Whitesnake went on hiatus in 1991 , and while many of these bands would re-unite again in the late 1990s or early 2000s , they never reached the commercial success they saw in the 1980s or early 1990s .
Other bands such as Mötley Crüe and Poison saw personnel changes which impacted those bands ' commercial viability during the decade .
Guns N ' Roses ' original lineup was whittled away throughout the decade .
Tensions between the other band members and lead singer Axl Rose continued after the release of the 1993 covers album The Spaghetti Incident ?
Despite this differentiation , hard rock and heavy metal have existed side by side , with bands frequently standing on the boundary of , or crossing between , the genres .
Disco appealed to a more diverse group of people and punk seemed to take over the rebellious role that hard rock once held .
However , new rock acts continued to emerge and record sales remained high into the 1980s .
1977 saw the début and rise to stardom of Foreigner , who went on to release several platinum albums through to the mid-1980s .
It featured the rock anthem `` Here I Go Again ' 87 '' as one of 4 UK top 20 singles .
The follow-up Slip of the Tongue -LRB- 1989 -RRB- went platinum , but according to critics Steve Erlwine and Greg Prato , `` it was a considerable disappointment after the across-the-board success of Whitesnake '' .
Crazy Nights -LRB- 1987 -RRB- by Kiss was the band 's highest charting release in the US since 1979 and the highest of their career in the UK .
Some of the glam rock bands that formed in the mid-1980s , such as White Lion and Cinderella experienced their biggest success during this period with their respective albums Pride -LRB- 1987 -RRB- and Long Cold Winter -LRB- 1988 -RRB- both going multi-platinum and launching a series of hit singles .
In the last years of the decade , the most notable successes were New Jersey -LRB- 1988 -RRB- by Bon Jovi , OU812 -LRB- 1988 -RRB- by Van Halen , Open Up and Say ... Ahh !
-LRB- 1988 -RRB- by Poison , Pump -LRB- 1989 -RRB- by Aerosmith , and Mötley Crüe 's most commercially successful album Dr. Feelgood -LRB- 1989 -RRB- .
New Jersey spawned five Top 10 singles , a record for a hard rock act .
In 1988 from 25 June to 5 November , the number one spot on the Billboard 200 album chart was held by a hard rock album for 18 out of 20 consecutive weeks ; the albums were OU812 , Hysteria , Appetite for Destruction , and New Jersey .
A final wave of glam rock bands arrived in the late 1980s , and experienced success with multi-platinum albums and hit singles from 1989 until the early 1990s , among them Extreme , Warrant Slaughter and FireHouse .
Skid Row also released their eponymous début -LRB- 1989 -RRB- , reaching number six on the Billboard 200 , but they were to be one of the last major bands that emerged in the glam rock era .
A few hard rock bands from the 1970s and 1980s managed to sustain highly successful recording careers .
Heart achieved their first Top 10 album since the early 90s with Red Velvet Car in 2010 , becoming the first female-led hard rock band to earn Top 10 albums spanning five decades .
There were reunions and subsequent tours from Van Halen -LRB- with Hagar in 2004 and then Roth in 2007 -RRB- , The Who -LRB- delayed in 2002 by the death of bassist John Entwistle until 2006 -RRB- and Black Sabbath -LRB- with Osbourne 1997 -- 2006 and Dio 2006 -- 2010 -RRB- and even a one off performance by Led Zeppelin -LRB- 2007 -RRB- , renewing the interest in previous eras .
However , these bands were short-lived , ending in 2007 and 2008 , respectively .
More successfully , AC/DC released the double platinum-certified Black Ice -LRB- 2008 -RRB- .
Bon Jovi continued to enjoy success , branching into country music with `` Who Says You Ca n't Go Home '' , which reached number one on the Hot Country Singles chart in 2006 , and the rock/country album Lost Highway , which reached number one in 2007 .
In 2009 , Bon Jovi released another number one album , The Circle , which marked a return to their hard rock sound .
Today the term `` High Plains '' is used for a subregion of the Great Plains .
Such ranching began in Texas and gradually moved northward .
In this context , the High Plains , as well as Southern Alberta , south-western Saskatchewan and Eastern Montana are mainly semi hot steppe land and are generally characterised by rangeland or marginal farmland .
They -LRB- and Americans as well -RRB- also took advantage of the homestead laws to obtain free farms .
Land speculators and local boosters identified many potential towns , and those reached by the railroad had a chance , while the others became ghost towns .
In Kansas , for example , nearly 5000 towns were mapped out , but by 1970 only 617 were actually operating .
In the mid-20th century , closeness to an interstate exchange determined whether a town would flourish or struggle for business .
Many have fewer than 2 inhabitants per square mile -LRB- 0.77 inhabitants per square kilometer -RRB- .
This problem is often exacerbated by the consolidation of farms and the difficulty of attracting modern industry to the region .
In addition , the smaller school-age population has forced the consolidation of school districts and the closure of high schools in some communities .
Although the eastern image of farm life in the prairies emphasized the isolation of the lonely farmer and wife , plains residents created busy social lives for themselves .
They often sponsored activities that combined work , food and entertainment such as barn raisings , corn huskings , quilting bees , Grange meetings , church activities and school functions .
The Grange was a nationwide farmers ' organization , they reserved high offices for women , and gave them a voice in public affairs .
The United States is a major exporter of agricultural products .
This area covers parts , but not all , of the states of Colorado , Kansas , Montana , Nebraska , New Mexico , North Dakota , Oklahoma , South Dakota , Texas , and Wyoming , and the Canadian provinces of Alberta , Manitoba and Saskatchewan .
The Great Plains ecoregion includes five sub-regions : Temperate Prairies , West-Central Semi-Arid Prairies , South-Central Semi-Arid Prairies , Texas Louisiana Coastal Plains , and Tamaulipus-Texas Semi-Arid Plain , which overlap or expand upon other Great Plains designations .
Homestead land was free for American settlers .
Immigrants poured in , especially from Germany and Scandinavia .
On the plains , very few single men attempted to operate a farm or ranch by themselves ; they clearly understood the need for a hard-working wife , and numerous children , to handle the many chores , including child-rearing , feeding and clothing the family , managing the housework , feeding the hired hands , and , especially after the 1930s , handling paperwork and financial details .
During the early years of settlement , farm women played an integral role in assuring family survival by working outdoors .
After approximately one generation , women increasingly left the fields , thus redefining their roles within the family .
The scientific housekeeping movement , promoted across the land by the media and government extension agents , as well as county fairs which featured achievements in home cookery and canning , advice columns for women regarding farm bookkeeping , and home economics courses in the schools .
Existing forest biomes declined and grasslands became much more widespread .
However , an examination of mammalian teeth suggests that it is the open , gritty habitat and not the grass itself which is linked to diet changes in mammals , giving rise to the `` grit , not grass '' hypothesis .
Hundreds of thousands of people claimed such homesteads , sometimes building sod houses out of the very turf of their land .
Many of them were not skilled dryland farmers and failures were frequent .
Much of the Plains were settled during relatively wet years .
Government experts did not understand how farmers should cultivate the prairies and gave advice counter to what would have worked -LSB- citation needed -RSB- .
Germans from Russia who had previously farmed , under similar circumstances , in what is now Ukraine were marginally more successful than other homesteaders .
The onset of infrared is defined -LRB- according to different standards -RRB- at various values typically between 700 nm and 800 nm , but the boundary between visible and infrared light is not precisely defined .
This is a property of a surface that describes how its thermal emissions deviate from the ideal of a black body .
To further explain , two objects at the same physical temperature will not show the same infrared image if they have differing emissivity .
Each chemical bond in a molecule vibrates at a frequency characteristic of that bond .
A group of atoms in a molecule -LRB- e.g. , CH2 -RRB- may have multiple modes of oscillation caused by the stretching and bending motions of the group as a whole .
A spectrum of all the frequencies of absorption in a sample is recorded .
This can be used to gain information about the sample composition in terms of chemical groups present and also its purity -LRB- for example , a wet sample will show a broad O-H absorption around 3200 cm − 1 -RRB- .
Cheaper digital cameras and camera phones have less effective filters and can `` see '' intense near-infrared , appearing as a bright purple-white color .
This is especially pronounced when taking pictures of subjects near IR-bright areas -LRB- such as near a lamp -RRB- , where the resulting infrared interference can wash out the image .
Lack of bright sources can make terahertz photography more challenging than most other infrared imaging techniques .
This is very useful information in deciding whether a painting is the prime version by the original artist or a copy , and whether it has been altered by over-enthusiastic restoration work .
In general , the more pentimenti the more likely a painting is to be the prime version .
It also gives useful insights into working practices .
The term ` Infrared ' did not appear until late in the 19th century .
Visible light or ultraviolet-emitting lasers can char paper and incandescently hot objects emit visible radiation .
Hot land surfaces will show up as dark-grey or black .
One disadvantage of infrared imagery is that low cloud such as stratus or fog can be a similar temperature to the surrounding land or sea surface and does not show up .
The main advantage of infrared is that images can be produced at night , allowing a continuous sequence of weather to be studied .
Unfortunately , international standards for these specifications are not currently available .
Thermal radiation is characterized by a particular spectrum of many wavelengths that is associated with emission from an object , due to the vibration of its molecules at a given temperature .
Thus , the popular association of infrared radiation with thermal radiation is only a coincidence based on typical -LRB- comparatively low -RRB- temperatures often found near the surface of planet Earth .
The infrared portion of the spectrum has several useful benefits for astronomers .
-LRB- In the visible light spectrum , the glare from the star will drown out the reflected light from a planet . -RRB-
Infrared light sources can be used to augment the available ambient light for conversion by night vision devices , increasing in-the-dark visibility without actually using a visible light source .
IR data transmission is also employed in short-range communication among computer peripherals and personal digital assistants .
It responds only to the rapidly pulsing signal created by the transmitter , and filters out slowly changing infrared radiation from ambient light .
Infrared communications are useful for indoor use in areas of high population density .
Infrared is the most common way for remote controls to command appliances .
Infrared remote control protocols like RC-5 , SIRC , are used to communicate with infrared .
In the semiconductor industry , infrared light can be used to characterize materials such as thin films and periodic trench structures .
One of the most widely used definitions defines it in terms of the variability within species , between species , and between ecosystems .
It is a measure of the variety of organisms present in different ecosystems .
Biodiversity is not distributed evenly on Earth .
There are latitudinal gradients in species diversity .
Biodiversity generally tends to cluster in hotspots , and has been increasing through time , but will be likely to slow in the future .
This multilevel construct is consistent with Dasmann and Lovejoy .
Wilcox 's definition was `` Biological diversity is the variety of life forms ... at all levels of biological systems -LRB- i.e. , molecular , organismic , population , species and ecosystem -RRB- ... '' .
This definition is used in the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity .
The latter models imply that changes in diversity are guided by a first-order positive feedback -LRB- more ancestors , more descendants -RRB- and/or a negative feedback arising from resource limitation .
The hyperbolic pattern of the world population growth arises from a second-order positive feedback between the population size and the rate of technological growth .
The similarity between the curves of biodiversity and human population probably comes from the fact that both are derived from the interference of the hyperbolic trend with cyclical and stochastic dynamics .
Intraspecific diversity , the variety of alleles within a single species , also offers us choice in our diets .
We may forgo wheat production in that area and plant a different species altogether , relying on interspecific diversity .
The Living Planet Report 2014 claims that `` the number of mammals , birds , reptiles , amphibians and fish across the globe is , on average , about half the size it was 40 years ago '' .
Biodiversity took the biggest hit in Latin America , plummeting 83 percent .
High-income countries showed a 10 % increase in biodiversity , which was canceled out by a loss in low-income countries .
This is despite the fact that high-income countries use five times the ecological resources of low-income countries , which was explained as a result of process whereby wealthy nations are outsourcing resource depletion to poorer nations , which are suffering the greatest ecosystem losses .
The unclassed forests covers 6.4 percent of the total forest area and they are marked by the following characteristics :
The agreements commit countries to `` conserve biodiversity '' , `` develop resources for sustainability '' and `` share the benefits '' resulting from their use .
Bioprospecting can become a type of biopiracy when such principles are not respected .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In comparison , the total mass of the biosphere has been estimated to be as much as 4 TtC -LRB- trillion tons of carbon -RRB- .
This dramatic rise in diversity was marked by periodic , massive losses of diversity classified as mass extinction events .
A significant loss occurred when rainforests collapsed in the carboniferous .
Vertebrates took 30 million years to recover from this event .
These phenomena can be especially detrimental to rare species that come into contact with more abundant ones .
This problem is not always apparent from morphological -LRB- outward appearance -RRB- observations alone .
Some degree of gene flow is normal adaptation , and not all gene and genotype constellations can be preserved .
However , hybridization with or without introgression may , nevertheless , threaten a rare species ' existence .
More recently , in 2015 , `` remains of biotic life '' were found in 4.1 billion-year-old rocks in Western Australia .
According to one of the researchers , `` If life arose relatively quickly on Earth ... then it could be common in the universe . ''
Some scientists believe that corrected for sampling artifacts , modern biodiversity may not be much different from biodiversity 300 million years ago. , whereas others consider the fossil record reasonably reflective of the diversification of life .
This is a functional classification that we impose and not an intrinsic feature of life or diversity .
The next 400 million years included repeated , massive biodiversity losses classified as mass extinction events .
The most recent , the Cretaceous -- Paleogene extinction event , occurred 65 million years ago and has often attracted more attention than others because it resulted in the extinction of the dinosaurs .
Some evidence suggests that invasive species are competitive in their new habitats because they are subject to less pathogen disturbance .
Others report confounding evidence that occasionally suggest that species-rich communities harbor many native and exotic species simultaneously while some say that diverse ecosystems are more resilient and resist invasive plants and animals .
An important question is , `` do invasive species cause extinctions ? ''
Many studies cite effects of invasive species on natives , but not extinctions .
Invasive species seem to increase local -LRB- i.e. : alpha diversity -RRB- diversity , which decreases turnover of diversity -LRB- i.e. : beta diversity -RRB- .
Overall gamma diversity may be lowered because species are going extinct because of other causes , but even some of the most insidious invaders -LRB- e.g. : Dutch elm disease , emerald ash borer , chestnut blight in North America -RRB- have not caused their host species to become extinct .
Extirpation , population decline , and homogenization of regional biodiversity are much more common .
Human activities have frequently been the cause of invasive species circumventing their barriers , by introducing them for food and other purposes .
Human activities therefore allow species to migrate to new areas -LRB- and thus become invasive -RRB- occurred on time scales much shorter than historically have been required for a species to extend its range .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The island of Madagascar and India are also particularly notable .
Colombia is characterized by high biodiversity , with the highest rate of species by area unit worldwide and it has the largest number of endemics -LRB- species that are not found naturally anywhere else -RRB- of any country .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Since the island separated from mainland Africa 66 million years ago , many species and ecosystems have evolved independently .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Indonesia 's 17,000 islands cover 735,355 square miles -LRB- 1,904,560 km2 -RRB- and contain 10 % of the world 's flowering plants , 12 % of mammals , and 17 % of reptiles , amphibians and birds -- along with nearly 240 million people .
Many regions of high biodiversity and/or endemism arise from specialized habitats which require unusual adaptations , for example , alpine environments in high mountains , or Northern European peat bogs .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
At least until the middle of the 21st century , worldwide losses of pristine biodiverse land will probably depend much on the worldwide human birth rate .
A limit is placed on the number of visitors permitted to enter certain fragile areas .
Designated trails or roads are created .
The visitors are allowed to enter only for study , cultural and recreation purposes .
Exploitation of habitat or wildlife is banned .
During the last century , decreases in biodiversity have been increasingly observed .
Estimates reach as high as 140,000 species per year -LRB- based on Species-area theory -RRB- .
This figure indicates unsustainable ecological practices , because few species emerge each year .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Almost all scientists acknowledge that the rate of species loss is greater now than at any time in human history , with extinctions occurring at rates hundreds of times higher than background extinction rates .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Not all introduced species are invasive , nor all invasive species deliberately introduced .
Less than 1 % of all species that have been described have been studied beyond simply noting their existence .
The vast majority of Earth 's species are microbial .
`` On the tree of life , based on analyses of small-subunit ribosomal RNA , visible life consists of barely noticeable twigs .
The inverse relationship of size and population recurs higher on the evolutionary ladder -- `` to a first approximation , all multicellular species on Earth are insects '' .
It is an essential component of nature and it ensures the survival of human species by providing food , fuel , shelter , medicines and other resources to mankind .
All species of animals taken together are known as fauna which includes birds , mammals , fish , reptiles , insects , crustaceans , molluscs , etc. .
By the early 1980s TNC 's Science program and its head , Robert E. Jenkins , Lovejoy and other leading conservation scientists at the time in America advocated the use of the term `` biological diversity '' .
Only a tiny fraction of wild species has been investigated for medical potential .
Evidence from market analysis and biodiversity science indicates that the decline in output from the pharmaceutical sector since the mid-1980s can be attributed to a move away from natural product exploration -LRB- `` bioprospecting '' -RRB- in favor of genomics and synthetic chemistry , indeed claims about the value of undiscovered pharmaceuticals may not provide enough incentive for companies in free markets to search for them because of the high cost of development ; meanwhile , natural products have a long history of supporting significant economic and health innovation .
Marine ecosystems are particularly important , although inappropriate bioprospecting can increase biodiversity loss , as well as violating the laws of the communities and states from which the resources are taken .
This has resulted in loss of genetic diversity and biodiversity as a whole .
The characters encoded are numbers 0 to 9 , lowercase letters a to z , uppercase letters A to Z , basic punctuation symbols , control codes that originated with Teletype machines , and a space .
For example , lowercase j would become binary 1101010 and decimal 106 .
Lowercase letters were therefore not interleaved with uppercase .
Even more importantly , forward compatibility is ensured as software that recognizes only 7-bit ASCII characters as special and does not alter bytes with the highest bit set -LRB- as is often done to support 8-bit ASCII extensions such as ISO-8859-1 -RRB- will preserve UTF-8 data unchanged .
On some systems Control-S retains its meaning but Control-Q is replaced by a second Control-S to resume output .
DEC operating systems -LRB- OS/8 , RT-11 , RSX-11 , RSTS , TOPS-10 , etc. -RRB- used both characters to mark the end of a line so that the console device -LRB- originally Teletype machines -RRB- would work .
For example , a Swedish programmer mailing another programmer asking if they should go for lunch , could get `` N -LCB- jag har sm | rg -RCB- sar . ''
as the answer , which should be `` Nä jag har smörgåsar . ''
meaning `` No I 've got sandwiches . ''
Because of his extensive work on ASCII , Bemer has been called `` the father of ASCII . ''
Except for the control characters that prescribe elementary line-oriented formatting , ASCII does not define any mechanism for describing the structure or appearance of text within a document .
Other schemes , such as markup languages , address page and document layout and formatting .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- That latter interpretation is the most common now .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Telnet used ASCII along with CR-LF line endings , and software using other conventions would translate between the local conventions and the NVT .
This adds complexity to implementations of those protocols , and to other network protocols , such as those used for E-mail and the World Wide Web , on systems not using the NVT 's CR-LF line-ending convention .
Operating systems such as DOS supported these code pages , and manufacturers of IBM PCs supported them in hardware .
Most modern character-encoding schemes are based on ASCII , though they support many additional characters .
Many more of the control codes have been given meanings quite different from their original ones .
This is the same meaning of `` escape '' encountered in URL encodings , C language strings , and other systems where certain characters have a reserved meaning .
Over time this meaning has been co-opted and has eventually been changed .
In modern use , an ESC sent to the terminal usually indicates the start of a command sequence , usually in the form of a so-called `` ANSI escape code '' -LRB- or , more properly , a `` Control Sequence Introducer '' -RRB- beginning with ESC followed by a '' -LSB- '' -LRB- left-bracket -RRB- character .
Compared to earlier telegraph codes , the proposed Bell code and ASCII were both ordered for more convenient sorting -LRB- i.e. , alphabetization -RRB- of lists , and added features for devices other than teleprinters .
However , it would require all data transmission to send eight bits when seven could suffice .
For example , Canada had its own version that supported French characters .
Other adapted encodings include ISCII -LRB- India -RRB- , VISCII -LRB- Vietnam -RRB- , and YUSCII -LRB- Yugoslavia -RRB- .
In particular , the Teletype Model 33 machine assignments for codes 17 -LRB- Control-Q , DC1 , also known as XON -RRB- , 19 -LRB- Control-S , DC3 , also known as XOFF -RRB- , and 127 -LRB- Delete -RRB- became de facto standards .
The Model 33 was also notable for taking the description of Control-G -LRB- BEL , meaning audibly alert the operator -RRB- literally as the unit contained an actual bell which it rang when it received a BEL character .
The best example of this is the newline problem on various operating systems .
Many of the non-alphanumeric characters were positioned to correspond to their shifted position on typewriters ; an important subtlety is that these were based on mechanical typewriters , not electric typewriters .
and 0 -RRB- pairs became standard once 0 and 1 became common .
Thus , in ASCII ! ''
# $ % were placed in second column , rows 1 -- 5 , corresponding to the digits 1 -- 5 in the adjacent column .
The parentheses could not correspond to 9 and 0 , however , because the place corresponding to 0 was taken by the space character .
This was accommodated by removing _ -LRB- underscore -RRB- from 6 and shifting the remaining characters left , which corresponded to many European typewriters that placed the parentheses with 8 and 9 .
The / ?
pair also dates to the No. 2 , and the , < .
> pairs were used on some keyboards -LRB- others , including the No. 2 , did not shift , -LRB- comma -RRB- or .
-LRB- full stop -RRB- so they could be used in uppercase without unshifting -RRB- .
However , ASCII split the ; : pair -LRB- dating to No. 2 -RRB- , and rearranged mathematical symbols -LRB- varied conventions , commonly - * = + -RRB- to : * ; + - = .
Since the original standard did not give detailed interpretation for most control codes , interpretations of this code varied .
This was useful specifically for paper tape , because punching the all-ones bit pattern on top of an existing mark would obliterate it .
Tapes designed to be `` hand edited '' could even be produced with spaces of extra NULs -LRB- blank tape -RRB- so that a block of characters could be `` rubbed out '' and then replacements put into the empty space .
Gastric juice in the stomach starts protein digestion .
Gastric juice mainly contains hydrochloric acid and pepsin .
As these two chemicals may damage the stomach wall , mucus is secreted by the stomach , providing a slimy layer that acts as a shield against the damaging effects of the chemicals .
At the same time protein digestion is occurring , mechanical mixing occurs by peristalsis , which is waves of muscular contractions that move along the stomach wall .
This allows the mass of food to further mix with the digestive enzymes .
Capybara , rabbits , hamsters and other related species do not have a complex digestive system as do , for example , ruminants .
Digestive systems take many forms .
In this process , enzymes are secreted into the environment surrounding the organism , where they break down an organic material , and some of the products diffuse back to the organism .
The nitrogen fixing Rhizobia are an interesting case , wherein conjugative elements naturally engage in inter-kingdom conjugation .
Infected plant cells form crown gall or root tumors .
The lips break the food down into smaller pieces .
The esophagus adds calcium carbonate to neutralize the acids formed by food matter decay .
Temporary storage occurs in the crop where food and calcium carbonate are mixed .
When the churning is complete , the glands in the walls of the gizzard add enzymes to the thick paste , which helps chemically breakdown the organic matter .
By peristalsis , the mixture is sent to the intestine where friendly bacteria continue chemical breakdown .
This releases carbohydrates , protein , fat , and various vitamins and minerals for absorption into the body .
After this it is routed through the vagus nerve and release of acetylcholine .
Gastric secretion at this phase rises to 40 % of maximum rate .
Acidity in the stomach is not buffered by food at this point and thus acts to inhibit parietal -LRB- secretes acid -RRB- and G cell -LRB- secretes gastrin -RRB- activity via D cell secretion of somatostatin .
This activates the release of acetylcholine , which stimulates the release of more gastric juices .
As protein enters the stomach , it binds to hydrogen ions , which raises the pH of the stomach .
Inhibition of gastrin and gastric acid secretion is lifted .
This triggers G cells to release gastrin , which in turn stimulates parietal cells to secrete gastric acid .
Gastric acid is about 0.5 % hydrochloric acid -LRB- HCl -RRB- , which lowers the pH to the desired pH of 1-3 .
Acid release is also triggered by acetylcholine and histamine .
The intestinal phase has two parts , the excitatory and the inhibitory .
Partially digested food fills the duodenum .
This triggers intestinal gastrin to be released .
Enterogastric reflex inhibits vagal nuclei , activating sympathetic fibers causing the pyloric sphincter to tighten to prevent more food from entering , and inhibits local reflexes .
The molecules secreted vary in size from the small Escherichia coli peptide colicin V , -LRB- 10 kDa -RRB- to the Pseudomonas fluorescens cell adhesion protein LapA of 900 kDa .
Examples may be seen in humans , who differ considerably from other hominids -LRB- lack of hair , smaller jaws and musculature , different dentition , length of intestines , cooking , etc. -RRB- .
In the stomach further release of enzymes break down the food further and this is combined with the churning action of the stomach .
The partially digested food enters the duodenum as a thick semi-liquid chyme .
In the small intestine , the larger part of digestion takes place and this is helped by the secretions of bile , pancreatic juice and intestinal juice .
The intestinal walls are lined with villi , and their epithelial cells is covered with numerous microvilli to improve the absorption of nutrients by increasing the surface area of the intestine .
Lactose intolerance varies widely by ethnic heritage ; more than 90 percent of peoples of east Asian descent are lactose intolerant , in contrast to about 5 percent of people of northern European descent .
Water and minerals are reabsorbed back into the blood in the colon -LRB- large intestine -RRB- where the pH is slightly acidic about 5.6 ~ 6.9 .
Some vitamins , such as biotin and vitamin K -LRB- K2MK7 -RRB- produced by bacteria in the colon are also absorbed into the blood in the colon .
Waste material is eliminated from the rectum during defecation .
For example , trypsin is secreted by pancreas in the form of trypsinogen , which is activated in the duodenum by enterokinase to form trypsin .
Trypsin then cleaves proteins to smaller polypeptides .
The phones of some members of Congress , including Boggs , had allegedly been tapped .
The complex is the length of three football fields .
FBI provides these tools of sophisticated identification and information services to local , state , federal , and international law enforcement agencies .
The director also is in charge of making sure the leadership in any one of the FBI field offices is manned with qualified agents .
They provide detailed data regarding the volume of crimes to include arrest , clearance -LRB- or closing a case -RRB- , and law enforcement officer information .
The UCR data only reflect the most serious offense in the case of connected crimes and has a very restrictive definition of rape .
Since about 93 % of the data submitted to the FBI is in this format , the UCR stands out as the publication of choice as most states require law enforcement agencies to submit this data .
The following year it was linked to the Bureau of Prohibition and rechristened the Division of Investigation -LRB- DOI -RRB- before finally becoming an independent service within the Department of Justice in 1935 .
In the same year , its name was officially changed from the Division of Investigation to the present-day Federal Bureau of Investigation , or FBI .
It was to investigate and disrupt the activities of dissident political organizations within the United States , including both militant and non-violent organizations .
Among its targets was the Southern Christian Leadership Conference , a leading civil rights organization with clergy leadership .
This effort confirmed the existence of Americans working in the United States for Soviet intelligence .
Another notable case is the arrest of Soviet spy Rudolf Abel in 1957 .
The discovery of Soviet spies operating in the US allowed Hoover to pursue his longstanding obsession with the threat he perceived from the American Left , ranging from Communist Party of the United States of America -LRB- CPUSA -RRB- union organizers to American liberals .
In July 2007 , U.S. District Judge Nancy Gertner in Boston found the bureau helped convict the four men using false witness account by mobster Joseph Barboza .
Technological innovation and the skills of FBI Laboratory analysts helped ensure that the three cases were successfully prosecuted .
During the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta , Georgia , the FBI was criticized for its investigation of the Centennial Olympic Park bombing .
It has settled a dispute with Richard Jewell , who was a private security guard at the venue , along with some media organizations , in regard to the leaking of his name during the investigation .
The book suggested that the FBI has not evolved into an effective counter-terrorism or counter-intelligence agency , due in large part to deeply ingrained agency cultural resistance to change .
For example , FBI personnel practices continue to treat all staff other than special agents as support staff , classifying intelligence analysts alongside the FBI 's auto mechanics and janitors .
The lab serves as the primary lab for most DNA , biological , and physical work .
Public tours of FBI headquarters ran through the FBI laboratory workspace before the move to the J. Edgar Hoover Building .
The services the lab conducts include Chemistry , Combined DNA Index System -LRB- CODIS -RRB- , Computer Analysis and Response , DNA Analysis , Evidence Response , Explosives , Firearms and Tool marks , Forensic Audio , Forensic Video , Image Analysis , Forensic Science Research , Forensic Science Training , Hazardous Materials Response , Investigative and Prospective Graphics , Latent Prints , Materials Analysis , Questioned Documents , Racketeering Records , Special Photographic Analysis , Structural Design , and Trace Evidence .
Efforts to deploy modern computers and networking equipment were generally successful , but attempts to develop new investigation software , outsourced to Science Applications International Corporation -LRB- SAIC -RRB- , were not .
Virtual Case File , or VCF , as the software was known , was plagued by poorly defined goals , and repeated changes in management .
At least $ 100 million -LRB- and much more by some estimates -RRB- was spent on the project , which never became operational .
The FBI has been forced to continue using its decade-old Automated Case Support system , which IT experts consider woefully inadequate .
In March 2005 , the FBI announced it was beginning a new , more ambitious software project , code-named Sentinel , which they expected to complete by 2009 .
At present , the Model 23 `` FG&R '' -LRB- finger groove and rail -RRB- is the issue sidearm .
New agents are issued firearms , on which they must qualify , on successful completion of their training at the FBI Academy .
The Glock 26 in 9 × 19mm Parabellum , and Glock Models 23 and 27 in .40 S&W caliber are authorized as secondary weapons .
Special agents are authorized to purchase and qualify with the Glock Model 21 in .45 ACP .
Special agents of the FBI HRT -LRB- Hostage Rescue Team -RRB- , and regional SWAT teams are issued the Springfield Professional Model 1911A1 .45 ACP pistol -LRB- see FBI Special Weapons and Tactics Teams -RRB- .
The FBI is near-impenetrable , with applicants intensely scrutinized and assessed over an extended period .
In 2009 , the Office of Personnel Management issued implementation guidance on the Isabella decision .
At least three years of professional work experience prior to application is also required .
All FBI employees require a Top Secret -LRB- TS -RRB- security clearance , and in many instances , employees need a TS/SCI -LRB- Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information -RRB- clearance .
Special Agents candidates also have to pass a Physical Fitness Test -LRB- PFT -RRB- , which includes a 300-meter run , one-minute sit-ups , maximum push-ups , and a 1.5-mile -LRB- 2.4 km -RRB- run .
Personnel must pass a polygraph test with questions including possible drug use .
Applicants who fail polygraphs may not gain employment with the FBI .
The files were collected for various reasons .
Beginning in 1997 , the New England media exposed criminal actions by federal , state , and local law enforcement officials tied to Bulger .
In 2002 , Special Agent John J Connolly was convicted of federal racketeering charges for helping Bulger avoid arrest .
In 2008 , Special Agent Connolly completed his term on the federal charges and was transferred to Florida where he was convicted of helping plan the murder of John B Callahan , a Bulger rival .
In 2014 , that conviction was overturned on a technicality .
Connolly was the agent leading the investigation of Bulger .
The database cross-referenced logs of Wikipedia edits with publicly available records pertaining to the internet IP addresses edits were made from .
Among his findings were that FBI computers were used to edit the FBI article in Wikipedia .
Although the edits correlated with known FBI IP addresses , there was no proof that the changes actually came from a member or employee of the FBI , only that someone who had access to their network had edited the FBI article in Wikipedia .
On July 6 , 2001 , he pleaded guilty to 15 counts of espionage in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia .
His spying activities have been described by the US Department of Justice 's Commission for the Review of FBI Security Programs as `` possibly the worst intelligence disaster in U.S. history '' .
Hoover was substantially involved in most major cases and projects that the FBI handled during his tenure .
After Hoover 's death , Congress passed legislation that limited the tenure of future FBI Directors to ten years .
Mass arrests and searches of homes -LRB- in most cases conducted without warrants -RRB- began a few hours after the attack , and over the next several weeks more than 5,500 Issei men were taken into FBI custody .
On February 19 , 1942 , President Franklin Roosevelt issued Executive Order 9066 , authorizing the removal of Japanese Americans from the West Coast .
FBI Director Hoover opposed the subsequent mass removal and confinement of Japanese Americans authorized under Executive Order 9066 , but Roosevelt prevailed .
The vast majority went along with the subsequent exclusion orders , but in a handful of cases where Japanese Americans refused to obey the new military regulations , FBI agents handled their arrests .
After the war , the FBI was assigned to protect returning Japanese Americans from attacks by hostile white communities .
All of the FBI work was done undercover and from within these organizations , using the provisions provided in the RICO Act .
Gradually the agency dismantled many of the groups .
For over 40 years , the FBI crime lab in Quantico believed lead in bullets had unique chemical signatures .
One year later , the FBI decided to stop doing bullet lead analysis .
It is also where new agents are sent for training to become FBI Special Agents .
First opened for use in 1972 , the facility located on 385 acres -LRB- 1.6 km2 -RRB- of woodland .
The FBI units that reside at Quantico are the Field and Police Training Unit , Firearms Training Unit , Forensic Science Research and Training Center , Technology Services Unit -LRB- TSU -RRB- , Investigative Training Unit , Law Enforcement Communication Unit , Leadership and Management Science Units -LRB- LSMU -RRB- , Physical Training Unit , New Agents ' Training Unit -LRB- NATU -RRB- , Practical Applications Unit -LRB- PAU -RRB- , the Investigative Computer Training Unit and the `` College of Analytical Studies . ''
Historian Taylor Branch documents an anonymous November 1964 `` suicide package '' sent by the Bureau that combined a letter to the civil rights leader telling him `` You are done .
There is only one way out for you ... '' with audio recordings of King 's sexual indiscretions .
Local , state , and federal agencies generate NIBRS data from their records management systems .
Data is collected on every incident and arrest in the Group A offense category .
The Group A offenses are 46 specific crimes grouped in 22 offense categories .
Specific facts about these offenses are gathered and reported in the NIBRS system .
In addition to the Group A offenses , eleven Group B offenses are reported with only the arrest information .
As of 2004 , 5,271 law enforcement agencies submitted NIBRS data .
That amount represents 20 % of the United States population and 16 % of the crime statistics data collected by the FBI .
Within these sub-branches there are various sections headed by section chiefs .
Section chiefs are ranked analogous to special agents in charge .
The FBI also maintains over 400 resident agencies across the United States , as well as over 50 legal attachés at United States embassies and consulates .
DCS is reported to stand for `` Digital Collection System '' ; the system has the same functions as before .
In 1968 , Congress passed legislation as part of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act Pub.L .
90 -- 351 , June 19 , 1968 , 82 Stat .
197 that specified a 10-year limit , a maximum of two 5-year terms , for future FBI Directors , as well as requiring Senate confirmation of appointees .
As the incumbent , this legislation did not apply to Hoover , only to his successors .
The bureau has participated to varying degrees , which has ranged from direct involvement in the creative process of film or TV series development , to providing consultation on operations and closed cases .
In the same time period , the FBI wounded 150 people , 70 of whom died ; the FBI found all 150 shootings to be justified .
Likewise , during the period from 2011 to the present , all shootings by FBI agents have been found to be justified by internal investigation .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Puerto Rico Governor Aníbal Acevedo Vilá criticized the FBI assault as `` improper '' and `` highly irregular '' and demanded to know why his government was not informed of it .
The Puerto Rico Justice Department filed suit in federal court against the FBI and the US Attorney General , demanding information crucial to the Commonwealth 's own investigation of the incident .
Ojeda Rios ' funeral was attended by a long list of dignitaries , including the highest authority of the Roman Catholic Church in Puerto Rico , Archbishop Roberto Octavio González Nieves , ex-Governor Rafael Hernández Colón , and numerous other personalities .
The male and female gonads are subsequently activated , which puts them into a state of rapid growth and development ; the triggered gonads now commence the mass production of the necessary chemicals .
The production of these hormones increases gradually until sexual maturation is met .
Between the ages of 10 and 25 , the brain undergoes changes that have important implications for behavior -LRB- see Cognitive development below -RRB- .
Thus , the brain does not grow in size much during adolescence .
The corresponding increase in emotional variability also can increase adolescents ' vulnerability .
This provides the ability to plan ahead , see the future consequences of an action and to provide alternative explanations of events .
It also makes adolescents more skilled debaters , as they can reason against a friend 's or parent 's assumptions .
The timing of puberty can have important psychological and social consequences .
They have the advantage in capturing the attention of potential partners and in becoming hand-picked for sports .
Pubescent boys often tend to have a good body image , are more confident , secure , and more independent .
Because they appear older than their peers , pubescent boys may face increased social pressure to conform to adult norms ; society may view them as more emotionally advanced , despite the fact that their cognitive and social development may lag behind their appearance .
Thus , it is during the adolescence-adulthood transition that individuals acquire the type of wisdom that is associated with age .
The study of adolescent development often involves interdisciplinary collaborations .
For example , researchers in neuroscience or bio-behavioral health might focus on pubertal changes in brain structure and its effects on cognition or social relations .
Sociologists interested in adolescence might focus on the acquisition of social roles -LRB- e.g. , worker or romantic partner -RRB- and how this varies across cultures or social conditions .
Developmental psychologists might focus on changes in relations with parents and peers as a function of school structure and pubertal status .
The Institute was instrumental in initiating studies of healthy development , in contrast to previous work that had been dominated by theories based on pathological personalities .
The studies looked at human development during the Great Depression and World War II , unique historical circumstances under which a generation of children grew up .
Jean Macfarlane launched the Berkeley Guidance Study , which examined the development of children in terms of their socioeconomic and family backgrounds .
These studies provided the background for Glen Elder in the 1960s , to propose a life-course perspective of adolescent development .
Elder formulated several descriptive principles of adolescent development .
The principle of historical time and place states that an individual 's development is shaped by the period and location in which they grow up .
The principle of the importance of timing in one 's life refers to the different impact that life events have on development based on when in one 's life they occur .
The idea of linked lives states that one 's development is shaped by the interconnected network of relationships of which one is a part ; and the principle of human agency asserts that one 's life course is constructed via the choices and actions of an individual within the context of their historical period and social network .
Regardless of genes , a girl must have a certain proportion of body fat to attain menarche .
Consequently , girls who have a high-fat diet and who are not physically active begin menstruating earlier , on average , than girls whose diet contains less fat and whose activities involve fat reducing exercise -LRB- e.g. ballet and gymnastics -RRB- .
Adolescents can conceptualize multiple `` possible selves '' that they could become and long-term possibilities and consequences of their choices .
For many , these distinctions are uncomfortable , but they also appear to motivate achievement through behavior consistent with the ideal and distinct from the feared possible selves .
Boys are generally fertile before they have an adult appearance .
Adolescence marks a rapid change in one 's role within a family .
The adolescent faces the task of increasing independence while preserving a caring relationship with his or her parents .
Arguments often concern minor issues of control , such as curfew , acceptable clothing , and the adolescent 's right to privacy , which adolescents may have previously viewed as issues over which their parents had complete authority .
Parent-adolescent disagreement also increases as friends demonstrate a greater impact on one another , new influences on the adolescent that may be in opposition to parents ' values .
Social media has also played an increasing role in adolescent and parent disagreements .
While parents never had to worry about the threats of social media in the past , it has become a dangerous place for children .
While adolescents strive for their freedoms , the unknowns to parents of what their child is doing on social media sites is a challenging subject , due to the increasing amount of predators on social media sites .
Many parents have very little knowledge of social networking sites in the first place and this further increases their mistrust .
An important challenge for the parent -- adolescent relationship is to understand how to enhance the opportunities of online communication while managing its risks .
Although conflicts between children and parents increase during adolescence , these are just relatively minor issues .
The areas of the brain involved in more complex processes lose matter later in development .
These include the lateral and prefrontal cortices , among other regions .
During adolescence , myelination and synaptic pruning in the prefrontal cortex increases , improving the efficiency of information processing , and neural connections between the prefrontal cortex and other regions of the brain are strengthened .
This leads to better evaluation of risks and rewards , as well as improved control over impulses .
Communication within peer groups allows adolescents to explore their feelings and identity as well as develop and evaluate their social skills .
Adolescents choose peer groups based on characteristics similarly found in themselves .
By utilizing these relationships , adolescents become more accepting of who they are becoming .
Group norms and values are incorporated into an adolescent 's own self-concept .
Through developing new communication skills and reflecting upon those of their peers , as well as self-opinions and values , an adolescent can share and express emotions and other concerns without fear of rejection or judgment .
However , while peers may facilitate social development for one another they may also hinder it .
Further evidence of peers hindering social development has been found in Spanish teenagers , where emotional -LRB- rather than solution-based -RRB- reactions to problems and emotional instability have been linked with physical aggression against peers .
Both physical and relational aggression are linked to a vast number of enduring psychological difficulties , especially depression , as is social rejection .
Because of this , bullied adolescents often develop problems that lead to further victimization .
Bullied adolescents are both more likely to continued to be bullied and to bully others in the future .
However , this relationship is less stable in cases of cyberbullying , a relatively new issue among adolescents .
There are at least two major approaches to understanding cognitive change during adolescence .
Adolescence marks a time of sexual maturation , which manifests in social interactions as well .
From these social media encounters , a further relationship may begin .
Kissing , hand holding , and hugging signify satisfaction and commitment .
This effect does not hold true for sexual activity in late adolescence that takes place within a romantic relationship .
Some research suggest that there are genetic causes of early sexual activity that are also risk factors for delinquency , suggesting that there is a group who are at risk for both early sexual activity and emotional distress .
It often involves monitoring one 's own cognitive activity during the thinking process .
Adolescents ' improvements in knowledge of their own thinking patterns lead to better self-control and more effective studying .
It is also relevant in social cognition , resulting in increased introspection , self-consciousness , and intellectualization -LRB- in the sense of thought about one 's own thoughts , rather than the Freudian definition as a defense mechanism -RRB- .
Being able to introspect may lead to two forms of adolescent egocentrism , which results in two distinct problems in thinking : the imaginary audience and the personal fable .
It is , therefore , clear that cultural differences exist in perceptions of adolescent autonomy , and such differences have implications for the lifestyles and development of adolescents .
In sub-Saharan African youth , the notions of individuality and freedom may not be useful in understanding adolescent development .
Rather , African notions of childhood and adolescent development are relational and interdependent .
Given the potential consequences , engaging in sexual behavior is somewhat risky , particularly for adolescents .
Adolescence is also commonly a time of questioning sexuality and gender .
This may involve intimate experimentation with people identifying as the same gender as well as with people of differing genders .
Some have argued that there may be evolutionary benefits to an increased propensity for risk-taking in adolescence .
For example , without a willingness to take risks , teenagers would not have the motivation or confidence necessary to leave their family of origin .
In addition , from a population perspective , there is an advantage to having a group of individuals willing to take more risks and try new methods , counterbalancing the more conservative elements more typical of the received knowledge held by older adults .
Identity development is a stage in the adolescent life cycle .
During these years , adolescents are more open to ` trying on ' different behaviours and appearances to discover who they are .
In other words , in an attempt to find their identity and discover who they are adolescents are liking to cycle through a number of identities to find one that suits them best .
Empirical studies suggest that this process might be more accurately described as identity development , rather than formation , but confirms a normative process of change in both content and structure of one 's thoughts about the self .
Since choices made during adolescent years can influence later life , high levels of self-awareness and self-control during mid-adolescence will lead to better decisions during the transition to adulthood .
The years of adolescence create a more conscientious group of young adults .
Adolescents pay close attention and give more time and effort to their appearance as their body goes through changes .
Unlike children , teens put forth an effort to look presentable -LRB- 1991 -RRB- .
The environment in which an adolescent grows up also plays an important role in their identity development .
The freshman year of college influences identity development significantly , but may actually prolong psychosocial moratorium by encouraging reexamination of previous commitments and further exploration of alternate possibilities without encouraging resolution .
Egocentrism in adolescents forms a self-conscious desire to feel important in their peer groups and enjoy social acceptance .
Unlike the conflicting aspects of self-concept , identity represents a coherent sense of self stable across circumstances and including past experiences and future goals .
Erikson 's theory of stages of development includes the identity crisis in which adolescents must explore different possibilities and integrate different parts of themselves before committing to their beliefs .
He described the resolution of this process as a stage of `` identity achievement '' but also stressed that the identity challenge `` is never fully resolved once and for all at one point in time '' .
`` Clothes help teens explore new identities , separate from parents , and bond with peers . ''
Fashion has played a major role when it comes to teenagers `` finding their selves '' ; Fashion is always evolving , which corresponds with the evolution of change in the personality of teenagers .
Adolescents attempt to define their identity by consciously styling themselves in different manners to find what best suits them .
Trial and error in matching both their perceived image and the image others respond to and see , allows for the adolescent to grasp an understanding of who they are Just as fashion is evolving to influence adolescents so is the media .
`` Modern life takes place amidst a never-ending barrage of flesh on screens , pages , and billboards . ''
This barrage consciously or subconsciously registers into the mind causing issues with self-image a factor that contributes to an adolescence sense of identity .
Answers are scored based on extent to which the individual has explored and the degree to which he has made commitments .
The final major aspect of identity formation is self-esteem .
Most theories on self-esteem state that there is a grand desire , across all genders and ages , to maintain , protect and enhance their self-esteem .
The validity of global self-esteem scales has been questioned , and many suggest that more specific scales might reveal more about the adolescent experience .
When they fail to win friends ' approval or could n't find someone with whom to share common activities and common interests , in these cases , girls suffer from low self-esteem .
In contrast , boys are more concerned with establishing and asserting their independence and defining their relation to authority .
As such , they are more likely to derive high self-esteem from their ability to successfully influence their friends ; on the other hand , the lack of romantic competence , for example , failure to win or maintain the affection of the opposite or same-sex -LRB- depending on sexual orientation -RRB- , is the major contributor to low self-esteem in adolescent boys .
Due to the fact that both men and women happen to have a low self-esteem after ending a romantic relationship , they are prone to other symptoms that is caused by this state .
Depression and hopelessness are only two of the various symptoms and it is said that women are twice as likely to experience depression and men are three to four times more likely to commit suicide -LRB- Mearns , 1991 ; Ustun & Sartorius , 1995 -RRB- .
In terms of sexual identity , adolescence is when most gay/lesbian and transgender adolescents begin to recognize and make sense of their feelings .
Many adolescents may choose to come out during this period of their life once an identity has been formed ; many others may go through a period of questioning or denial , which can include experimentation with both homosexual and heterosexual experiences .
Coming to terms with and creating a positive LGBT identity can be difficult for some youth for a variety of reasons .
Peer pressure is a large factor when youth who are questioning their sexuality or gender identity are surrounded by heteronormative peers and can cause great distress due to a feeling of being different from everyone else .
While coming out can also foster better psychological adjustment , the risks associated are real .
Indeed , coming out in the midst of a heteronormative peer environment often comes with the risk of ostracism , hurtful jokes , and even violence .
Despite changing family roles during adolescence , the home environment and parents are still important for the behaviors and choices of adolescents .
In addition , parents influence the education of adolescence .
Much research has been conducted on the psychological ramifications of body image on adolescents .
As such , modern day adolescents are exposed to many representations of ideal , societal beauty .
Scholars continue to debate the effects of media on body dissatisfaction in teens .
A potential important influence on adolescence is change of the family dynamic , specifically divorce .
Custody disputes soon after a divorce often reflect a playing out of control battles and ambivalence between parents .
In extreme cases of instability and abuse in homes , divorce can have a positive effect on families due to less conflict in the home .
However , most research suggests a negative effect on adolescence as well as later development .
A recent study found that , compared with peers who grow up in stable post-divorce families , children of divorce who experience additional family transitions during late adolescence , make less progress in their math and social studies performance over time .
A parental divorce during childhood or adolescence continues to have a negative effect when a person is in his or her twenties and early thirties .
In other countries , initiation ceremonies play an important role , marking the transition into adulthood or the entrance into adolescence .
This illuminates the extent to which adolescence is , at least in part , a social construction ; it takes shape differently depending on the cultural context , and may be enforced more by cultural practices or transitions than by universal chemical or biological physical changes .
In a 2008 study conducted by YouGov for Channel 4 , 20 % of 14 − 17-year-olds surveyed revealed that they had their first sexual experience at 13 or under in the United Kingdom .
This constant increase in the likelihood of a long-term relationship can be explained by sexual maturation and the development of cognitive skills necessary to maintain a romantic bond -LRB- e.g. caregiving , appropriate attachment -RRB- , although these skills are not strongly developed until late adolescence .
Long-term relationships allow adolescents to gain the skills necessary for high-quality relationships later in life and develop feelings of self-worth .
Overall , positive romantic relationships among adolescents can result in long-term benefits .
High-quality romantic relationships are associated with higher commitment in early adulthood and are positively associated with self-esteem , self-confidence , and social competence .
For example , an adolescent with positive self-confidence is likely to consider themselves a more successful partner , whereas negative experiences may lead to low confidence as a romantic partner .
Adolescents often date within their demographic in regards to race , ethnicity , popularity , and physical attractiveness .
However , there are traits in which certain individuals , particularly adolescent girls , seek diversity .
While most adolescents date people approximately their own age , boys typically date partners the same age or younger ; girls typically date partners the same age or older .
There are certain characteristics of adolescent development that are more rooted in culture than in human biology or cognitive structures .
Social responsibilities , sexual expression , and belief system development , for instance , are all things that are likely to vary by culture .
Furthermore , distinguishing characteristics of youth , including dress , music and other uses of media , employment , art , food and beverage choices , recreation , and language , all constitute a youth culture .
For these reasons , culture is a prevalent and powerful presence in the lives of adolescents , and therefore we can not fully understand today 's adolescents without studying and understanding their culture .
Many cultures are present within any given country and racial or socioeconomic group .
When discussing peer relationships among adolescents it is also important to include information in regards to how they communicate with one another .
An important aspect of communication is the channel used .
Teens are heavy users of newer forms of communication such as text message and social-networking websites such as Facebook , especially when communicating with peers .
In contemporary society , adolescents also face some risks as their sexuality begins to transform .
While some of these , such as emotional distress -LRB- fear of abuse or exploitation -RRB- and sexually transmitted infections/diseases -LRB- STIs/STDs -RRB- , including HIV/AIDS , are not necessarily inherent to adolescence , others such as teenage pregnancy -LRB- through non-use or failure of contraceptives -RRB- are seen as social problems in most western societies .
Adolescents in the United States often chose `` anything but intercourse '' for sexual activity because they mistakenly believe it reduces the risk of STIs .
They also believe students should be able to be tested for STIs .
Furthermore , teachers want to address such topics with their students .
But , although 9 in 10 sex education instructors across the country believe that students should be taught about contraceptives in school , over one quarter report receiving explicit instructions from school boards and administrators not to do so .
According to anthropologist Margaret Mead , the turmoil found in adolescence in Western society has a cultural rather than a physical cause ; they reported that societies where young women engaged in free sexual activity had no such adolescent turmoil .
Adolescence is a period frequently marked by increased rights and privileges for individuals .
While cultural variation exists for legal rights and their corresponding ages , considerable consistency is found across cultures .
This includes protecting children against unchecked child labor , enrollment in the military , prostitution , and pornography .
People below this age are considered minors or children .
In addition to the sharing of household chores , certain cultures expect adolescents to share in their family 's financial responsibilities .
Differences between families in the distribution of financial responsibilities or provision of allowance may reflect various social background circumstances and intrafamilial processes , which are further influenced by cultural norms and values , as well as by the business sector and market economy of a given society .
Many cultures define the transition into adultlike sexuality by specific biological or social milestones in an adolescent 's life .
In addition to biological factors , an adolescent 's sexual socialization is highly dependent upon whether their culture takes a restrictive or permissive attitude toward teen or premarital sexual activity .
These cultures may attempt to restrict sexual activity by separating males and females throughout their development , or through public shaming and physical punishment when sexual activity does occur .
In less restrictive cultures , there is more tolerance for displays of adolescent sexuality , or of the interaction between males and females in public and private spaces .
Less restrictive cultures may tolerate some aspects of adolescent sexuality , while objecting to other aspects .
For instance , some cultures find teenage sexual activity acceptable but teenage pregnancy highly undesirable .
Other cultures do not object to teenage sexual activity or teenage pregnancy , as long as they occur after marriage .
Cultures vary in how overt this double standard is -- in some it is legally inscribed , while in others it is communicated through social convention .
Lesbian , gay , bi-sexual and transsexual youth face much discrimination through bullying from those unlike them and may find telling others that they are gay to be a traumatic experience .
The range of sexual attitudes that a culture embraces could thus be seen to affect the beliefs , lifestyles , and societal perceptions of its adolescents .
Although research has been inconclusive , some findings have indicated that electronic communication negatively affects adolescents ' social development , replaces face-to-face communication , impairs their social skills , and can sometimes lead to unsafe interaction with strangers .
Studies have shown differences in the ways the internet negatively impacts the adolescents ' social functioning .
Online socializing tends to make girls particularly vulnerable , while socializing in Internet cafés seems only to affect boys academic achievement .
However , the Internet can be significantly useful in educating teens because of the access they have to information on many various topics .
Data collected by the National Institute on Drug Abuse shows that between the years of 2007 and 2011 , marijuana use grew from 5.7 % to 7.2 % among 8th grade students ; among 10th grade students , from 14.2 % to 17.6 % ; and among 12th graders , from 18.8 % to 22.6 % .
Additional , recent years have seen a surge in popularity of MDMA ; between 2010 and 2011 , the use of MDMA increased from 1.4 % to 2.3 % among high school seniors .
Until mid-to-late adolescence , boys and girls show relatively little difference in drinking motives .
The period of adolescence is most closely associated with the teenage years , though its physical , psychological and cultural expressions may begin earlier and end later .
For example , although puberty has been historically associated with the onset of adolescent development , it now typically begins prior to the teenage years and there has been a normative shift of it occurring in preadolescence , particularly in females -LRB- see precocious puberty -RRB- .
Thus chronological age provides only a rough marker of adolescence , and scholars have found it difficult to agree upon a precise definition of adolescence .
In fact , more than a third -LRB- 34 % -RRB- of teens visit their main social networking site several times a day .
For girls , early maturation can sometimes lead to increased self-consciousness , though a typical aspect in maturing females .
Because of their bodies ' developing in advance , pubescent girls can become more insecure and dependent .
In addition , girls may have to deal with sexual advances from older boys before they are emotionally and mentally mature .
Another set of significant physical changes during puberty happen in bodily distribution of fat and muscle .
Frequently , the increase in fat for girls happens in their years just before puberty .
This may help explain sex differences in athletic performance .
In males , these changes involve appearance of pubic , facial , and body hair , deepening of the voice , roughening of the skin around the upper arms and thighs , and increased development of the sweat glands .
In females , secondary sex changes involve elevation of the breasts , widening of the hips , development of pubic and underarm hair , widening of the areolae , and elevation of the nipples .
Through experience outside the family circle , they learn that rules they were taught as absolute are in fact relativistic .
This can lead to a period of questioning authority in all domains .
Hall , who was the first president of the American Psychological Association , viewed adolescence primarily as a time of internal turmoil and upheaval -LRB- sturm und drang -RRB- .
He believed that adolescence was a representation of our human ancestors ' phylogenetic shift from being primitive to being civilized .
Hall 's assertions stood relatively uncontested until the 1950s when psychologists such as Erik Erikson and Anna Freud started to formulate their theories about adolescence .
Freud believed that the psychological disturbances associated with youth were biologically based and culturally universal while Erikson focused on the dichotomy between identity formation and role fulfillment .
Even with their different theories , these three psychologists agreed that adolescence was inherently a time of disturbance and psychological confusion .
The less turbulent aspects of adolescence , such as peer relations and cultural influence , were left largely ignored until the 1980s .
An adolescent 's environment plays a huge role in their identity development .
The forming of an adolescent 's identity is a crucial time in their life .
It has been recently found that demographic patterns suggest that the transition to adulthood is now occurring over a longer span of years than was the case during the middle of the 20th century .
This therefore has caused various factors to become important during this development .
So many factors contribute to the developing social identity of an adolescent from commitment , to coping devices , to social media .
All of these factors are affected by the environment an adolescent grows up in .
Adolescence is a sensitive period in the development process , and exposure to the wrong things at that time can have a major effect on future decisions .
While children that grow up in nice suburban communities are not exposed to bad environments they are more likely to participate in activities that can benefit their identity and contribute to a more successful identity development .
The relationships adolescents have with their peers , family , and members of their social sphere play a vital role in the social development of an adolescent .
This is not harmful ; however , if these friends expose an individual to potentially harmful situations , this is an aspect of peer pressure .
Adolescence is a critical period in social development because adolescents can be easily influenced by the people they develop close relationships with .
This is the first time individuals can truly make their own decisions , which also makes this a sensitive period .
Relationships are vital in the social development of an adolescent due to the extreme influence peers can have over an individual .
These relationships become significant because they begin to help the adolescent understand the concept of personalities , how they form and why a person has that specific type of personality .
`` The use of psychological comparisons could serve both as an index of the growth of an implicit personality theory and as a component process accounting for its creation .
In other words , by comparing one person 's personality characteristics to another 's , we would be setting up the framework for creating a general theory of personality -LRB- and , ... such a theory would serve as a useful framework for coming to understand specific persons -RRB- . ''
This can be likened to the use of social comparison in developing one 's identity and self-concept , which includes ones personality , and underscores the importance of communication , and thus relationships , in one 's development .
In social comparison we use reference groups , with respect to both psychological and identity development .
These reference groups are the peers of adolescents .
This means that who the teen chooses/accepts as their friends and who they communicate with on a frequent basis often makes up their reference groups and can therefore have a huge impact on who they become .
Peer groups are essential to social and general development .
High quality friendships may enhance children 's development regardless of the characteristics of those friends .
As children begin to bond with various people and create friendships , it later helps them when they are adolescent and sets up the framework for adolescence and peer groups .
It is also common for adolescents to use friends as coping devices in different situations .
A three-factor structure of dealing with friends including avoidance , mastery , and nonchalance has shown that adolescents use friends as coping devices with social stresses .
Some researchers are now focusing on learning about how adolescents view their own relationships and sexuality ; they want to move away from a research point of view that focuses on the problems associated with adolescent sexuality .
-LSB- why ? -RSB-
College Professor Lucia O'Sullivan and her colleagues found that there were n't any significant gender differences in the relationship events adolescent boys and girls from grades 7-12 reported .
Most teens said they had kissed their partners , held hands with them , thought of themselves as being a couple and told people they were in a relationship .
This means that private thoughts about the relationship as well as public recognition of the relationship were both important to the adolescents in the sample .
The degree to which adolescents are perceived as autonomous beings varies widely by culture , as do the behaviors that represent this emerging autonomy .
Emotional autonomy is defined in terms of an adolescent 's relationships with others , and often includes the development of more mature emotional connections with adults and peers .
Cultural differences are especially visible in this category because it concerns issues of dating , social time with peers , and time-management decisions .
Converging influences from adolescent cognitive development , expanding social relationships , an increasingly adultlike appearance , and the acceptance of more rights and responsibilities enhance feelings of autonomy for adolescents .
Proper development of autonomy has been tied to good mental health , high self-esteem , self-motivated tendencies , positive self-concepts , and self-initiating and regulating behaviors .
These differences may be influenced by cultural values of education and the amount of responsibility adolescents are expected to assume in their family or community .
Out of a polled body of students , 4.4 % of 8th graders reported having been on at least one occasion been drunk within the previous month ; for 10th graders , the number was 13.7 % , and for 12th graders , 25 % .
The study indicated that there was a discernible gender difference in the prevalence of smoking among the students .
The finding of the study show that more males than females began smoking when they were in primary and high schools whereas most females started smoking after high school .
The most prevalent answers among Canadian adolescents were to `` get in a party mood , '' 18 % ; `` because I enjoy it , '' 16 % ; and `` to get drunk , '' 10 % .
According to Hogan & Astone -LRB- 1986 -RRB- , this transition can include markers such as leaving school , starting a full-time job , leaving the home of origin , getting married , and becoming a parent for the first time .
Such milestones include driving a vehicle , having legal sexual relations , serving in the armed forces or on a jury , purchasing and drinking alcohol , voting , entering into contracts , finishing certain levels of education , and marriage .
It then spreads to form a moustache over the entire upper lip .
This is followed by the appearance of hair on the upper part of the cheeks , and the area under the lower lip .
The hair eventually spreads to the sides and lower border of the chin , and the rest of the lower face to form a full beard .
As with most human biological processes , this specific order may vary among some individuals .
Facial hair is often present in late adolescence , around ages 17 and 18 , but may not appear until significantly later .
Some men do not develop full facial hair for 10 years after puberty .
The adolescent growth spurt is a rapid increase in the individual 's height and weight during puberty resulting from the simultaneous release of growth hormones , thyroid hormones , and androgens .
In addition to changes in height , adolescents also experience a significant increase in weight -LRB- Marshall , 1978 -RRB- .
The weight gained during adolescence constitutes nearly half of one 's adult body weight .
Teenage and early adult males may continue to gain natural muscle growth even after puberty .
Adolescence is also a time for rapid cognitive development .
This allows the individual to think and reason in a wider perspective .
The thoughts , ideas and concepts developed at this period of life greatly influence one 's future life , playing a major role in character and personality formation .
Their increased facility permits them to appreciate the ways in which language can be used to convey multiple messages , such as satire , metaphor , and sarcasm .
This also permits the application of advanced reasoning and logical processes to social and ideological matters such as interpersonal relationships , politics , philosophy , religion , morality , friendship , faith , democracy , fairness , and honesty .
In addressing this question , it is important to distinguish whether adolescents are more likely to engage in risky behaviors -LRB- prevalence -RRB- , whether they make risk-related decisions similarly or differently than adults -LRB- cognitive processing perspective -RRB- , or whether they use the same processes but value different things and thus arrive at different conclusions .
Peaking in the 7th-9th grades , the personality traits adolescents use to describe themselves refer to specific contexts , and therefore may contradict one another .
In this stage , the youth is overwhelmed by feelings of inner turmoil regarding their sexual orientation , and begins to engage sexual experiences with same-sex partners .
In the third stage of identity assumption , which usually takes place a few years after the adolescent has left home , adolescents begin to come out to their family and close friends , and assumes a self-definition as gay , lesbian , or bisexual .
In the final stage , known as commitment , the young adult adopts their sexual identity as a lifestyle .
Therefore , this model estimates that the process of coming out begins in childhood , and continues through the early to mid 20s .
This model has been contested , and alternate ideas have been explored in recent years .
During childhood , siblings are a source of conflict and frustration as well as a support system .
Adolescence may affect this relationship differently , depending on sibling gender .
Sibling interactions are children 's first relational experiences , the ones that shape their social and self-understanding for life .
Sustaining positive sibling relations can assist adolescents in a number of ways .
Older siblings can give guidance to younger siblings , although the impact of this can be either positive or negative depending on the activity of the older sibling .
Within a clique of highly athletic male-peers , for example , the clique may create a stronger sense of fidelity and competition .
Cliques also have become somewhat a `` collective parent , '' i.e. telling the adolescents what to do and not to do .
Towards late adolescence , cliques often merge into mixed-sex groups as teenagers begin romantically engaging with one another .
These small friend groups then break down further as socialization becomes more couple-oriented .
On a larger scale , adolescents often associate with crowds , groups of individuals who share a common interest or activity .
Often , crowd identities may be the basis for stereotyping young people , such as jocks or nerds .
In large , multi-ethnic high schools , there are often ethnically-determined crowds .
While crowds are very influential during early and middle adolescence , they lose salience during high school as students identify more individually .
Dating violence is fairly prevalent within adolescent relationships .
This reported aggression includes hitting , throwing things , or slaps , although most of this physical aggression does not result in a medical visit .
The lifestyle of an adolescent in a given culture is profoundly shaped by the roles and responsibilities he or she is expected to assume .
For instance , adolescents in certain cultures are expected to contribute significantly to household chores and responsibilities .
However , specific household responsibilities for adolescents may vary by culture , family type , and adolescent age .
Because exposure to media has increased over the past decade , adolescents ' utilization of computers , cell phones , stereos and televisions to gain access to various mediums of popular culture has also increased .
As a result of the amount of time adolescents spend using these devices , their total media exposure is high .
In fact , studies suggest that more significantly than actual drug norms , an individual 's perception of the illicit drug use by friends and peers is highly associated with his or her own habits in substance use during both middle and high school , a relationship that increases in strength over time .
Whereas social influences on alcohol use and marijuana use tend to work directly in the short term , peer and friend norms on smoking cigarettes in middle school have a profound effect on one 's own likelihood to smoke cigarettes well into high school .
It should be noted that the legal coming of age often does not correspond with the sudden realization of autonomy ; many adolescents who have legally reached adult age are still dependent on their guardians or peers for emotional and financial support .
This sediment uplift was accompanied by igneous intrusions and volcanism .
The only anomalous area of West Antarctica is the Ellsworth Mountains region , where the stratigraphy is more similar to East Antarctica .
More surprising are small forms of life such as mudworms , sea cucumbers and free-swimming snails found in both polar oceans .
In addition , Shackleton himself and three other members of his expedition made several firsts in December 1908 -- February 1909 : they were the first humans to traverse the Ross Ice Shelf , the first to traverse the Transantarctic Mountains -LRB- via the Beardmore Glacier -RRB- , and the first to set foot on the South Polar Plateau .
One month later , the doomed Scott Expedition reached the pole .
Despite these new acts , unregulated and illegal fishing , particularly of Patagonian toothfish -LRB- marketed as Chilean Sea Bass in the U.S. -RRB- , remains a serious problem .
The number was predicted to increase to over 80,000 by 2010 .
Exploitation of all mineral resources is banned until 2048 by the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty .
Belgian polar explorer Alain Hubert stated : `` This base will be the first of its kind to produce zero emissions , making it a unique model of how energy should be used in the Antarctic . ''
However it is the outflow of the ice from the land to form the ice shelf which causes a rise in global sea level .
The flora of the continent largely consists of bryophytes .
Growth is restricted to a few weeks in the summer .
This was the first arms control agreement established during the Cold War .
The first confirmed sighting of Antarctica can be narrowed down to the crews of ships captained by three individuals .
This happened three days before Bransfield sighted land , and ten months before Palmer did so in November 1820 .
The first documented landing on Antarctica was by the American sealer John Davis , apparently at Hughes Bay , near Cape Charles , in West Antarctica on 7 February 1821 , although some historians dispute this claim .
Sand and silts were laid down in what is now the Ellsworth , Horlick and Pensacola Mountains .
During the Permian period , the land became dominated by seed plants such as Glossopteris , a pteridosperm which grew in swamps .
Over time these swamps became deposits of coal in the Transantarctic Mountains .
Towards the end of the Permian period , continued warming led to a dry , hot climate over much of Gondwana .
For comparison , Antarctica is nearly twice the size of Australia .
For comparison , this is 10.7 °C -LRB- 20 °F -RRB- colder than subliming dry ice at one atmosphere of partial pressure , but since CO2 only makes up 0.039 % of air , temperatures of less than − 150 °C -LRB- − 238 °F -RRB- would be needed to produce dry ice snow in Antarctica .
Temperatures reach a minimum of between − 80 °C -LRB- − 112 °F -RRB- and − 89.2 °C -LRB- − 128.6 °F -RRB- in the interior in winter and reach a maximum of between 5 °C -LRB- 41 °F -RRB- and 15 °C -LRB- 59 °F -RRB- near the coast in summer .
Given the latitude , long periods of constant darkness or constant sunlight create climates unfamiliar to human beings in much of the rest of the world .
This cooling has the effect of intensifying the westerly winds which flow around the continent -LRB- the polar vortex -RRB- and thus prevents outflow of the cold air near the South Pole .
Antarctic sea life includes penguins , blue whales , orcas , colossal squids and fur seals .
King penguins , chinstrap penguins , and gentoo penguins also breed in the Antarctic .
Antarctica contains many other mountains , on both the main continent and the surrounding islands .
Another well-known volcano is found on Deception Island , which is famous for a giant eruption in 1970 .
Minor eruptions are frequent and lava flow has been observed in recent years .
Other dormant volcanoes may potentially be active .
They proposed instead that a comprehensive regime to protect the Antarctic environment be negotiated in its place .
The Madrid Protocol bans all mining in Antarctica , designating Antarctica a `` natural reserve devoted to peace and science '' .
Ginkgo trees , conifers , bennettites , horsetails , ferns and cycads were plentiful during this period .
Ammonites were common in the seas around Antarctica , and dinosaurs were also present , though only three Antarctic dinosaur genera -LRB- Cryolophosaurus and Glacialisaurus , from the Hanson Formation , and Antarctopelta -RRB- have been described to date .
It was during this era that Gondwana began to break up .
Most of these meteorites have fallen onto the ice sheet in the last million years .
Motion of the ice sheet tends to concentrate the meteorites at blocking locations such as mountain ranges , with wind erosion bringing them to the surface after centuries beneath accumulated snowfall .
Next to the continental shore are many ice shelves .
These are floating extensions of outflowing glaciers from the continental ice mass .
Offshore , temperatures are also low enough that ice is formed from seawater through most of the year .
It is important to understand the various types of Antarctic ice to understand possible effects on sea levels and the implications of global cooling .
During the whaling era , which lasted until 1966 , the population of that island varied from over 1,000 in the summer -LRB- over 2,000 in some years -RRB- to some 200 in the winter .
The settlements included Grytviken , Leith Harbour , King Edward Point , Stromness , Husvik , Prince Olav Harbour , Ocean Harbour and Godthul .
Managers and other senior officers of the whaling stations often lived together with their families .
A study by Eric Steig published in 2009 noted for the first time that the continent-wide average surface temperature trend of Antarctica is slightly positive at > 0.05 °C -LRB- 0.09 °F -RRB- per decade from 1957 to 2006 .
This is partly offset by autumn cooling in East Antarctica .
The amount of surface warming in West Antarctica , while large , has not led to appreciable melting at the surface , and is not directly affecting the West Antarctic Ice Sheet 's contribution to sea level .
Although coal , hydrocarbons , iron ore , platinum , copper , chromium , nickel , gold and other minerals have been found , they have not been in large enough quantities to exploit .
The elapsed time since fall , or terrestrial residence age , of a meteorite represents more information that might be useful in environmental studies of Antarctic ice sheets .
The ice was being held back by a `` thread '' of ice about 6 km -LRB- 4 mi -RRB- wide , prior to its collapse on 5 April 2009 .
If all of this ice were melted , sea levels would rise about 60 m -LRB- 200 ft -RRB- .
In the dry valleys , the same effect occurs over a rock base , leading to a desiccated landscape .
If life is discovered in Lake Vostok , it would strengthen the argument for the possibility of life on Europa .
If found , these resilient creatures could further bolster the argument for extraterrestrial life in extremely cold , methane-rich environments .
During the Eocene -- Oligocene extinction event about 34 million years ago , CO2 levels have been found to be about 760 ppm and had been decreasing from earlier levels in the thousands of ppm .
Third , the Earth is at aphelion in July -LRB- i.e. , the Earth is farthest from the Sun in the Antarctic winter -RRB- , and the Earth is at perihelion in January -LRB- i.e. , the Earth is closest to the Sun in the Antarctic summer -RRB- .
In 1984 , Juan Pablo Camacho was born at the Frei Montalva Station , becoming the first Chilean born in Antarctica .
Several bases are now home to families with children attending schools at the station .
As of 2009 , eleven children were born in Antarctica -LRB- south of the 60th parallel south -RRB- : eight at the Argentine Esperanza Base and three at the Chilean Frei Montalva Station .
The apparently simple morphology , scarcely differentiated structures , metabolic systems and enzymes still active at very low temperatures , and reduced life cycles shown by such fungi make them particularly suited to harsh environments such as the McMurdo Dry Valleys .
In particular , their thick-walled and strongly melanized cells make them resistant to UV light .
Some of these fungi are also apparently endemic to Antarctica .
Endemic Antarctic fungi also include certain dung-inhabiting species which have had to evolve in response to the double challenge of extreme cold while growing on dung , and the need to survive passage through the gut of warm-blooded animals .
The Argentine , British and Chilean claims all overlap , and have caused friction .
Qantas resumed commercial overflights to Antarctica from Australia in the mid-1990s .
Researchers include biologists , geologists , oceanographers , physicists , astronomers , glaciologists , and meteorologists .
Medical physicians have made discoveries concerning the spreading of viruses and the body 's response to extreme seasonal temperatures .
Astrophysicists at Amundsen -- Scott South Pole Station study the celestial dome and cosmic microwave background radiation .
Before Mary 's conception , Anne had been barren and was far advanced in years .
According to gospel accounts , Mary was present at the Crucifixion of Jesus and is depicted as a member of the early Christian community in Jerusalem .
Whether the Virgin Mary died or not is not defined dogmatically , however , although a reference to the death of Mary are made in Munificentissimus Deus .
-LSB- Luke 2:39 -RSB-
-LSB- Num .1:7 & Ex .6:23 -RSB-
The adoption of the mother of Jesus as a virtual goddess may represent a reintroduction of aspects of the worship of Isis .
In fact , some scholars have gone even further , and have suggested , on the basis of this relationship , a direct link between the cult of Mary and that of Isis . ''
It has since been visited as the House of the Virgin Mary by Roman Catholic pilgrims who consider it the place where Mary lived until her assumption .
Devotions to artistic depictions of Mary vary among Christian traditions .
Others maintain that Luther in later years changed his position on the Immaculate Conception , which , at that time was undefined in the Church , maintaining however the sinlessness of Mary throughout her life .
For Luther , early in his life , the Assumption of Mary was an understood fact , although he later stated that the Bible did not say anything about it and stopped celebrating its feast .
Important to him was the belief that Mary and the saints do live on after death .
`` Throughout his career as a priest-professor-reformer , Luther preached , taught , and argued about the veneration of Mary with a verbosity that ranged from childlike piety to sophisticated polemics .
His views are intimately linked to his Christocentric theology and its consequences for liturgy and piety . ''
Luther , while revering Mary , came to criticize the `` Papists '' for blurring the line , between high admiration of the grace of God wherever it is seen in a human being , and religious service given to another creature .
He considered the Roman Catholic practice of celebrating saints ' days and making intercessory requests addressed especially to Mary and other departed saints to be idolatry .
Differences in feasts may also originate from doctrinal issues -- the Feast of the Assumption is such an example .
Given that there is no agreement among all Christians on the circumstances of the death , Dormition or Assumption of Mary , the feast of assumption is celebrated among some denominations and not others .
Beyond a painter 's retainer , patrons were expected to purchase any gold or lapis lazuli to be used in the painting .
Hence , it was an expression of devotion and glorification to swathe the Virgin in gowns of blue .
Since Nontrinitarian churches are typically also mortalist , the issue of praying to Mary , whom they would consider `` asleep '' , awaiting resurrection , does not arise .
These state beliefs in both the Immaculate Conception of Mary and the Virgin birth of Jesus .
It mentions how Mary was informed by an angel that she would become the mother of Jesus through the actions of God alone .
Orthodox Christianity includes a large number of traditions regarding the Ever Virgin Mary , the Theotokos .
Although Calvin and Huldrych Zwingli honored Mary as the Mother of God in the 16th century , they did so less than Martin Luther .
In Methodism , Mary is honored as the Mother of God .
Contemporary Methodism does hold that Mary was a virgin before , during , and immediately after the birth of Christ .
In addition , some Methodists also hold the doctrine of the Assumption of Mary as a pious opinion .
How far Celsus sourced his view from Jewish sources remains a subject of discussion .
Mary had been venerated since Early Christianity , and is considered by millions to be the most meritorious saint of the religion .
There is significant diversity in the Marian beliefs and devotional practices of major Christian traditions .
The Roman Catholic Church holds distinctive Marian dogmas ; namely her status as the mother of God ; her Immaculate Conception ; her perpetual virginity ; and her Assumption into heaven .
Let it be done unto me according to your word . ''
-LSB- Mt 1:18 -25 -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The authors of the Gospels of Matthew and Luke consider Jesus ' conception not the result of intercourse and assert that Mary had `` no relations with man '' before Jesus ' birth .
Catholic teachings make clear that Mary is not considered divine and prayers to her are not answered by her , they are answered by God .
The views of the Church Fathers still play an important role in the shaping of Orthodox Marian perspective .
However , the Orthodox views on Mary are mostly doxological , rather than academic : they are expressed in hymns , praise , liturgical poetry and the veneration of icons .
A number of Orthodox feasts are connected with the miraculous icons of the Theotokos .
Mary 's special position within God 's purpose of salvation as `` God-bearer '' -LRB- Theotokos -RRB- is recognised in a number of ways by some Anglican Christians .
All the member churches of the Anglican Communion affirm in the historic creeds that Jesus was born of the Virgin Mary , and celebrates the feast days of the Presentation of Christ in the Temple .
The feast of the St. Mary the Virgin is observed on the traditional day of the Assumption , August 15 .
The Nativity of the Blessed Virgin is kept on September 8 .
Therefore , there is virtually no Marian veneration , Marian feasts , Marian pilgrimages , Marian art , Marian music or Marian spirituality in today 's Protestant communities .
The statement that Joseph `` knew her not till she brought forth her first born son '' -LRB- Matthew 1:25 DouayRheims -RRB- has been debated among scholars , with some saying that she did not remain a virgin and some saying that she was a perpetual virgin .
The hagiography of Mary and the Holy Family can be contrasted with other material in the Gospels .
These references include an incident which can be interpreted as Jesus rejecting his family in the New Testament : `` And his mother and his brothers arrived , and standing outside , they sent in a message asking for him ... And looking at those who sat in a circle around him , Jesus said , ` These are my mother and my brothers .
Although the Catholics and the Orthodox may honor and venerate Mary , they do not view her as divine , nor do they worship her .
Roman Catholics view Mary as subordinate to Christ , but uniquely so , in that she is seen as above all other creatures .
However , she is not considered a `` substitute for the One Mediator '' who is Christ .
`` Let Mary be in honor , but let worship be given to the Lord '' , he wrote .
Similarly , Catholics do not worship Mary as a divine being , but rather `` hyper-venerate '' her .
The Council stated that the Church Fathers `` did not hesitate to speak of the holy Virgin as the Mother of God '' .
Zachariah placed Mary on the third step of the altar , whereby God gave her grace .
At that point an angel told Zachariah to betroth Mary to a widower in Israel , who would be indicated .
This story provides the theme of many hymns for the Feast of Presentation of Mary , and icons of the feast depict the story .
The Orthodox believe that Mary was instrumental in the growth of Christianity during the life of Jesus , and after his Crucifixion , and Orthodox Theologian Sergei Bulgakov wrote : `` The Virgin Mary is the center , invisible , but real , of the Apostolic Church . ''
According to author Shabbir Akhtar , the Islamic perspective on Mary 's Immaculate Conception is compatible with the Catholic doctrine of the same topic .
Do not go beyond the bounds in your religion , and do not say anything of Allah but the truth .
Give up -LRB- this assertion -RRB- â $ '' -LRB- it is -RRB- for your own good -LRB- to do so -RRB- .
Allah is but One Allah ; All-Glorified He is in that He is absolutely above having a son .
To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth .
And Allah suffices as the One to be relied on , to Whom affairs should be referred . ''
Quran 4/171
The issue of the parentage of Jesus in the Talmud affects also the view of his mother .
However the Talmud does not mention Mary by name and is considerate rather than only polemic .
Melbourne has an extensive transport network .
of their land .
An extensive radial railway network centred on Melbourne and spreading out across the suburbs and into the countryside was established from the late 1850s .
Further major public buildings were begun in the 1860s and 1870s such as the Supreme Court , Government House , and the Queen Victoria Market .
The central city filled up with shops and offices , workshops , and warehouses .
Large banks and hotels faced the main streets , with fine townhouses in the east end of Collins Street , contrasting with tiny cottages down laneways within the blocks .
The name `` Melbourne '' refers to the area of urban agglomeration -LRB- as well as a census statistical division -RRB- spanning 9,900 km2 -LRB- 3,800 sq mi -RRB- which comprises the broader metropolitan area , as well as being the common name for its city centre .
In the aftermath of the Eureka Stockade , mass public support for the plight of the miners resulted in major political changes to the colony , including changes to working conditions across local industries including mining , agriculture and manufacturing .
Melbourne is also prone to isolated convective showers forming when a cold pool crosses the state , especially if there is considerable daytime heating .
These showers are often heavy and can contain hail and squalls and significant drops in temperature , but they pass through very quickly at times with a rapid clearing trend to sunny and relatively calm weather and the temperature rising back to what it was before the shower .
While snow is occasionally seen at higher elevations in the outskirts of the city , it has not been recorded in the Central Business District since 1986 .
It has an observation deck near the top from where you can see above all of Melbourne 's structures .
Since the mid-1990s , Melbourne has maintained significant population and employment growth .
These factors have led to population growth and further suburban expansion through the 2000s .
Subdivision regularly occurs in the outer areas of Melbourne , with numerous developers offering house and land packages .
However , after 10 years -LSB- when ? -RSB-
Founded by free settlers from the British Crown colony of Van Diemen 's Land on 30 August 1835 , in what was then the colony of New South Wales , it was incorporated as a Crown settlement in 1837 .
During the Victorian gold rush of the 1850s , it was transformed into one of the world 's largest and wealthiest cities .
Much of the vegetation within the city are non-native species , most of European origin , and in many cases plays host to invasive species and noxious weeds .
Significant introduced urban pests include the common myna , feral pigeon , brown rat , European wasp , common starling and red fox .
Many outlying suburbs , particularly towards the Yarra Valley and the hills to the north-east and east , have gone for extended periods without regenerative fires leading to a lack of saplings and undergrowth in urbanised native bushland .
The Department of Sustainability and Environment partially addresses this problem by regularly burning off .
Several national parks have been designated around the urban area of Melbourne , including the Mornington Peninsula National Park , Port Phillip Heads Marine National Park and Point Nepean National Park in the south east , Organ Pipes National Park to the north and Dandenong Ranges National Park to the east .
There are also a number of significant state parks just outside Melbourne .
Air pollution , by world standards , is classified as being good .
Summer and autumn are the worst times of year for atmospheric haze in the urban area .
Batman selected a site on the northern bank of the Yarra River , declaring that `` this will be the place for a village '' .
Batman then returned to Launceston in Tasmania .
In early August 1835 a different group of settlers , including John Pascoe Fawkner , left Launceston on the ship Enterprize .
Fawkner was forced to disembark at Georgetown , Tasmania , because of outstanding debts .
The remainder of the party continued and arrived at the mouth of the Yarra River on 15 August 1835 .
On 30 August 1835 the party disembarked and established a settlement at the site of the current Melbourne Immigration Museum .
Melbourne 's rich and diverse literary history was recognised in 2008 when it became the second UNESCO City of Literature .
The State Library of Victoria is one of Australia 's oldest cultural institutions and one of many public and university libraries across the city .
Melbourne also has Australia 's widest range of bookstores , as well the nation 's largest publishing sector .
Several major literary prizes are open to local writers including the Melbourne Prize for Literature and the Victorian Premier 's Literary Awards .
As a result of the boom , large commercial buildings , coffee palaces , terrace housing and palatial mansions proliferated in the city .
This period also saw the expansion of a major radial rail-based transport network .
It is a leading financial centre in the Asia-Pacific region , and ranks among the top 30 cities in the world in the Global Financial Centres Index .
It is recognised as a UNESCO City of Literature and a major centre for street art , music and theatre .
Some of Australia 's most prominent and well known schools are based in Melbourne .
New fire regulations and redevelopment saw most of the taller pre-war CBD buildings either demolished or partially retained through a policy of facadism .
The city is home to three major annual international sporting events : the Australian Open -LRB- one of the four Grand Slam tennis tournaments -RRB- ; the Melbourne Cup -LRB- horse racing -RRB- ; and the Australian Grand Prix -LRB- Formula One -RRB- .
Also , the Australian Masters golf tournament is held at Melbourne since 1979 , having been co-sanctioned by the European Tour from 2006 to 2009 .
The city is home to the National Sports Museum , which until 2003 was located outside the members pavilion at the Melbourne Cricket Ground .
Batman 's Treaty with the Aborigines was annulled by the New South Wales governor -LRB- who at the time governed all of eastern mainland Australia -RRB- , with compensation paid to members of the association .
However , later that year the settlement was named `` Melbourne '' after the British Prime Minister , William Lamb , 2nd Viscount Melbourne , whose seat was Melbourne Hall in the market town of Melbourne , Derbyshire .
From 2006 , the growth of the city extended into `` green wedges '' and beyond the city 's urban growth boundary .
The city has carved out a niche as Australia 's leading centre for superannuation -LRB- pension -RRB- funds , with 40 % of the total , and 65 % of industry super-funds including the $ 109 billion-dollar Federal Government Future Fund .
The city was rated 41st within the top 50 financial cities as surveyed by the MasterCard Worldwide Centers of Commerce Index -LRB- 2008 -RRB- , second only to Sydney -LRB- 12th -RRB- in Australia .
Melbourne is Australia 's second-largest industrial centre .
It is the Australian base for a number of significant manufacturers including Boeing , truck-makers Kenworth and Iveco , Cadbury as well as Bombardier Transportation and Jayco , among many others .
It is also home to a wide variety of other manufacturers , ranging from petrochemicals and pharmaceuticals to fashion garments , paper manufacturing and food processing .
These areas were rapidly filled from the mid 1850s by the ubiquitous terrace house , as well as detached houses and some grand mansions in large grounds , while some of the major roads developed as shopping streets .
Melbourne quickly became a major finance centre , home to several banks , the Royal Mint , and Australia 's first stock exchange in 1861 .
Several programs are being implemented to minimise beach and river pollution .
To counter the trend towards low-density suburban residential growth , the government began a series of controversial public housing projects in the inner city by the Housing Commission of Victoria , which resulted in demolition of many neighbourhoods and a proliferation of high-rise towers .
It remains a prominent Melbourne landmark and meeting place .
The city has rail connections with regional Victorian cities , as well as direct interstate rail services to Sydney and Adelaide and beyond which depart from Melbourne 's other major rail terminus , Southern Cross Station in Spencer Street .
Many rail lines , along with dedicated lines and rail yards are also used for freight .
RMIT University was also ranked among the top 51 -- 100 universities in the world in the subjects of : accounting , Business and Management , communication and media studies , computer science and information systems .
The Swinburne University of Technology , based in the inner city Melbourne suburb of Hawthorn is ranked 76 -- 100 in the world for Physics by the Academic Ranking of World Universities making Swinburne the only Australian university outside the Group of Eight to achieve a top 100 rating in a science discipline .
In recent years , the number of international students at Melbourne 's universities has risen rapidly , a result of an increasing number of places being made available to full fee paying students .
There is an abundance of parks and gardens in Melbourne , many close to the CBD with a variety of common and rare plant species amid landscaped vistas , pedestrian pathways and tree-lined avenues .
Melbourne 's parks are often considered the best public parks in all of Australia 's major cities .
There are also many parks in the surrounding suburbs of Melbourne , such as in the municipalities of Stonnington , Boroondara and Port Phillip , south east of the central business district .
Overall , Melbourne is , owing to the rain shadow of the Otway Ranges , nonetheless drier than average for southern Victoria .
Within the city and surrounds , however , rainfall varies widely , from around 425 millimetres -LRB- 17 in -RRB- at Little River to 1,250 millimetres -LRB- 49 in -RRB- on the eastern fringe at Gembrook .
These include services which are associated with local government in other countries and include public transport , main roads , traffic control , policing , education above preschool level , health and planning of major infrastructure projects .
The state government retains the right to override certain local government decisions , including urban planning , and Melburnian issues often feature prominently in state election .
Office , commercial and public developments in the adjoining districts of Southbank and Docklands have made these redeveloped areas into extensions of the CBD in all but name .
The city is recognised for its mix of modern architecture which intersects with an extensive range of nineteenth and early twentieth century buildings .
It is considered the spiritual home of the two sports in Australia .
The origins of Australian rules football can be traced to matches played next to the MCG in 1858 .
Additionally , the city annually hosts the AFL Grand Final .
Ship transport is an important component of Melbourne 's transport system .
CSL , one of the world 's top five biotech companies , and Sigma Pharmaceuticals have their headquarters in Melbourne .
The two are the largest listed Australian pharmaceutical companies .
Melbourne has been attracting an increasing share of domestic and international conference markets .
Construction began in February 2006 of a $ 1 billion 5000-seat international convention centre , Hilton Hotel and commercial precinct adjacent to the Melbourne Exhibition and Convention Centre to link development along the Yarra River with the Southbank precinct and multibillion-dollar Docklands redevelopment .
In recent years , Melton , Wyndham and Casey , part of the Melbourne statistical division , have recorded the highest growth rate of all local government areas in Australia .
Another study claims that Melbourne will surpass Sydney in population by 2040 .
The Melbourne Arts Precinct in Southbank is home to Arts Centre Melbourne , which includes the State Theatre , Hamer Hall , the Playhouse and the Fairfax Studio .
Each station -LRB- excluding C31 -RRB- broadcasts a primary channel and several multichannels .
Rowing is also a large part of Melbourne 's sporting identity , with a number of clubs located on the Yarra River , out of which many Australian Olympians trained .
The early 20th century saw an increase in popularity of automobiles , resulting in large-scale suburban expansion .
By the mid 1950s there was just under 200 passenger vehicles per 1000 people by 2013 there was 600 passenger vehicles per 1000 people .
Today it has an extensive network of freeways and arterial roadways used by private vehicles including freight as well as public transport systems including bus and taxis .
The airport is home base for passenger airlines Jetstar Airways and Tiger Airways Australia and cargo airlines Australian air Express and Toll Priority ; and is a major hub for Qantas and Virgin Australia .
Avalon Airport , located between Melbourne and Geelong , is a secondary hub of Jetstar .
It is also used as a freight and maintenance facility .
Air Ambulance facilities are available for domestic and international transportation of patients .
Melbourne also has a significant general aviation airport , Moorabbin Airport in the city 's south east that also handles a small number of passenger flights .
Essendon Airport , which was once the city 's main airport also handles passenger flights , general aviation and some cargo flights .
Melbourne has an integrated public transport system based around extensive train , tram , bus and taxi systems .
Despite privatisation and successive governments persisting with auto-centric urban development into the 21st century , there have since been large increases in public transport patronage , with the mode share for commuters increasing to 14.8 % and 8.4 % of all trips .
Since 2006 public transport patronage has grown by over 20 % .
The organisation is also responsible for management of sewerage and the major water catchments in the region as well as the Wonthaggi desalination plant and North -- South Pipeline .
Water is stored in a series of reservoirs located within and outside the Greater Melbourne area .
At the time of Australia 's federation on 1 January 1901 , Melbourne became the seat of government of the federation .
Major projects included the construction of a new facility for the Melbourne Museum , Federation Square , the Melbourne Exhibition and Convention Centre , Crown Casino and the CityLink tollway .
Other strategies included the privatisation of some of Melbourne 's services , including power and public transport , and a reduction in funding to public services such as health , education and public transport infrastructure .
The city reaches south-east through Dandenong to the growth corridor of Pakenham towards West Gippsland , and southward through the Dandenong Creek valley , the Mornington Peninsula and the city of Frankston taking in the peaks of Olivers Hill , Mount Martha and Arthurs Seat , extending along the shores of Port Phillip as a single conurbation to reach the exclusive suburb of Portsea and Point Nepean .
In the west , it extends along the Maribyrnong River and its tributaries north towards Sunbury and the foothills of the Macedon Ranges , and along the flat volcanic plain country towards Melton in the west , Werribee at the foothills of the You Yangs granite ridge south west of the CBD .
Like many urban environments , the city faces significant environmental issues , many of them relating to the city 's large urban footprint and urban sprawl and the demand for infrastructure and services .
One such issue is water usage , drought and low rainfall .
Both projects are being conducted under controversial Public-Private Partnerships and a multitude of independent reports have found that neither project is required to supply water to the city and that Sustainable Water Management is the best solution .
In the meantime , the drought must be weathered .
Melbourne is an international cultural centre , with cultural endeavours spanning major events and festivals , drama , musicals , comedy , music , art , architecture , literature , film and television .
The 1970s saw the rise of the Australian New Wave and its Ozploitation offshoot , instigated by Melbourne-based productions Stork and Alvin Purple .
Picnic at Hanging Rock and Mad Max , both shot in and around Melbourne , achieved worldwide acclaim .
2004 saw the construction of Melbourne 's largest film and television studio complex , Docklands Studios Melbourne , which has hosted many domestic productions , as well as international features .
Melbourne is also home to the headquarters of Village Roadshow Pictures , Australia 's largest film production company .
Famous modern day actors from Melbourne include Cate Blanchett , Rachel Griffiths , Guy Pearce , Geoffrey Rush and Eric Bana .
Victorian terrace housing , townhouses and historic Italianate , Tudor revival and Neo-Georgian mansions are all common in neighbourhoods such as Toorak .
Melbourne 's suburbs also have the Head Offices of Wesfarmers companies Coles -LRB- including Liquorland -RRB- , Bunnings , Target , K-Mart & Officeworks .
Melbourne Airport provides an entry point for national and international visitors , and is Australia 's second busiest airport .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The city also features substantial Indian , Sri Lankan , and Malaysian-born communities , in addition to recent South African and Sudanese influxes .
The cultural diversity is reflected in the city 's restaurants that serve international cuisines .
Melbourne universities have campuses all over Australia and some internationally .
The 2012 -- 2013 Times Higher Education Supplement ranked the University of Melbourne as the 28th -LRB- 30th by QS ranking -RRB- best university in the world .
Monash University was ranked as the 99th -LRB- 60th by QS ranking -RRB- best university in the world .
A long list of AM and FM radio stations broadcast to greater Melbourne .
These include `` public '' -LRB- i.e. , state-owned ABC and SBS -RRB- and community stations .
Many commercial stations are networked-owned : DMG has Nova 100 and Smooth ; ARN controls Gold 104.3 and KIIS 101.1 ; and Southern Cross Austereo runs both Fox and Triple M. Stations from towns in regional Victoria may also be heard -LRB- e.g. 93.9 Bay FM , Geelong -RRB- .
Light FM is a contemporary Christian station .
AM stations include ABC : 774 , Radio National , and News Radio ; also Fairfax affiliates 3AW -LRB- talk -RRB- and Magic -LRB- easy listening -RRB- .
Melbourne has many community run stations that serve alternative interests , such as 3CR and 3KND -LRB- Indigenous -RRB- .
Many suburbs have low powered community run stations serving local audiences .
Around 80 per cent of Melbourne 's tram network shares road space with other vehicles , while the rest of the network is separated or are light rail routes .
Melbourne 's trams are recognised as iconic cultural assets and a tourist attraction .
Heritage trams operate on the free City Circle route , intended for visitors to Melbourne , and heritage restaurant trams travel through the city and surrounding areas during the evening .
Melbourne is currently building 50 new E Class trams with some already in service in 2014 .
The E Class trams are about 30 metres long and are superior to the C2 class tram of similar length .
Henry had inherited significant territories along the Atlantic seaboard -- Anjou , Normandy and England -- and expanded his empire by conquering Brittany .
The result was the Angevin Empire , named after Henry 's paternal title as Count of Anjou and , more specifically , its seat in Angers .
-LSB- nb 2 -RSB- The Empire , however , was inherently fragile : although all the lands owed allegiance to Henry , the disparate parts each had their own histories , traditions and governance structures .
As one moved south through Anjou and Aquitaine , the extent of Henry 's power in the provinces diminished considerably , scarcely resembling the modern concept of an empire at all .
Some of the traditional ties between parts of the empire such as Normandy and England were slowly dissolving over time .
It was unclear what would happen to the empire on Henry 's death .
Although the custom of primogeniture , under which an eldest son would inherit all his father 's lands , was slowly becoming more widespread across Europe , it was less popular amongst the Norman kings of England .
Most believed that Henry would divide the empire , giving each son a substantial portion , and hoping that his children would continue to work together as allies after his death .
To complicate matters , much of the Angevin empire was held by Henry only as a vassal of the King of France of the rival line of the House of Capet .
Eleanor , irritated by her husband 's persistent interference in Aquitaine , encouraged Richard and Geoffrey to join their brother Henry in Paris .
Henry II triumphed over the coalition of his sons , but was generous to them in the peace settlement agreed at Montlouis .
Richard appears to have started to recognise John as his heir presumptive in the final years before his death , but the matter was not clear-cut and medieval law gave little guidance as to how the competing claims should be decided .
With Norman law favouring John as the only surviving son of Henry II and Angevin law favouring Arthur as the only son of Henry 's elder son , the matter rapidly became an open conflict .
Arthur was supported by the majority of the Breton , Maine and Anjou nobles and received the support of Philip II , who remained committed to breaking up the Angevin territories on the continent .
Although John was the Count of Poitou and therefore the rightful feudal lord over the Lusignans , they could legitimately appeal John 's actions in France to his own feudal lord , Philip .
John was unwilling to weaken his authority in western France in this way .
He argued that he need not attend Philip 's court because of his special status as the Duke of Normandy , who was exempt by feudal tradition from being called to the French court .
When John still refused to come , Philip declared John in breach of his feudal responsibilities , reassigned all of John 's lands that fell under the French crown to Arthur -- with the exception of Normandy , which he took back for himself -- and began a fresh war against John .
The nature of government under the Angevin monarchs was ill-defined and uncertain .
There was as yet no model for what should happen if a king refused to do so .
Despite his claim to unique authority within England , John would sometimes justify his actions on the basis that he had taken council with the barons .
The resulting social pressures were complicated by bursts of deflation that resulted from John 's military campaigns .
It was usual at the time for the king to collect taxes in silver , which was then re-minted into new coins ; these coins would then be put in barrels and sent to royal castles around the country , to be used to hire mercenaries or to meet other costs .
At those times when John was preparing for campaigns in Normandy , for example , huge quantities of silver had to be withdrawn from the economy and stored for months , which unintentionally resulted in periods during which silver coins were simply hard to come by , commercial credit difficult to acquire and deflationary pressure placed on the economy .
The result was political unrest across the country .
Following the failed rebellion of his elder brothers between 1173 and 1174 , however , John became Henry 's favourite child .
Despite this , after Richard died in 1199 , John was proclaimed King of England , and came to an agreement with Philip II of France to recognise John 's possession of the continental Angevin lands at the peace treaty of Le Goulet in 1200 .
John married Isabella whilst she was relatively young -- her exact date of birth is uncertain , and estimates place her between at most 15 and more probably towards nine years old at the time of her marriage .
-LSB- nb 15 -RSB- Even by the standards of the time , Isabella was married whilst very young .
Vincent concluded that the marriage was not a particularly `` amicable '' one .
Other aspects of their marriage suggest a closer , more positive relationship .
In contrast to Vincent , historian William Chester Jordan concludes that the pair were a `` companionable couple '' who had a successful marriage by the standards of the day .
John spent much of the next decade attempting to regain these lands , raising huge revenues , reforming his armed forces and rebuilding continental alliances .
John 's judicial reforms had a lasting impact on the English common law system , as well as providing an additional source of revenue .
John 's attempt to defeat Philip in 1214 failed due to the French victory over John 's allies at the battle of Bouvines .
When he returned to England , John faced a rebellion by many of his barons , who were unhappy with his fiscal policies and his treatment of many of England 's most powerful nobles .
Civil war broke out shortly afterwards , with the barons aided by Louis of France .
It soon descended into a stalemate .
After a successful campaign against Alfonso , John headed north again , taking the city of Angers .
During John 's early years , Henry attempted to resolve the question of his succession .
He enjoyed gambling , in particular at backgammon , and was an enthusiastic hunter , even by medieval standards .
He liked music , although not songs .
-LSB- nb 3 -RSB-
The Norman and Angevin kings had traditionally exercised a great deal of power over the church within their territories .
From the 1040s onwards , however , successive popes had put forward a reforming message that emphasised the importance of the church being `` governed more coherently and more hierarchically from the centre '' and established `` its own sphere of authority and jurisdiction , separate from and independent of that of the lay ruler '' , in the words of historian Richard Huscroft .
After the 1140s , these principles had been largely accepted within the English church , albeit with an element of concern about centralising authority in Rome .
These changes brought the customary rights of lay rulers such as John over ecclesiastical appointments into question .
Henry had tried to have John officially proclaimed King of Ireland , but Pope Lucius III would not agree .
John 's first period of rule in Ireland was not a success .
Ireland had only recently been conquered by Anglo-Norman forces , and tensions were still rife between Henry II , the new settlers and the existing inhabitants .
Richard refused to give up Aquitaine ; Henry II was furious and ordered John , with help from Geoffrey , to march south and retake the duchy by force .
The two attacked the capital of Poitiers , and Richard responded by attacking Brittany .
This resolution produced mixed responses .
Although some chroniclers felt that John had been humiliated by the sequence of events , there was little public reaction .
Innocent benefited from the resolution of his long-standing English problem , but John probably gained more , as Innocent became a firm supporter of John for the rest of his reign , backing him in both domestic and continental policy issues .
Innocent immediately turned against Philip , calling upon him to reject plans to invade England and to sue for peace .
John paid some of the compensation money he had promised the church , but he ceased making payments in late 1214 , leaving two-thirds of the sum unpaid ; Innocent appears to have conveniently forgotten this debt for the good of the wider relationship .
The political turmoil continued .
John hoped to acquire Normandy , Anjou and the other lands in France held by Richard in exchange for allying himself with Philip .
John was persuaded not to pursue an alliance by his mother .
Longchamp , who had left England after Walter 's intervention , now returned , and argued that he had been wrongly removed as justiciar .
John intervened , suppressing Longchamp 's claims in return for promises of support from the royal administration , including a reaffirmation of his position as heir to the throne .
John seized the opportunity and went to Paris , where he formed an alliance with Philip .
He agreed to set aside his wife , Isabella of Gloucester , and marry Philip 's sister , Alys , in exchange for Philip 's support .
Fighting broke out in England between forces loyal to Richard and those being gathered by John .
John retreated to Normandy , where Richard finally found him later that year .
Richard declared that his younger brother -- despite being 27 years old -- was merely `` a child who has had evil counsellors '' and forgave him , but removed his lands with the exception of Ireland .
The political situation in England rapidly began to deteriorate .
John exploited this unpopularity to set himself up as an alternative ruler with his own royal court , complete with his own justiciar , chancellor and other royal posts , and was happy to be portrayed as an alternative regent , and possibly the next king .
John 's position was undermined by Walter 's relative popularity and by the news that Richard had married whilst in Cyprus , which presented the possibility that Richard would have legitimate children and heirs .
Letters of support from the pope arrived in April but by then the rebel barons had organised .
This self-proclaimed `` Army of God '' marched on London , taking the capital as well as Lincoln and Exeter .
John 's efforts to appear moderate and conciliatory had been largely successful , but once the rebels held London they attracted a fresh wave of defectors from John 's royalist faction .
In order to remarry , John first needed to abandon Isabel , Countess of Gloucester , his first wife ; John accomplished this by arguing that he had failed to get the necessary papal permission to marry Isabel in the first place -- as a cousin , John could not have legally wed her without this .
It remains unclear why John chose to marry Isabella of Angoulême .
Contemporary chroniclers argued that John had fallen deeply in love with Isabella , and John may have been motivated by desire for an apparently beautiful , if rather young , girl .
-LSB- nb 5 -RSB-
The powerful Anjou nobleman William des Roches was persuaded to switch sides from Arthur to John ; suddenly the balance seemed to be tipping away from Philip and Arthur in favour of John .
Neither side was keen to continue the conflict , and following a papal truce the two leaders met in January 1200 to negotiate possible terms for peace .
From John 's perspective , what then followed represented an opportunity to stabilise control over his continental possessions and produce a lasting peace with Philip in Paris .
-LSB- nb 4 -RSB- John , in turn , abandoned Richard 's former policy of containing Philip through alliances with Flanders and Boulogne , and accepted Philip 's right as the legitimate feudal overlord of John 's lands in France .
Philip may have provided him with private support but refused to openly support Louis , who was excommunicated by Innocent for taking part in the war against John .
Louis ' planned arrival in England presented a significant problem for John , as the prince would bring with him naval vessels and siege engines essential to the rebel cause .
Further desertions of John 's local allies at the beginning of 1203 steadily reduced John 's freedom to manoeuvre in the region .
As the situation became worse for John , he appears to have decided to have Arthur killed , with the aim of removing his potential rival and of undermining the rebel movement in Brittany .
After this , Arthur 's fate remains uncertain , but modern historians believe he was murdered by John .
The annals of Margam Abbey suggest that `` John had captured Arthur and kept him alive in prison for some time in the castle of Rouen ... when John was drunk he slew Arthur with his own hand and tying a heavy stone to the body cast it into the Seine . ''
-LSB- nb 7 -RSB- Rumours of the manner of Arthur 's death further reduced support for John across the region .
De Roches was a powerful Anjou noble , but John largely ignored him , causing considerable offence , whilst the king kept the rebel leaders in such bad conditions that twenty-two of them died .
At this time most of the regional nobility were closely linked through kinship , and this behaviour towards their relatives was regarded as unacceptable .
-LSB- nb 6 -RSB-
The civil war continued until royalist victories at the battles of Lincoln and Dover in 1217 .
The Angevin kings had three main sources of income available to them , namely revenue from their personal lands , or demesne ; money raised through their rights as a feudal lord ; and revenue from taxation .
Revenue from the royal demesne was inflexible and had been diminishing slowly since the Norman conquest .
English kings had widespread feudal rights which could be used to generate income , including the scutage system , in which feudal military service was avoided by a cash payment to the king .
John intensified his efforts to maximise all possible sources of income , to the extent that he has been described as `` avaricious , miserly , extortionate and moneyminded '' .
John also used revenue generation as a way of exerting political control over the barons : debts owed to the crown by the king 's favoured supporters might be forgiven ; collection of those owed by enemies was more stringently enforced .
Several new processes had been introduced to English law under Henry II , including novel disseisin and mort d'ancestor .
These processes meant the royal courts had a more significant role in local law cases , which had previously been dealt with only by regional or local lords .
John worked extremely hard to ensure that this system operated well , through judges he had appointed , by fostering legal specialists and expertise , and by intervening in cases himself .
John continued to try relatively minor cases , even during military crises .
Viewed positively , Lewis Warren considers that John discharged `` his royal duty of providing justice ... with a zeal and a tirelessness to which the English common law is greatly endebted '' .
Nonetheless , these changes were popular with many free tenants , who acquired a more reliable legal system that could bypass the barons , against whom such cases were often brought .
John 's reforms were less popular with the barons themselves , especially as they remained subject to arbitrary and frequently vindictive royal justice .
The use of recorded evidence was combined with an increased scepticism about two of the most colourful chroniclers of John 's reign , Roger of Wendover and Matthew Paris .
In many cases the detail provided by these chroniclers , both writing after John 's death , was challenged by modern historians .
Interpretations of Magna Carta and the role of the rebel barons in 1215 have been significantly revised : although the charter 's symbolic , constitutional value for later generations is unquestionable , in the context of John 's reign most historians now consider it a failed peace agreement between `` partisan '' factions .
There has been increasing debate about the nature of John 's Irish policies .
The most infamous case , which went beyond anything considered acceptable at the time , proved to be that of William de Braose , a powerful marcher lord with lands in Ireland .
John 's suspicions and jealousies meant that he rarely enjoyed good relationships with even the leading loyalist barons .
From Henry II onwards , ira et malevolentia had come to describe the right of the king to express his anger and displeasure at particular barons or clergy , building on the Norman concept of malevoncia -- royal ill-will .
When the threat of invasion faded , John formed a large military force in England intended for Poitou , and a large fleet with soldiers under his own command intended for Normandy .
John built up a strong team of engineers for siege warfare and a substantial force of professional crossbowmen .
The king was supported by a team of leading barons with military expertise , including William Longespée , William the Marshal , Roger de Lacy and , until he fell from favour , the marcher lord William de Braose .
Strategically , John faced several challenges : England itself had to be secured against possible French invasion , the sea-routes to Bordeaux needed to be secured following the loss of the land route to Aquitaine , and his remaining possessions in Aquitaine needed to be secured following the death of his mother , Eleanor , in April 1204 .
Ideally , this plan would benefit from the opening of a second front on Philip 's eastern frontiers with Flanders and Boulogne -- effectively a re-creation of Richard 's old strategy of applying pressure from Germany .
All of this would require a great deal of money and soldiers .
He drew on the country for resources to fight his war with Philip on the continent .
Conflict continued in Ireland between the Anglo-Norman settlers and the indigenous Irish chieftains , with John manipulating both groups to expand his wealth and power in the country .
John stopped short of trying to actively enforce this charter on the native Irish kingdoms , but historian David Carpenter suspects that he might have done so , had the baronial conflict in England not intervened .
Simmering tensions remained with the native Irish leaders even after John left for England .
This had been rescinded by Richard I in exchange for financial compensation in 1189 , but the relationship remained uneasy .
John began his reign by reasserting his sovereignty over the disputed northern counties .
He refused William 's request for the earldom of Northumbria , but did not intervene in Scotland itself and focused on his continental problems .
The two kings maintained a friendly relationship , meeting in 1206 and 1207 , until it was rumoured in 1209 that William was intending to ally himself with Philip II of France .
This effectively crippled William 's power north of the border , and by 1212 John had to intervene militarily to support the Scottish king against his internal rivals .
-LSB- nb 16 -RSB- John made no efforts to reinvigorate the Treaty of Falaise , though , and both William and Alexander remained independent kings , supported by , but not owing fealty to , John .
He responded by attempting to punish Innocent personally and to drive a wedge between those English clergy that might support him and those allying themselves firmly with the authorities in Rome .
In many cases , individual institutions were able to negotiate terms for managing their own properties and keeping the produce of their estates .
By 1209 the situation showed no signs of resolution , and Innocent threatened to excommunicate John if he did not acquiesce to Langton 's appointment .
Although theoretically a significant blow to John 's legitimacy , this did not appear to greatly worry the king .
Two of John 's close allies , Emperor Otto IV and Count Raymond VI of Toulouse , had already suffered the same punishment themselves , and the significance of excommunication had been somewhat devalued .
Official figures suggest that around 14 % of annual income from the English church was being appropriated by John each year .
John was incensed about what he perceived as an abrogation of his customary right as monarch to influence the election .
Innocent set a commission in place to try to convince John to change his mind , but to no avail .
The first part of the campaign went well , with John outmanoeuvring the forces under the command of Prince Louis and retaking the county of Anjou by the end of June .
John arrived back in England in October .
John 's plan was to split Philip 's forces by pushing north-east from Poitou towards Paris , whilst Otto , Renaud and Ferdinand , supported by William Longespée , marched south-west from Flanders .
John was well prepared for a conflict .
He had stockpiled money to pay for mercenaries and ensured the support of the powerful marcher lords with their own feudal forces , such as William Marshal and Ranulf of Chester .
The rebels lacked the engineering expertise or heavy equipment necessary to assault the network of royal castles that cut off the northern rebel barons from those in the south .
Neither John nor the rebel barons seriously attempted to implement the peace accord .
Innocent obliged ; he declared the charter `` not only shameful and demeaning , but illegal and unjust '' and excommunicated the rebel barons .
Accounts of the incident vary considerably between the various chroniclers and the exact location of the incident has never been confirmed ; the losses may have involved only a few of his pack-horses .
From there he travelled north to relieve the rebel siege at Lincoln and back east to King 's Lynn , probably to order further supplies from the continent .
Tensions between Louis and the English barons began to increase , prompting a wave of desertions , including William Marshal 's son William and William Longespée , who both returned to John 's faction .
Revisionist histories written by John Foxe , William Tyndale and Robert Barnes portrayed John as an early Protestant hero , and John Foxe included the king in his Book of Martyrs .
Scott 's work influenced the late 19th-century children 's writer Howard Pyle 's book The Merry Adventures of Robin Hood , which in turn established John as the principal villain within the traditional Robin Hood narrative .
Sam De Grasse 's role as John in the black-and-white 1922 film version shows John committing numerous atrocities and acts of torture .
The character of John acts either to highlight the virtues of King Richard , or contrasts with the Sheriff of Nottingham , who is usually the `` swashbuckling villain '' opposing Robin .
An extreme version of this trend can be seen in the Disney cartoon version , for example , which depicts John , voiced by Peter Ustinov , as a `` cowardly , thumbsucking lion '' .
Popular works that depict John beyond the Robin Hood legends , such as James Goldman 's play and later film , The Lion in Winter , set in 1183 , commonly present him as an `` effete weakling '' , in this instance contrasted with the more masculine Henry II , or as a tyrant , as in A. A. Milne 's poem for children , `` King John 's Christmas '' .
Historical interpretations of John have been subject to considerable change over the years .
Medieval chroniclers provided the first contemporary , or near contemporary , histories of John 's reign .
Reliable accounts of the middle and later parts of John 's reign are more limited , with Gervase of Canterbury and Ralph of Coggeshall writing the main accounts ; neither of them were positive about John 's performance as king .
By contrast , Shakespeare 's King John , a relatively anti-Catholic play that draws on The Troublesome Reign for its source material , offers a more `` balanced , dual view of a complex monarch as both a proto-Protestant victim of Rome 's machinations and as a weak , selfishly motivated ruler '' .
By the middle of the 17th century , plays such as Robert Davenport 's King John and Matilda , although based largely on the earlier Elizabethan works , were transferring the role of Protestant champion to the barons and focusing more on the tyrannical aspects of John 's behaviour .
Nonetheless , modern historians agree that he also had many faults as king , including what historian Ralph Turner describes as `` distasteful , even dangerous personality traits '' , such as pettiness , spitefulness and cruelty .
As part of this agreement John was promised the future inheritance of Savoy , Piedmont , Maurienne , and the other possessions of Count Humbert .
Henry the Young King was unimpressed by this ; although he had yet to be granted control of any castles in his new kingdom , these were effectively his future property and had been given away without consultation .
Alais made the trip over the Alps and joined Henry II 's court , but she died before marrying John , which left the prince once again without an inheritance .
For the remaining years of Richard 's reign , John supported his brother on the continent , apparently loyally .
Richard 's policy on the continent was to attempt to regain through steady , limited campaigns the castles he had lost to Philip II whilst on crusade .
He allied himself with the leaders of Flanders , Boulogne and the Holy Roman Empire to apply pressure on Philip from Germany .
The following year , John seized the town of Gamaches and led a raiding party within 50 miles -LRB- 80 km -RRB- of Paris , capturing the Bishop of Beauvais .
Just as John stood to benefit strategically from marrying Isabella , so the marriage threatened the interests of the Lusignans , whose own lands currently provided the key route for royal goods and troops across Aquitaine .
John attempted a synchronised operation involving land-based and water-borne forces , considered by most historians today to have been imaginative in conception , but overly complex for forces of the period to have carried out successfully .
John successfully devastated much of Brittany , but did not deflect Philip 's main thrust into the east of Normandy .
Opinions vary amongst historians as to the military skill shown by John during this campaign , with most recent historians arguing that his performance was passable , although not impressive .
-LSB- nb 8 -RSB- John 's situation began to deteriorate rapidly .
The eastern border region of Normandy had been extensively cultivated by Philip and his predecessors for several years , whilst Angevin authority in the south had been undermined by Richard 's giving away of various key castles some years before .
His use of routier mercenaries in the central regions had rapidly eaten away his remaining support in this area too , which set the stage for a sudden collapse of Angevin power .
-LSB- nb 9 -RSB- John retreated back across the Channel in December , sending orders for the establishment of a fresh defensive line to the west of Chateau Gaillard .
John 's mother Eleanor died the following month .
This was not just a personal blow for John , but threatened to unravel the widespread Angevin alliances across the far south of France .
Philip moved south around the new defensive line and struck upwards at the heart of the Duchy , now facing little resistance .
By August , Philip had taken Normandy and advanced south to occupy Anjou and Poitou as well .
The result was a sequence of innovative but unpopular financial measures .
In many cases these were levied in the absence of any actual military campaign , which ran counter to the original idea that scutage was an alternative to actual military service .
John maximised his right to demand relief payments when estates and castles were inherited , sometimes charging enormous sums , beyond barons ' abilities to pay .
Another innovation of Richard 's , increased charges levied on widows who wished to remain single , was expanded under John .
John continued to sell charters for new towns , including the planned town of Liverpool , and charters were sold for markets across the kingdom and in Gascony .
-LSB- nb 11 -RSB- The king introduced new taxes and extended existing ones .
John found that these measures enabled him to raise further resources through the confiscation of the lands of barons who could not pay or refused to pay .
John 's personal life greatly affected his reign .
Contemporary chroniclers state that John was sinfully lustful and lacking in piety .
John 's behaviour after his second marriage to Isabella of Angoulême is less clear , however .
The specific accusations made against John during the baronial revolts are now generally considered to have been invented for the purposes of justifying the revolt ; nonetheless , most of John 's contemporaries seem to have held a poor opinion of his sexual behaviour .
-LSB- nb 14 -RSB-
John had already begun to improve his Channel forces before the loss of Normandy and he rapidly built up further maritime capabilities after its collapse .
Most of these ships were placed along the Cinque Ports , but Portsmouth was also enlarged .
Wrotham was responsible for fusing John 's galleys , the ships of the Cinque Ports and pressed merchant vessels into a single operational fleet .
John adopted recent improvements in ship design , including new large transport ships called buisses and removable forecastles for use in combat .
Royal power in Wales was unevenly applied , with the country divided between the marcher lords along the borders , royal territories in Pembrokeshire and the more independent native Welsh lords of North Wales .
John 's invasion , striking into the Welsh heartlands , was a military success .
Llywelyn came to terms that included an expansion of John 's power across much of Wales , albeit only temporarily .
Innocent gave some dispensations as the crisis progressed .
The rules on burials and lay access to churches appear to have been steadily circumvented , at least unofficially .
Although the interdict was a burden to much of the population , it did not result in rebellion against John .
Some contemporary chroniclers suggested that in January Philip II of France had been charged with deposing John on behalf of the papacy , although it appears that Innocent merely prepared secret letters in case Innocent needed to claim the credit if Philip did successfully invade England .
Within a few months of John 's return , rebel barons in the north and east of England were organising resistance to his rule .
John appears to have been playing for time until Pope Innocent III could send letters giving him explicit papal support .
This was particularly important for John , as a way of pressuring the barons but also as a way of controlling Stephen Langton , the Archbishop of Canterbury .
John 's campaign started well .
One chronicler had not seen `` a siege so hard pressed or so strongly resisted '' , whilst historian Reginald Brown describes it as `` one of the greatest -LSB- siege -RSB- operations in England up to that time '' .
Both operations were successful and the majority of the remaining rebels were pinned down in London .
John took back Alexander 's possessions in northern England in a rapid campaign and pushed up towards Edinburgh over a ten-day period .
Numerous -- probably fictitious -- accounts circulated soon after his death that he had been killed by poisoned ale , poisoned plums or a `` surfeit of peaches '' .
These historians were often inclined to see John 's reign , and his signing of Magna Carta in particular , as a positive step in the constitutional development of England , despite the flaws of the king himself .
Winston Churchill , for example , argued that '' -LSB- w -RSB- hen the long tally is added , it will be seen that the British nation and the English-speaking world owe far more to the vices of John than to the labours of virtuous sovereigns '' .
John -LRB- 24 December 1166 -- 19 October 1216 -RRB- , also known as John Lackland -LRB- Norman French : Johan sanz Terre -RRB- , was King of England from 6 April 1199 until his death in 1216 .
Shortly after his birth , John was passed from Eleanor into the care of a wet nurse , a traditional practice for medieval noble families .
This may have been done with the aim of steering her youngest son , with no obvious inheritance , towards a future ecclesiastical career .
Eleanor spent the next few years conspiring against her husband Henry and neither parent played a part in John 's very early life .
John spent some time as a member of the household of his eldest living brother Henry the Young King , where he probably received instruction in hunting and military skills .
Henry II began to find more lands for John , mostly at various nobles ' expense .
The following year , Henry disinherited the sisters of Isabelle of Gloucester , contrary to legal custom , and betrothed John to the now extremely wealthy Isabelle .
Richard set about raising the huge sums of money required for this expedition through the sale of lands , titles and appointments , and attempted to ensure that he would not face a revolt while away from his empire .
John was made Count of Mortain , was married to the wealthy Isabel of Gloucester , and was given valuable lands in Lancaster and the counties of Cornwall , Derby , Devon , Dorset , Nottingham and Somerset , all with the aim of buying his loyalty to Richard whilst the king was on crusade .
Richard retained royal control of key castles in these counties , thereby preventing John from accumulating too much military and political power , and , for the time being , the king named the four-year-old Arthur of Brittany as the heir to the throne .
In return , John promised not to visit England for the next three years , thereby in theory giving Richard adequate time to conduct a successful crusade and return from the Levant without fear of John seizing power .
Richard left political authority in England -- the post of justiciar -- jointly in the hands of Bishop Hugh de Puiset and William Mandeville , and made William Longchamp , the Bishop of Ely , his chancellor .
It was difficult for a commander to advance far into fresh territory without having secured his lines of communication by capturing these fortifications , which slowed the progress of any attack .
Armies of the period could be formed from either feudal or mercenary forces .
As a result , commanders of the period were increasingly drawing on larger numbers of mercenaries .
John initially adopted a defensive posture similar to that of 1199 : avoiding open battle and carefully defending his key castles .
John 's operations became more chaotic as the campaign progressed , and Philip began to make steady progress in the east .
John became aware in July that Arthur 's forces were threatening his mother , Eleanor , at Mirebeau Castle .
Thanks to the efforts of men like Hubert Walter , this trend towards improved record keeping continued into his reign .
Like previous kings , John managed a peripatetic court that travelled around the kingdom , dealing with both local and national matters as he went .
John was very active in the administration of England and was involved in every aspect of government .
John was in England for much longer periods than his predecessors , which made his rule more personal than that of previous kings , particularly in previously ignored areas such as the north .
One group was the familiares regis , John 's immediate friends and knights who travelled around the country with him .
They also played an important role in organising and leading military campaigns .
Being a member of these inner circles brought huge advantages , as it was easier to gain favours from the king , file lawsuits , marry a wealthy heiress or have one 's debts remitted .
By the time of Henry II , these posts were increasingly being filled by `` new men '' from outside the normal ranks of the barons .
This intensified under John 's rule , with many lesser nobles arriving from the continent to take up positions at court ; many were mercenary leaders from Poitou .
Many barons perceived the king 's household as what Ralph Turner has characterised as a `` narrow clique enjoying royal favour at barons ' expense '' staffed by men of lesser status .
Contemporary chroniclers catalogued his various anti-religious habits at length , including his failure to take communion , his blasphemous remarks , and his witty but scandalous jokes about church doctrine , including jokes about the implausibility of the Resurrection .
They commented on the paucity of John 's charitable donations to the church .
Historian Frank McLynn argues that John 's early years at Fontevrault , combined with his relatively advanced education , may have turned him against the church .
The historian Lewis Warren has argued that the chronicler accounts were subject to considerable bias and the King was `` at least conventionally devout , '' citing his pilgrimages and interest in religious scripture and commentaries .
John used some of this money to pay for new alliances on Philip 's eastern frontiers , where the growth in Capetian power was beginning to concern France 's neighbours .
The invasion plans for 1212 were postponed because of fresh English baronial unrest about service in Poitou .
Philip seized the initiative in 1213 , sending his elder son , Louis , to invade Flanders with the intention of next launching an invasion of England .
John was forced to postpone his own invasion plans to counter this threat .
The attack was a success , destroying Philip 's vessels and any chances of an invasion of England that year .
John hoped to exploit this advantage by invading himself late in 1213 , but baronial discontent again delayed his invasion plans until early 1214 , in what would prove to be his final Continental campaign .
They favoured Reginald , the chapter 's sub-prior .
To complicate matters , the bishops of the province of Canterbury also claimed the right to appoint the next archbishop .
The chapter secretly elected Reginald and he travelled to Rome to be confirmed ; the bishops challenged the appointment and the matter was taken before Innocent .
John refused Innocent 's request that he consent to Langton 's appointment , but the pope consecrated Langton anyway in June 1207 .
Tensions between John and the barons had been growing for several years , as demonstrated by the 1212 plot against the king .
The northern barons rarely had any personal stake in the conflict in France , and many of them owed large sums of money to John ; the revolt has been characterised as `` a rebellion of the king 's debtors '' .
Many of John 's military household joined the rebels , particularly amongst those that John had appointed to administrative roles across England ; their local links and loyalties outweighed their personal loyalty to John .
Tension also grew across North Wales , where opposition to the 1211 treaty between John and Llywelyn was turning into open conflict .
The charter went beyond simply addressing specific baronial complaints , and formed a wider proposal for political reform , albeit one focusing on the rights of free men , not serfs and unfree labour .
It promised the protection of church rights , protection from illegal imprisonment , access to swift justice , new taxation only with baronial consent and limitations on scutage and other feudal payments .
Unfortunately for John , his fleet was dispersed by bad storms and Louis landed unopposed in Kent .
Louis and the rebel barons advanced west and John retreated , spending the summer reorganising his defences across the rest of the kingdom .
John saw several of his military household desert to the rebels , including his half-brother , William Longespée .
John 's second wife , Isabella of Angoulême , left England for Angoulême soon after the king 's death ; she became a powerful regional leader , but largely abandoned the children she had had by John .
Richard became a noted European leader and ultimately the King of the Romans in the Holy Roman Empire .
Isabella married the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II .
His youngest daughter , Eleanor , married William Marshal 's son , also called William , and later the famous English rebel Simon de Montfort .
John had a number of illegitimate children by various mistresses , including nine sons -- Richard , Oliver , John , Geoffrey , Henry , Osbert Gifford , Eudes , Bartholomew and probably Philip -- and three daughters -- Joan , Maud and probably Isabel .
Of these , Joan became the most famous , marrying Prince Llywelyn the Great of Wales .
Jim Bradbury notes the current consensus that John was a `` hard-working administrator , an able man , an able general '' , albeit , as Turner suggests , with `` distasteful , even dangerous personality traits '' , including pettiness , spitefulness and cruelty .
Popular historian Frank McLynn maintains a counter-revisionist perspective on John , arguing that the king 's modern reputation amongst historians is `` bizarre '' , and that as a monarch John `` fails almost all those -LSB- tests -RSB- that can be legitimately set '' .
Even after a transition to the superior PowerPC-based Power Macintosh -LRB- later renamed the PowerMac , in line with the PowerBook series -RRB- line in 1994 , the falling prices of commodity PC components and the release of Windows 95 saw the Macintosh user base decline .
By December 1980 , Smith had succeeded in designing a board that not only used the 68000 , but increased its speed from 5 MHz to 8 MHz ; this board also had the capacity to support a 384 × 256-pixel display .
The final Mac design was self-contained and had the complete QuickDraw picture language and interpreter in 64 kB of ROM -- far more than most other computers ; it had 128 kB of RAM , in the form of sixteen 64 kilobit -LRB- kb -RRB- RAM chips soldered to the logicboard .
The final product 's screen was a 9-inch , 512x342 pixel monochrome display , exceeding the size of the planned screen .
The computer sold well , nonetheless , reportedly outselling the IBM PCjr which also began shipping early that year .
By April 1984 the company sold 50,000 Macintoshes , and hoped for 70,000 by early May and almost 250,000 by the end of the year .
Apple released the Macintosh Plus on January 10 , 1986 , for a price of US$ 2,600 .
It offered one megabyte of RAM , easily expandable to four megabytes by the use of socketed RAM boards .
It also featured a SCSI parallel interface , allowing up to seven peripherals -- such as hard drives and scanners -- to be attached to the machine .
Its floppy drive was increased to an 800 kB capacity .
Apple began bundling both with every Macintosh .
It was followed in 1989 by the Macintosh IIcx , a more compact version with fewer slots and a version of the Mac SE powered by the 16 MHz 68030 , the Macintosh SE/30 .
This allowed it to natively support more than 8 MB of RAM , unlike its predecessors , which had `` 32-bit dirty '' ROMs -LRB- 8 of the 32 bits available for addressing were used for OS-level flags -RRB- .
System 7 was the first Macintosh operating system to support 32-bit addressing .
These companies had invested substantial resources in creating their own Mac-compatible hardware .
Apple bought out Power Computing 's license , but allowed Umax to continue selling Mac clones until their license expired , as they had a sizeable presence in the lower-end segment that Apple did not .
In September 1997 Apple extended Umax ' license allowing them to sell clones with Mac OS 8 , the only clone maker to do so , but with the restriction that they only sell low-end systems .
From its beginnings on an 8 MHz machine with 128 KB of RAM , it had grown to support Apple 's latest 1 GHz G4-equipped Macs .
Since its architecture was laid down , features that were already common on Apple 's competition , like preemptive multitasking and protected memory , had become feasible on the kind of hardware Apple manufactured .
OS X uses Darwin , XNU , and Mach as foundations , and is based on NeXTSTEP .
At US$ 29.99 , it allowed adventurous Mac users to sample Apple 's new operating system and provide feedback for the actual release .
The initial version of Mac OS X , 10.0 `` Cheetah '' , was released on March 24 , 2001 .
Older Mac OS applications could still run under early Mac OS X versions , using an environment called `` Classic '' .
Subsequent releases of Mac OS X included 10.1 `` Puma '' -LRB- 2001 -RRB- , 10.2 `` Jaguar '' -LRB- 2002 -RRB- , 10.3 `` Panther '' -LRB- 2003 -RRB- and 10.4 `` Tiger '' -LRB- 2005 -RRB- .
Apple introduced an emulator during the transition from PowerPC chips -LRB- called Rosetta -RRB- , much as it did during the transition from Motorola 68000 architecture a decade earlier .
Current Mac computers use ATI Radeon or nVidia GeForce graphics cards as well as Intel graphics built into the main CPU .
All current Macs -LRB- except for the MacBook Pro without Retina Display -RRB- do not ship with an optical media drive that includes a dual-function DVD/CD burner .
Apple refers to this as a SuperDrive .
USB was introduced in the 1998 iMac G3 and is ubiquitous today , while FireWire is mainly reserved for high-performance devices such as hard drives or video cameras .
Front Row has been discontinued as of 2011 , however , and the Apple Remote is no longer bundled with new Macs .
Originally , the hardware architecture was so closely tied to the Mac OS operating system that it was impossible to boot an alternative operating system .
Later the Regis McKenna team grew to include Jane Anderson , Katie Cadigan and Andy Cunningham , who eventually led the Apple account for the agency .
The SE also updated Jerry Manock and Terry Oyama 's original design and shared the Macintosh II 's Snow White design language , as well as the new Apple Desktop Bus -LRB- ADB -RRB- mouse and keyboard that had first appeared on the Apple IIGS some months earlier .
In recent years , Apple has seen a significant boost in sales of Macs .
The iMac , MacBook Pro , MacBook Air , and Mac Mini lines currently all use aluminum enclosures , and are now made of a single unibody .
Multi-touch gestures from the iPhone 's interface have been applied to the Mac line in the form of touch pads on notebooks and the Magic Mouse and Magic Trackpad for desktops .
Steve Jobs requested that McIntosh Laboratory give Apple a release for the name with its changed spelling so that Apple could use it , but the request was denied , forcing Apple to eventually buy the rights to use the name .
-LRB- A 1984 Byte Magazine article suggested Apple changed the spelling only after `` early users '' misspelled `` McIntosh '' .
However , Jef Raskin had adopted the Macintosh spelling by 1981 , when the Macintosh computer was still a single prototype machine in the lab .
This explanation further clashes with the first explanation given above that the change was made for `` legal reasons . '' -RRB-
It most notably aired during the third quarter of Super Bowl XVIII on January 22 , 1984 , and is now considered a `` watershed event '' and a `` masterpiece . ''
`` 1984 '' used an unnamed heroine to represent the coming of the Macintosh -LRB- indicated by a Picasso-style picture of the computer on her white tank top -RRB- as a means of saving humanity from the `` conformity '' of IBM 's attempts to dominate the computer industry .
The ad alludes to George Orwell 's novel , Nineteen Eighty-Four , which described a dystopian future ruled by a televised `` Big Brother . ''
This first model was later renamed to `` Macintosh 128k '' for uniqueness amongst a populous family of subsequently updated models which are also based on Apple 's same proprietary architecture .
From 2001 to 2008 , Mac sales increased continuously on an annual basis .
According to IDC 's quarterly PC tracker , globally , in 3rd quarter of 2014 , Apple 's PC market share increased 5.7 percent year over year , with record sales of 5.5 million units .
It was given the code and rights to several applications , most notably MacWrite , MacPaint , and MacProject .
By the early 1990s , Claris applications were shipping with the majority of consumer-level Macintoshes and were extremely popular .
In 1991 , Claris released ClarisWorks , which soon became their second best-selling application .
It was first demonstrated by Steve Jobs in the first of his famous Mac keynote speeches , and though the Mac garnered an immediate , enthusiastic following , some labeled it a mere `` toy . ''
Because the operating system was designed largely around the GUI , existing text-mode and command-driven applications had to be redesigned and the programming code rewritten .
Apple introduced the Macintosh Office suite the same year with the `` Lemmings '' ad .
The Macintosh took 45 percent of operating profits in the PC industry during Q4 2012 , compared to 13 percent for Dell , seven percent for Hewlett Packard , six percent for Lenovo and Asus , and one percent for Acer .
It also helped that the Macintosh lineup is simple , updated on a yearly schedule , and consistent across both Apple retail stores , and authorized resellers where they have a special `` store within a store '' section to distinguish them from Windows PCs .
In contrast , Windows PC manufacturers generally have a wide range of offerings , selling only a portion through retail with a full selection on the web , and often with limited-time or region-specific models .
Many small companies sprang up to address the memory issue .
At one point , its product lineup was subdivided into Classic , LC , II , Quadra , Performa , and Centris models , with essentially the same computer being sold under a number of different names .
This accompanied the release of the iPod , Apple 's first successful handheld device .
They were the first portable computers with the keyboard behind a palm rest and a built-in pointing device -LRB- a trackball -RRB- in front of the keyboard .
During the transition , Apple included a virtual machine subsystem known as Classic , allowing users to run Mac OS 9 applications under Mac OS X 10.4 and earlier on PowerPC machines .
Apple introduced Mac OS X 10.8 in February , and it was made available in the summer of 2012 .
Mountain Lion includes many new features , such as Mission Control , the Mac App Store -LRB- available to Mac OS X v10 .6.6 `` Snow Leopard . ''
users by software update -RRB- , Launchpad , an application viewer and launcher akin to the iOS Home Screen , and Resume , a feature similar to the hibernate function found in Microsoft Windows .
The most recent version is OS X El Capitan .
In addition to Mavericks , all new Macs are bundled with assorted Apple-produced applications , including iLife , the Safari web browser and the iTunes media player .
Mac OS X has a smaller usage share compared to Microsoft Windows -LRB- roughly 5 % and 92 % , respectively -RRB- , but it also has traditionally more secure UNIX roots .
Worms , as well as potential vulnerabilities , were noted in February 2006 , which led some industry analysts and anti-virus companies to issue warnings that Apple 's Mac OS X is not immune to malware .
Increasing market share coincided with additional reports of a variety of attacks .
Apple releases security updates for its software .
At first , the malware installer required the user to enter the administrative password , but later versions were able to install without user input .
Apple announced an OS X update to fix the problem .
Whether the size of the Mac 's market share and installed base is relevant , and to whom , is a hotly debated issue .
Industry pundits have often called attention to the Mac 's relatively small market share to predict Apple 's impending doom , particularly in the early and mid-1990s when the company 's future seemed bleakest .
Others argue that market share is the wrong way to judge the Mac 's success .
Because the overall market for personal computers has grown rapidly , the Mac 's increasing sales numbers are effectively swamped by the industry 's expanding sales volume as a whole .
Apple 's small market share , then , gives the impression that fewer people are using Macs than did ten years ago , when exactly the opposite is true .
Soaring sales of the iPhone and iPad mean that the portion of Apple 's profits represented by the Macintosh has declined in 2010 , dropping to 24 % from 46 % two years earlier .
Others try to de-emphasize market share , citing that it is rarely brought up in other industries .
Notably , a report published in the first quarter of 2008 found that Apple had a 14 % market share in the personal computer market in the US , including 66 % of all computers over $ 1,000 .
Notwithstanding these technical and commercial successes on the Macintosh platform , their systems remained fairly expensive , making them less competitive in light of the falling costs of components that made IBM PC compatibles cheaper and accelerated their adoption .
Furthermore , Apple had created too many similar models that confused potential buyers ; at one point the product lineup was subdivided into Classic , LC , II , Quadra , Performa , and Centris models , with essentially the same computer being sold under a number of different names .
The iMac G4 's relatively high prices were approaching that of laptops which were portable and had higher resolution LCD screens .
Meanwhile , Windows PC manufacturers could offer desktop configurations with LCD flat panel monitors at prices comparable to the eMac and at much lower cost than the iMac G4 .
The flop of the Power Mac G4 Cube , along with the more expensive iMac G4 and heavy eMac , meant that Macintosh desktop sales never reached the market share attained by the previous iMac G3 .
The change in sales of form factors is due to the desktop iMac moving from affordable -LRB- iMac G3 -RRB- to upscale -LRB- iMac G4 -RRB- and subsequent releases are considered premium all-in-ones .
Since their transition to Intel processors in 2006 , the complete lineup is entirely based on said processors and associated systems .
Its current lineup comprises three desktops -LRB- the all-in-one iMac , entry-level Mac mini , and the Mac Pro tower graphics workstation -RRB- , and four laptops -LRB- the MacBook , MacBook Air , MacBook Pro , and MacBook Pro with Retina display -RRB- .
Burrel 's innovative design , which combined the low production cost of an Apple II with the computing power of Lisa 's CPU , the Motorola 68K , received the attention of Steve Jobs , co-founder of Apple .
Realizing that the Macintosh was more marketable than the Lisa , he began to focus his attention on the project .
Jobs also commissioned industrial designer Hartmut Esslinger to work on the Macintosh line , resulting in the `` Snow White '' design language ; although it came too late for the earliest Macs , it was implemented in most other mid - to late-1980s Apple computers .
He went on to found NeXT , another computer company targeting the education market , and did not return until 1997 , when Apple acquired NeXT .
Although outselling every other computer , it did not meet expectations during the first year , especially among business customers .
The primary improvement in the Macintosh II was Color QuickDraw in ROM , a color version of the graphics language which was the heart of the machine .
Among the many innovations in Color QuickDraw were the ability to handle any display size , any color depth , and multiple monitors .
It had an internal hard drive and a power supply with a fan , which was initially fairly loud .
One third-party developer sold a device to regulate fan speed based on a heat sensor , but it voided the warranty .
Later Macintosh computers had quieter power supplies and hard drives .
It also did not help matters that during the previous year Jean-Louis Gassée had steadfastly refused to lower the profit margins on Mac computers .
Apple concluded that Intel 's CISC -LRB- Complex Instruction Set Computer -RRB- architecture ultimately would not be able to compete against RISC -LRB- Reduced Instruction Set Computer -RRB- processors .
Apple 's product design and engineering did n't help matters as they restricted the use of the ' 040 to their expensive Quadras for a time while the 486 was readily available to OEMs as well as enthusiasts who put together their own machines .
In late 1991 , as the higher-end Macintosh desktop lineup transitioned to the ' 040 , Apple was unable to offer the ' 040 in their top-of-the-line PowerBooks until early 1994 with the PowerBook 500 series , several years after the first 486-powered IBM compatible laptops hit the market which cost Apple considerable sales .
The Power Macintosh line , the first to use the new chips , proved to be highly successful , with over a million PowerPC units sold in nine months .
However , in the long run , spurning Intel for the PowerPC was a mistake as the commoditization of Intel-architecture chips meant Apple could n't compete on price against `` the Dells of the world '' .
In 1998 , Apple introduced its new iMac which , like the original 128K Mac , was an all-in-one computer .
It made the company an annual profit of US$ 309 million , Apple 's first profitable year since Michael Spindler took over as CEO in 1995 .
This aesthetic was applied to the Power Macintosh and later the iBook , Apple 's first consumer-level laptop computer , filling the missing quadrant of Apple 's `` four-square product matrix '' -LRB- desktop and portable products for both consumers and professionals -RRB- .
More than 140,000 pre-orders were placed before it started shipping in September , and by October proved to be a large success .
At WWDC 2005 , Steve Jobs announced this transition , revealing that Mac OS X was always developed to run on both the Intel and PowerPC architectures .
All new Macs now use x86 processors made by Intel , and some were renamed as a result .
Intel-based Macs running OS X 10.6 and below -LRB- support has been discontinued since 10.7 -RRB- can run pre-existing software developed for PowerPC using an emulator called Rosetta , although at noticeably slower speeds than native programs .
However , the Classic environment is unavailable on the Intel architecture .
Intel chips introduced the potential to run the Microsoft Windows operating system natively on Apple hardware , without emulation software such as Virtual PC .
Classic was discontinued in Mac OS X 10.5 , and Boot Camp became a standard feature on Intel-based Macs .
Macs did not natively support pointing devices that featured multiple buttons , even from third parties , until Mac OS X arrived in 2001 .
A Bluetooth version followed in July 2006 .
It is available only in a wireless configuration , but the wired Mighty Mouse -LRB- re-branded as `` Apple Mouse '' -RRB- is still available as an alternative .
Since 2010 , Apple has also offered the Magic Trackpad as a means to control Macintosh desktop computers in a way similar to laptops .
Apple also released Boot Camp and Mac-specific Windows drivers that help users to install Windows XP or Vista and natively dual boot between Mac OS X and Windows .
Unlike most PCs , however , Macs are unable to run many legacy PC operating systems .
The Air has been the best-selling ultra-portable in certain countries over Windows Ultrabooks , particularly the United States .
While several Ultrabooks were able to claim individual distinctions such as being the lightest or thinnest , the Air was regarded by reviewers as the best all-around subnotebook/ultraportable in regard to `` OS X experience , full keyboard , superior trackpad , Thunderbolt connector and the higher-quality , all-aluminum unibody construction '' .
It may be used to protect naval , ground , and air forces in any location .
Missile defence is an extension of air defence as are initiatives to adapt air defence to the task of intercepting any projectile in flight .
Subsequently these became part of the air force and ground forces respectively
This was the first occasion in military history that a military aircraft was shot down with ground-to-air fire .
AA gunnery was a difficult business .
The difficulties increased as aircraft performance improved .
However , the German Würzburg radar was capable of providing data suitable for controlling AA guns and the British AA No 1 Mk 1 GL radar was designed to be used on AA gun positions .
The following year they decided to adopt the Bofors 40 mm and a twin barrel Vickers 2-pdr -LRB- 40 mm -RRB- on a modified naval mount .
Invariably the type is differentiated from other fighter aircraft designs by higher speeds and shorter operating ranges , as well as much reduced ordnance payloads .
If current developments continue , some -LSB- who ? -RSB-
However , arrangements in the UK were also called ` anti-aircraft ' , abbreviated as AA , a term that remained in general use into the 1950s .
After the First World War it was sometimes prefixed by ` Light ' or ` Heavy ' -LRB- LAA or HAA -RRB- to classify a type of gun or unit .
.
The first issue was ammunition .
Igniferious fuses were not well suited for anti-aircraft use .
The fuse length was determined by time of flight , but the burning rate of the gunpowder was affected by altitude .
The British pom-poms had only contact-fused ammunition .
The British also fitted tracers to their shells for use at night .
Automated fire ensured a constant rate of fire that made it easier to predict where each shell should be individually aimed .
During the 1920s there was some work on a 4.7-inch which lapsed , but revived in 1937 , leading to a new gun in 1944 .
It was standardised in 1927 as the T9 AA cannon , but trials quickly revealed that it was worthless in the ground role .
Also , in 1931 the US Army worked on a mobile anti-aircraft machine mount on the back of a heavy truck having four .30 caliber water-cooled machine guns and an optical director .
It proved unsuccessful and was abandoned .
The balloon , a simple blimp tethered to the ground , worked in two ways .
However , many different definitions are used but unless the same definition is used , performance of different guns or missiles can not be compared .
First to go were the large weapons , replaced by equally large missile systems of much higher performance .
The tracked vehicles are usually armoured vehicles specifically designed to carry SAMs .
Some vessels like Aegis cruisers are as much a threat to aircraft as any land-based air defence system .
In general , naval vessels should be treated with respect by aircraft , however the reverse is equally true .
RPGs are used in this role only when more effective weapons are not available .
However , the type of shell or warhead and its fuzing and , with missiles the guidance arrangement , were and are varied .
The first were formally formed in November 1914 .
Initially they used QF 1-pounder `` pom-pom '' -LRB- a 37 mm version of the Maxim Gun -RRB- .
During World War II the Royal Marines also provided air defence units ; formally part of the mobile naval base defence organisation , they were handled as an integral part of the army-commanded ground based air defences .
These were complex instruments and various other methods were also used .
Various types of ammunition were proposed , high explosive , incendiary , bullet-chains , rod bullets and shrapnel .
Mountings were generally pedestal type , but could be on field platforms .
Krupp 's designs included adaptations of their 65 mm 9-pounder , a 75 mm 12-pounder , and even a 105 mm gun .
Erhardt also had a 12-pounder , while Vickers Maxim offered a 3-pounder and Schneider a 47 mm .
However , since balloons were slow moving , sights were simple .
But the challenges of faster moving airplanes were recognised .
However , in general , these ad-hoc solutions proved largely useless .
The exception to this rule was the guns protecting spotting balloons , in which case the altitude could be accurately measured from the length of the cable holding the balloon .
Germany introduced the 8.8 cm FlaK 18 in 1933 , 36 and 37 models followed with various improvements but ballistic performance was unchanged .
3.7-inch HAA were to provide the backbone of the groundbased AA defences , although initially significant numbers of 3-inch 20-cwt were also used .
40-mm Bofors entered service in increasing numbers .
Fixed AA defences , using HAA and LAA , were established by the Army in key overseas places , notably Malta , Suez Canal and Singapore .
Production of the QF 3.7-inch -LRB- 94 mm -RRB- began in 1937 ; this gun was used both on mobile carriages with the field army and transportable guns on fixed mountings for static positions .
For the ranges and speeds that the Bofors worked at , neither answer was good enough .
Nevertheless , while 20 mm was better than a machine gun and mounted on a very small trailer made it easy to move , its effectiveness was limited .
The first , the 3.7 cm FlaK 18 developed by Rheinmetall in the early 1930s , was basically an enlarged 2 cm FlaK 30 .
A redesigned gun 3.7 cm FlaK 36 entered service in 1938 , it too had a two-wheel carriage .
However , by the mid-1930s the Luftwaffe realised that there was still a coverage gap between 3.7 cm and 8.8 cm guns .
They started development of a 5 cm gun on a four-wheel carriage .
Those in cities attacked by the Allied land forces became fortresses .
After the war most were left to rot .
Some were outside territorial waters , and had a second life in the 1960s as platforms for pirate radio stations .
The developments during World War II continued for a short time into the post-war period as well .
The Kerrison was fairly simple , but it pointed the way to future generations that incorporated radar , first for ranging and later for tracking .
Further research started during the war .
Among them were several guided and unguided systems .
Unguided systems involved the Fliegerfaust -LRB- literally `` aircraft fist '' -RRB- as the first MANPADS .
Guided systems were several sophisticated radio , wire , or radar guided missiles like the Wasserfall -LRB- `` waterfall '' -RRB- rocket .
Due to the severe war situation for Germany all of those systems were only produced in small numbers and most of them were only used by training or trial units .
Following several years of post-war development , however , these systems began to mature into viable weapons systems .
Its expected performance is over 13,000 miles -LRB- 21,000 km -RRB- per hour muzzle velocity , accurate enough to hit a 5-meter target from 200 nautical miles -LRB- 370 km -RRB- away while shooting at 10 shots per minute .
-LSB- verification needed -RSB- These systems while currently designed for static targets would only need the ability to be retargeted to become the next generation of AA system .
Two six-barrelled 30 mm Gsh-6-30 Gatling guns and 9M311 surface-to-air missiles provide for its defensive capabilities .
In the past , this was not always the case .
Early missile systems were cumbersome and required much infrastructure ; many could not be moved at all .
With the diversification of air defence there has been much more emphasis on mobility .
Most modern systems are usually either self-propelled -LRB- i.e. guns or missiles are mounted on a truck or tracked chassis -RRB- or easily towed .
For more information on this part of the conflict , see SA-2 Guideline .
Often , the high-altitude long-range missile systems force aircraft to fly at low level , where anti-aircraft guns can bring them down .
As well as the small and large systems , for effective air defence there must be intermediate systems .
NATO defines anti-aircraft warfare -LRB- AAW -RRB- as `` measures taken to defend a maritime force against attacks by airborne weapons launched from aircraft , ships , submarines and land-based sites . ''
At the start of the 20th century these were either very primitive or non-existent .
Heavier guns and long-range missiles may be in air-defence brigades and come under corps or higher command .
The air defences were expanded with more RNVR AA guns , 75 mm and 3-inch , the pom-poms being ineffective .
The naval 3-inch was also adopted by the army , the QF 3 inch 20 cwt -LRB- 76 mm -RRB- , a new field mounting was introduced in 1916 .
Given the target height its operators tracked the target and the predictor produced bearing , quadrant elevation and fuse setting .
These were passed electrically to the guns where they were displayed on repeater dials to the layers who ` matched pointers ' -LRB- target data and the gun 's actual data -RRB- to lay the guns .
This system of repeater electrical dials built on the arrangements introduced by British coast artillery in the 1880s , and coast artillery was the background of many AA officers .
Goertz in Germany and Levallois in France produced 5 metre instruments .
However , in most countries the main effort in HAA guns until the mid-1930s was improving existing ones , although various new designs were on drawing boards .
Operators simply fed the guns and selected the targets .
This system , modern even by today 's standards , was in late development when the war ended .
No 120 M1 was ever fired at an enemy aircraft .
The smallest tactical unit of the operation was a gun battery consisting of four 90 mm guns firing shells equipped with a radio proximity fuse .
Output from the gun-laying radar was fed to the M-9 director , an electronic analog computer developed at Bell Laboratories to calculate the lead and elevation corrections for the guns .
With the help of these three technologies , close to 90 % of the V-1 missiles , on track to the defence zone around the port , were destroyed .
Both sides also used the Blowpipe missile .
MANPADS of the former Soviet Union have been exported around the World , and can be found in use by many armed forces .
Potential targets , if they are military aircraft , will be identified as friend or foe before being engaged .
In addition , Side looking radars , High-powered optical satellites , and sky-scanning , high-aperture , high sensitivity radars such as radio telescopes , would all be able to narrow down the location of a stealth aircraft under certain parameters .
As one of the oldest Indo-European languages for which substantial written documentation exists , Sanskrit holds a prominent position in Indo-European studies .
However , linguistic change led to an eventual loss of mutual intelligibility .
In East India , the Bengali alphabet , and , later , the Odia alphabet , were used .
Traditional Sanskrit scholars call such deviations ārṣa -LRB- आर्ष -RRB- , meaning ` of the ṛṣis ' , the traditional title for the ancient authors .
However , there is a clear , five-level linguistic development of Vedic from the Rigveda to the language of the Upanishads and the earliest sutras such as the Baudhayana sutras .
With the wide availability of Unicode-aware web browsers , IAST has become common online .
It is also possible to type using an alphanumeric keyboard and transliterate to Devanagari using software like Mac OS X 's international support .
Chinese words like 剎那 chànà -LRB- Devanagari : क्षण kṣaṇa ` instantaneous period ' -RRB- were borrowed from Sanskrit .
All modern Indo-Aryan languages , as well as Munda and Dravidian languages , have borrowed many words either directly from Sanskrit -LRB- tatsama words -RRB- , or indirectly via middle Indo-Aryan languages -LRB- tadbhava words -RRB- .
It has been described as a paradox that the first evidence of written Sanskrit occurs centuries later than that of the Prakrit languages which are its linguistic descendants .
In northern India , there are Brāhmī inscriptions dating from the third century BCE onwards , the oldest appearing on the famous Prakrit pillar inscriptions of king Ashoka .
The earliest South Indian inscriptions in Tamil Brahmi , written in early Tamil , belong to the same period .
When Sanskrit was written down , it was first used for texts of an administrative , literary or scientific nature .
fifth century BCE -RRB- .
Patanjali , who lived three centuries after Pāṇini , wrote the Mahābhāṣya , the `` Great Commentary '' on the Aṣṭādhyāyī and Vārtikas .
Because of these three ancient Vyākaraṇins -LRB- grammarians -RRB- , this grammar is called Trimuni Vyākarana .
To understand the meaning of the sutras , Jayaditya and Vāmana wrote a commentary , the Kāsikā , in 600 CE .
Pāṇinian grammar is based on 14 Shiva sutras -LRB- aphorisms -RRB- , where the whole mātrika -LRB- alphabet -RRB- is abbreviated .
Though they are quite similar , they differ in a number of essential points of phonology , vocabulary , grammar and syntax .
The end of the Vedic period is marked by the composition of the Upanishads , which form the concluding part of the traditional Vedic corpus ; however , the early Sutras are Vedic , too , both in language and content .
Sanskrit speakers were almost always multilingual .
Sanskrit learning programmes also feature on the lists of most AIR broadcasting centres .
Inhabitants of all castes learn Sanskrit starting in childhood and converse in the language .
Even the local Muslims converse in Sanskrit .
Another effort concentrates on preserving and passing along the oral tradition of the Vedas , www.shrivedabharathi.in is one such organisation based out of Hyderabad that has been digitising the Vedas by recording recitations of Vedic Pandits .
The closing credits of The Matrix Revolutions has a prayer from the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad .
The lyrics include the mantra Om shanti .
The lyrics of `` The Child In Us '' by Enigma also contains Sanskrit verses .
-LSB- better source needed -RSB- .
Valencia is Spain 's third largest metropolitan area , with a population ranging from 1.7 to 2.5 million .
The city has global city status .
Valencia enjoyed strong economic growth over the last decade , much of it spurred by tourism and the construction industry , -LSB- citation needed -RSB- with concurrent development and expansion of telecommunications and transport .
English soldiers advanced as far as Requena on the road to Madrid .
The Bourbon forces burned important cities like Xativa , where pictures of the Spanish Bourbons in public places are hung upside down as a protest to this day .
The capital of the Kingdom of Valencia was moved to Orihuela , an outrage to the citizens of Valencia .
Because of his hatred of the city of Orihuela , which had bombarded and looted Valencia during the War of Succession , the cardinal resigned the viceroyalty in protest against the actions of Philip , who finally relented and returned the capital to Valencia .
The Christians set it afire before abandoning it , and the Almoravid Masdali took possession on 5 May 1109 .
The two Muslim dynasties would rule Valencia for more than a century .
In the early 20th century Valencia was an industrialised city .
Small businesses predominated , but with the rapid mechanisation of industry larger companies were being formed .
22.8 °C -LRB- 73.0 °F -RRB- during the day and 13.8 °C -LRB- 56.8 °F -RRB- at night .
Generally , temperatures similar to those experienced in the northern part of Europe in summer last about 8 months , from April to November .
March is transitional , the temperature often exceeds 20 °C -LRB- 68 °F -RRB- , with an average temperature of 19.0 °C -LRB- 66 °F -RRB- during the day and 10.0 °C -LRB- 50 °F -RRB- at night .
December , January and February are the coldest months , with average temperatures around 17 °C -LRB- 63 °F -RRB- during the day and 7 °C -LRB- 45 °F -RRB- at night .
Valencia has one of the mildest winters in Europe , owing to its southern location on the Mediterranean Sea and the Foehn phenomenon .
The financial markets were destabilised , causing a severe economic crisis that led to rationing .
A black market in rationed goods existed for over a decade .
To prevent further disasters , the river was eventually diverted to a new course .
The river was divided in two at the western city limits -LRB- Plan Sur de Valencia -RRB- , and diverted southwards along a new course that skirts the city , before meeting the Mediterranean .
The old course of the river continues , dry , through the city centre , almost to the sea .
The main exports are foodstuffs and beverages .
Valencia 's manufacturing sector focuses on metallurgy , chemicals , textiles , shipbuilding and brewing .
Small and medium-sized industries are an important part of the local economy , and before the current crisis unemployment was lower than the Spanish average .
The Santo Caliz -LRB- Holy Chalice -RRB- is a simple , small stone cup .
Its base was added in Medieval Times and consists of fine gold , alabaster and gem stones .
Spanish is official in all of Spain , whereas Valencian is official in the Valencian Country , as well as in Catalonia and the Balearic Islands , where it receives the name of Catalan .
Valencian has been historically repressed in favour of Spanish .
The effects have been more noticeable in the city proper , whereas the language has remained active in the rural and metropolitan areas .
After the Castille-Aragon unification , a Spanish-speaking elite established itself in the city .
In more recent history , the establishment of Franco 's military and administrative apparatus in Valencia further excluded Valencian from public life .
However , due to industrialisation in recent decades , Valencia has attracted immigration from other regions in Spain , and hence there is also a demographic factor for its declining social use .
Due to a combination of these reasons , Valencia has become the bastion of anti-Catalan blaverism , which celebrates Valencian as merely folkloric , but rejects the existing standard which was adapted from Catalan orthography .
Spanish is currently the predominant language in the city proper but , thanks to the education system , most Valencians have basic knowledge of both Spanish and Valencian , and either can be used in the city .
Valencia is therefore the second biggest Catalan-speaking city after Barcelona .
Institutional buildings and streets are named in Valencian .
The city is also home to many pro-Valencian political and civil organisations .
Little is known of its history for nearly a hundred years ; although this period is only scarcely documented by archeology , excavations suggest that there was little development of the city .
The additions made to the back of the cathedral detract from its height .
The 18th-century restoration rounded the pointed arches , covered the Gothic columns with Corinthian pillars , and redecorated the walls .
The dome has no lantern , its plain ceiling being pierced by two large side windows .
There are four chapels on either side , besides that at the end and those that open into the choir , the transept , and the sanctuary .
It contains many paintings by eminent artists .
A silver reredos , which was behind the altar , was carried away in the war of 1808 , and converted into coin to meet the expenses of the campaign .
Behind the Chapel of the Blessed Sacrament is a small Renaissance chapel built by Calixtus III .
Beside the cathedral is the chapel dedicated to the Our Lady of the Forsaken -LRB- Virgen de los desamparados or Mare de Déu dels Desamparats -RRB- .
Fifty thousand Moors were forced to leave .
Poets such as Ibn al-Abbar and Ibn Amira mourned this exile from their beloved Valencia .
Thenceforth the city entered a new historical stage in which a new society and a new language developed , forming the basis of the character of the Valencian people as they are known today .
So far no remains have been found .
When Islamic culture settled in , Valencia , then called Balansiyya , prospered from the 10th century , due to a booming trade in paper , silk , leather , ceramics , glass and silver-work .
This boom was reflected in the growth of artistic and cultural pursuits .
In painting and sculpture , Flemish and Italian trends had an influence on artists such as Lluís Dalmau , Peris Gonçal and Damià Forment .
Literature flourished with the patronage of the court of Alfonso the Magnanimous , supporting authors like Ausiàs March , Roiç de Corella , and Isabel de Villena .
He failed to take the city in two assaults and retreated to Madrid .
The Crown endeavoured to compensate the nobles , who had lost much of their agricultural labour force ; this harmed the economy of the city for generations to come .
Later , during the so-called Catalan Revolt -LRB- 1640 -- 1652 -RRB- , Valencia contributed to the cause of Philip IV with militias and money , resulting in a period of further economic hardship exacerbated by the arrival of troops from other parts of Spain .
It was not immediately clear what caused the crash .
However , the trade union CC.OO .
accused the authorities of `` rushing '' to say anything but admit that Line 1 is in a state of `` constant deterioration '' with a `` failure to carry out maintenance '' .
This production was promoted by the Ateneo Mercantil de Valencia -LRB- Mercantile Athenaeum of Valencia -RRB- , especially by its chairman , Tomás Trénor y Palavicino , and had the support of the Government and the Crown ; it was officially inaugurated by King Alfonso XIII himself .
The inevitable march to civil war and the combat in Madrid resulted in the removal of the capital of the Republic to Valencia .
The bombardment intensified and inflicted massive destruction on several occasions ; by the end of the war the city had survived 442 bombardments , leaving 2,831 dead and 847 wounded , although it is estimated that the death toll was higher , as the data given are those recognised by Francisco Franco 's government .
On 30 March 1939 Valencia surrendered and the Nationalist troops entered the city .
The postwar years were a time of hardship for Valencians .
During Franco 's regime speaking or teaching Valencian was prohibited ; in a significant reversal it is now compulsory for every schoolchild in Valencia .
The day after the broadcast of this report , which received extensive media coverage , several voices called for the reopening of the investigation .
The investigation was effectively reopened and the accident is currently under re-examination .
In 1357 , the arch that connects it with the cathedral was built .
In the council chamber are preserved the portraits of all the prelates of Valencia .
Major monuments include Valencia Cathedral , the Torres de Serrans , the Torres de Quart , the Llotja de la Seda -LRB- declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1996 -RRB- , and the Ciutat de les Arts i les Ciències -LRB- City of Arts and Sciences -RRB- , an entertainment-based cultural and architectural complex designed by Santiago Calatrava and Félix Candela .
Valencia stands on the banks of the Turia River , located on the eastern coast of the Iberian Peninsula and the western part of the Mediterranean Sea , fronting the Gulf of Valencia .
In 1986 , because of its cultural , historical , and ecological value , the Generalitat Valenciana declared it a natural park .
The urban area of Valencia extending beyond the administrative city limits has a population of between 1,561,000 and 1,564,145 .
1,705,742 or 2,300,000 or 2,516,818 people live in the Valencia metropolitan area .
The Roman historian Florus says that Brutus transferred the soldiers who had fought under him to that province .
The Cardo corresponds to the existing Calle de Salvador , Almoina , and the Decumanus corresponds to Calle de los Caballeros .
Balansiyya had a rebirth of sorts with the beginning of the Taifa of Valencia kingdom in the 11th century .
This victory was immortalised in the Lay of the Cid .
During his rule , he converted nine mosques into churches and installed the French monk Jérôme as bishop of the See of Valencia .
The city went through serious troubles in the mid-fourteenth century .
Among these were the War of the Union , a citizen revolt against the excesses of the monarchy , led by Valencia as the capital of the kingdom -- and the war with Castile , which forced the hurried raising of a new wall to resist Castilian attacks in 1363 and 1364 .
The Jews who occupied the area around the waterfront had progressed economically and socially , and their quarter gradually expanded its boundaries at the expense of neighbouring parishes .
Faced with this loss of business , Valencia suffered a severe economic crisis .
It also bore a strong anti-Islamic aspect , as rebels rioted against Aragon 's population of mudéjars and imposed forced conversions to Christianity .
He followed this act by dissolving the two chambers of the Spanish Parliament on 10 May .
Neither proposed project received final approval , but they did serve as a guide , though not closely followed , for future growth .
The economy began to recover in the early 1960s , and the city experienced explosive population growth through immigration spurred by the jobs created with the implementation of major urban projects and infrastructure improvements .
In Gothic times , it seems to have been dedicated to the Holy Saviour ; the Cid dedicated it to the Blessed Virgin ; King James I of Aragon did likewise , leaving in the main chapel the image of the Blessed Virgin , which he carried with him and is reputed to be the one now preserved in the sacristy .
The Moorish mosque , which had been converted into a Christian Church by the conqueror , was deemed unworthy of the title of the cathedral of Valencia , and in 1262 Bishop Andrés de Albalat laid the cornerstone of the new Gothic building , with three naves ; these reach only to the choir of the present building .
Valencia is among with Barcelona , Porto and Monte Carlo the only European cities ever to host Formula One World Championship Grands Prix on public roads in the middle of cities .
Periodically the Spanish round of the Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters touring car racing Championship -LRB- DTM -RRB- is held in Valencia .
The new company also acquired Sprague Electric Railway & Motor Company in the same year .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The standard requires many headlines to be lowercased and adds visual `` white space '' to documents and advertising .
GE has a history of some of its activities giving rise to large-scale air and water pollution .
GE has also been implicated in the creation of toxic waste .
Both plants continue to operate under the GE banner to this day .
Around the same time , General Electric 's Canadian counterpart , Canadian General Electric , was formed .
About 50 % of all the PCBs currently in the river are estimated to be retained in the sediment behind Woods Pond dam .
Former filled oxbows are also polluted .
Waterfowl and fish who live in and around the river contain significant levels of PCBs and can present health risks if consumed .
GE -LRB- General Electric -RRB- Energy 's renewable energy business has expanded greatly , to keep up with growing U.S. and global demand for clean energy .
GE 's history of working with turbines in the power-generation field gave them the engineering know-how to move into the new field of aircraft turbosuperchargers .
Superchargers became indispensable in the years immediately prior to World War II , and GE was the world leader in exhaust-driven supercharging when the war started .
This pollution caused a range of harmful effects to wildlife and people who eat fish from the river or drink the water .
In response to this contamination , activists protested in various ways .
In 2010 , GE continued to raise its investment by adding $ 10 billion into Ecomagination over the next five years .
Each of the 30 films received world premiere screenings at a major international film festival , including the Sundance Film Festival and the Tribeca Film Festival .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
A rival joint bid was submitted in June 2014 by Siemens and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries -LRB- MHI -RRB- with Siemens seeking to acquire Alstom 's gas turbine business for $ 3.9 billion , and MHI proposing a joint venture in steam turbines , plus a $ 3.1 billion cash investment .
The acquisition was expected to be completed in 2015 .
Through its RCA subsidiary , it has been associated with the center since its construction in the 1930s .
The army was initially led by men who had served in the British Army or colonial militias and who brought much of British military heritage with them .
As the Revolutionary War progressed , French aid , resources , and military thinking influenced the new army .
The Vietnam War is often regarded as a low point for the U.S. Army due to the use of drafted personnel , the unpopularity of the war with the American public , and frustrating restrictions placed on the military by American political leaders .
On a tactical level , American soldiers -LRB- and the U.S. military as a whole -RRB- did not lose a sizable battle .
By the twentieth century , the U.S. Army had mobilized the U.S. Volunteers on four separate occasions during each of the major wars of the nineteenth century .
The army is led by a civilian Secretary of the Army , who has the statutory authority to conduct all the affairs of the army under the authority , direction and control of the Secretary of Defense .
Thus , the secretaries of the military departments -LRB- and their respective service chiefs underneath them -RRB- only have the responsibility to organize , train and equip their service components .
The army provides trained forces to the combatant commanders for use as directed by the Secretary of Defense .
The United States Army considers itself descended from the Continental Army , and dates its institutional inception from the origin of that armed force in 1775 .
Following ending victories in the province of Upper Canada , which dubbed the U.S. Army `` Regulars , by God ! ''
, British troops were able to capture and burn Washington .
The regular army , however , proved they were professional and capable of defeating the British army during the invasions of Plattsburgh and Baltimore , prompting British agreement on the previously rejected terms of a status quo ante bellum .
Per the treaty both sides returned to the status quo with no victor .
State militias became the new nation 's sole ground army , with the exception of a regiment to guard the Western Frontier and one battery of artillery guarding West Point 's arsenal .
For the first two years Confederate forces did well in set battles but lost control of the border states .
The Confederates had the advantage of defending a very large country in an area where disease caused twice as many deaths as combat .
The Union pursued a strategy of seizing the coastline , blockading the ports , and taking control of the river systems .
By 1863 the Confederacy was being strangled .
With the outbreak of the Korean War , concerns over the defense of Western Europe rose .
Hundreds of thousands of U.S. troops remained stationed in West Germany , with others in Belgium , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom , until the 1990s in anticipation of a possible Soviet attack .
On the European front , U.S. Army troops formed a significant portion of the forces that captured North Africa and Sicily , and later fought in Italy .
Following the Axis surrenders in May -LRB- Germany -RRB- and August -LRB- Japan -RRB- of 1945 , army troops were deployed to Japan and Germany to occupy the two defeated nations .
Two years after World War II , the Army Air Forces separated from the army to become the United States Air Force in September 1947 after decades of attempting to separate .
Believing that no U.S. president should be able to take the United States -LRB- and more specifically the U.S. Army -RRB- to war without the support of the American people , General Abrams intertwined the structure of the three components of the army in such a way as to make extended operations impossible , without the involvement of both the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve .
It served as the primary source for ground forces with its ability to sustain short and long-term deployment operations .
The army is also divided into major branches such as Air Defense Artillery , Infantry , Aviation , Signal Corps , Corps of Engineers , and Armor .
The force is in the process of contracting after several years of growth .
The length of AIT school varies by the MOS The length of time spent in AIT depends on the MOS of the soldier , and some highly technical MOS training may require many months -LRB- e.g. , foreign language translators -RRB- .
Indirect fire is provided by the M203 grenade launcher .
Thousands of other MRAPs like the Cougar , BAE Caiman , and larger MaxxPros will be disposed of .
Unit commanders may still direct the wear of patrol caps in these units in training environments or motor pools .
As a branch of the armed forces , the mission of the U.S. Army is `` to fight and win our Nation 's wars , by providing prompt , sustained , land dominance , across the full range of military operations and the spectrum of conflict , in support of combatant commanders . ''
The service participates in conflicts worldwide and is the major ground-based offensive and defensive force .
Under a United Nations umbrella , hundreds of thousands of U.S. troops fought to prevent the takeover of South Korea by North Korea , and later , to invade the northern nation .
By 1989 Germany was nearing reunification and the Cold War was coming to a close .
Army leadership reacted by starting to plan for a reduction in strength .
A number of incentives such as early retirement were used .
In the first one hundred years of its existence , the United States Army was maintained as a small peacetime force to man permanent forts and perform other non-wartime duties such as engineering and construction works .
States also maintained full-time militias which could also be called into the service of the army .
Any or all of the National Guard can be federalized by presidential order and against the governor 's wishes .
The ASI allows the army to take a wide ranging MOS and focus it into a more specific MOS .
For commissioned officers , ASI training includes pre-commissioning training either at USMA , or via ROTC , or by completing OCS .
Furthermore , most of these tents are set up and operated through the support of Natick Soldier Systems Center .
After most slave states , located in the southern U.S. , formed the Confederate States , C.S. troops led by former U.S. Army officers , mobilized a very large fraction of Southern white manpower .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In 1910 , Mexico was having a civil war , peasant rebels fighting government soldiers .
The army was deployed to American towns near the border to ensure safety to lives and property .
They fought the rebels and the Mexican federal troops until 1918 .
U.S. troops were sent to the Western Front and were involved in the last offensives that ended the war .
With the armistice in November 1918 , the army once again decreased its forces .
During the 1960s the Department of Defense continued to scrutinize the reserve forces and to question the number of divisions and brigades as well as the redundancy of maintaining two reserve components , the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve .
The loss of the divisions did not set well with the states .
Their objections included the inadequate maneuver element mix for those that remained and the end to the practice of rotating divisional commands among the states that supported them .
Under the proposal , the remaining division commanders were to reside in the state of the division base .
No reduction , however , in total Army National Guard strength was to take place , which convinced the governors to accept the plan .
The states reorganized their forces accordingly between 1 December 1967 and 1 May 1968 .
As specified before the 2013 end-strength re-definitions , the three major types of ground combat brigades are :
The army employs various individual weapons to provide light firepower at short ranges .
The most common weapons used by the army are the compact variant of the M16 rifle , the M4 carbine , as well as the 7.62 × 51mm variant of the FN SCAR for Army Rangers .
While they operate a wide variety of combat support vehicles , one of the most common types centers on the family of HEMTT vehicles .
`` This text produced the effect of a red flag on the Gallic bull '' , Bismarck later wrote .
A crowd of 15 -- 20,000 people , carrying flags and patriotic banners , marched through the streets of Paris , demanding war .
The southern German states immediately sided with Prussia .
By the time he realized what kind of a force he was opposing , it was too late .
Because the reserves had not arrived , Frossard erroneously believed that he was in grave danger of being outflanked as German soldiers under General von Glume were spotted in Forbach .
Instead of continuing to defend the heights , by the close of battle after dusk he retreated to the south .
Napoleon III personally led the army with Marshal MacMahon in attendance .
The Army of Châlons marched northeast towards the Belgian border to avoid the Prussians before striking south to link up with Bazaine .
The Prussians , under the command of Field Marshal Count Helmuth von Moltke , took advantage of this maneuver to catch the French in a pincer grip .
He left the Prussian First and Second Armies besieging Metz , except three corps detached to form the Army of the Meuse under the Crown Prince of Saxony .
Having reformed in the town , the Army of Châlons was immediately isolated by the converging Prussian armies .
Napoleon III ordered the army to break out of the encirclement immediately .
With MacMahon wounded on the previous day , General Auguste Ducrot took command of the French troops in the field .
Today I say to you : rescue the French Republic by every means . ''
After the surrender of Metz , more than 100,000 well-trained and experienced German troops joined the German ` Southern Army ' .
Several sources claim that in his carriage on the way back to Paris , Favre broke into tears , and collapsed into his daughter 's arms as the guns around Paris fell silent at midnight .
Furious , he refused to surrender and launched an immediate attack on German forces at Orleans which , predictably , failed .
A delegation of Parisian diplomats arrived in Tours by train on 5 February to negotiate with Gambetta , and the following day Gambetta stepped down and surrendered control of the provincial armies to the Government of National Defence , which promptly ordered a cease-fire across France .
Furthermore , no system had been put in place for military control of the railways , and officers simply commandeered trains as they saw fit .
Napoleon III , then the emperor of France , demanded compensations in Belgium and on the left bank of the Rhine to secure France 's strategic position , which the Prussian chancellor , Otto von Bismarck , flatly refused .
Prussia then turned its attention towards the south of Germany , where it sought to incorporate the southern German kingdoms , Bavaria , Württemberg , Baden and Hesse-Darmstadt , into a unified Prussia-dominated Germany .
Universal conscription -LRB- rather than by ballot , as previously -RRB- and a shorter period of service gave increased numbers of reservists , who would swell the army to a planned strength of 800,000 on mobilisation .
However , the Franco-Prussian War broke out before these reforms could be completely implemented .
The mobilisation of reservists was chaotic and resulted in large numbers of stragglers , while the Garde Mobile were generally untrained and often mutinous .
Saarbrücken also proved to be a major obstacle in terms of logistics .
Only one railway there led to the German hinterland but could be easily defended by a single force , and the only river systems in the region ran along the border instead of inland .
While the French hailed the invasion as the first step towards the Rhineland and later Berlin , General Le Bœuf and Napoleon III were receiving alarming reports from foreign news sources of Prussian and Bavarian armies massing to the southeast in addition to the forces to the north and northeast .
The French press and parliament demanded a war , which the generals of Napoleon III assured him that France would win .
Napoleon and his Prime Minister , Émile Ollivier , for their parts sought war to solve their problems with political disunity in France .
The German forces were superior in numbers , had better training and leadership and made more effective use of modern technology , particularly railroads and artillery .
The fighting within the town had become extremely intense , becoming a door to door battle of survival .
Despite a never-ending attack of Prussian infantry , the soldiers of the 2nd Division kept to their positions .
The final attack by the Prussian troops also cost c. 1,000 casualties .
The German cavalry then failed to pursue the French and lost touch with them .
German-French War , French : Guerre franco-allemande , lit .
Although badly outnumbered , the French defended their position just outside Fröschwiller .
By afternoon , the Germans had suffered c. 10,500 killed or wounded and the French had lost a similar number of casualties and another c. 9,200 men taken prisoner , a loss of about 50 % .
The Germans captured Fröschwiller which sat on a hilltop in the centre of the French line .
Having lost any hope for victory and facing a massacre , the French army disengaged and retreated in a westerly direction towards Bitche and Saverne , hoping to join French forces on the other side of the Vosges mountains .
Many Germans also viewed the French as the traditional destabilizer of Europe , and sought to weaken France to prevent further breaches of the peace .
But the French had spent the night and early morning digging trenches and rifle pits while placing their artillery and their mitrailleuses in concealed positions .
Finally aware of the Prussian advance , the French opened up a massive return fire against the mass of advancing Germans .
However , the Prussian artillery was superior with the all-steel Krupp breech-loading gun .
At 15:00 , the massed guns of the VII and VIII Corps opened fire to support the attack .
But by 16:00 , with the attack in danger of stalling , Steinmetz ordered the VII Corps forward , followed by the 1st Cavalry Division .
The artillery was equipped with rifled , muzzle-loaded La Hitte guns .
Marguerite was killed leading the very first charge and the two additional charges led to nothing but heavy losses .
By the end of the day , with no hope of breaking out , Napoleon III called off the attacks .
The Prussians reported their losses at 2,320 killed , 5,980 wounded and 700 captured or missing .
By the next day , on 2 September , Napoleon III surrendered and was taken prisoner with 104,000 of his soldiers .
It was an overwhelming victory for the Prussians , for they not only captured an entire French army , but the leader of France as well .
The defeat of the French at Sedan had decided the war in Prussia 's favour .
One French army was now immobilised and besieged in the city of Metz , and no other forces stood on French ground to prevent a German invasion .
Nevertheless , the war would continue .
As Austria along with Bavaria , Württemberg and Baden were expected to join in a revenge war against Prussia , I Corps would invade the Bavarian Palatinate and proceed to `` free '' the South German states in concert with Austro-Hungarian forces .
VI Corps would reinforce either army as needed .
Despite access to the armaments factories of Lille , the Army of the North suffered from severe supply difficulties , which depressed morale .
In January 1871 , Gambetta forced Faidherbe to march his army beyond the fortresses and engage the Prussians in open battle .
The army was severely weakened by low morale , supply problems , the terrible winter weather and low troop quality , whilst general Faidherbe was unable to command due to his poor health , the result of decades of campaigning in West Africa .
At the Battle of St. Quentin , the Army of the North suffered a crushing defeat and was scattered , releasing thousands of Prussian soldiers to be relocated to the East .
Once blocked from retreat , the French in the fortress of Metz had no choice but to engage in a fight that would see the last major cavalry engagement in Western Europe .
At 20:00 , the arrival of the Prussian 4th Infantry Division of the II Corps and with the Prussian right flank on Mance Ravine , the line stabilised .
By then , the Prussians of the 1st Guards Infantry Division and the XII and II Corps captured St. Privat forcing the decimated French forces to withdraw .
With the Prussians exhausted from the fighting , the French were now able to mount a counter-attack .
General Bourbaki , however , refused to commit the reserves of the French Old Guard to the battle because , by that time , he considered the overall situation a ` defeat ' .
By 22:00 , firing largely died down across the battlefield for the night .
By the time engine repairs had been completed , the French fleet had already departed .
The blockade proved only partially successful due to crucial oversights by the planners in Paris .
Reservists that were supposed to be at the ready in case of war , were working in the Newfoundland fisheries or in Scotland .
Before long , the French navy ran short of coal , needing 200 short tons -LRB- 180 t -RRB- per day and having a bunker capacity in the fleet of only 250 short tons -LRB- 230 t -RRB- .
A blockade of Wilhelmshaven failed and conflicting orders about operations in the Baltic Sea or a return to France , made the French naval efforts futile .
The French General Staff -- along with those of every other European military -- was little better than a collection of assistants for the line commanders .
This disorganization hampered the French commanders ' ability to exercise control of their forces .
To allow supplies into Paris , one of the perimeter forts had to be handed over .
Favre was unaware that the real aim of Bismarck in making such extortionate demands was to establish a durable peace on the new western frontier of Germany , preferably by a peace with a friendly government , on terms acceptable to French public opinion .
An impregnable military frontier was an inferior alternative to him , favoured only by the militant nationalists on the German side .
At 17:15 , the Prussian 4th Guards Infantry Brigade joined the advance followed at 17:45 by the Prussian 1st Guards Infantry Brigade .
At 18:15 the Prussian 2nd Guards Infantry Brigade , the last of the 1st Guards Infantry Division , was committed to the attack on St. Privat while Steinmetz committed the last of the reserves of the First Army across the Mance Ravine .
At the same time , Prussian forces were concentrated in the provinces of Alsace and Lorraine .
After the German victory at Sedan , most of the French standing army was either besieged in Metz or prisoner of the Germans , who hoped for an armistice and an end to the war .
The Government of National Defence had no electoral mandate , the Emperor was a captive and the Empress in exile but there had been no abdication de jure and the army was still bound by an oath of allegiance to the defunct imperial régime .
Following the Siege of Paris , the capital fell on 28 January 1871 and then a revolutionary uprising called the Paris Commune seized power in the capital and held it for two months , until it was bloodily suppressed by the regular French army at the end of May 1871 .
Other historians , notably French historian Pierre Milza , dispute this .
Rather than advancing in a column or line formation , Prussian infantry moved in small groups that were harder to target by artillery or French defensive fire .
The sheer number of soldiers available made encirclement en masse and destruction of French formations relatively easy .
To the resulting lack of intelligence at the top can be ascribed all the inexcusable defects of French military policy . ''
Worse still , once the small number of soldiers who had been trained how to use the new weapon became casualties , there were no replacements who knew how to operate the mitrailleuse .
A shortage of officers , following the capture of most of the professional French army at the Siege of Metz and at the Battle of Sedan , led naval officers to be sent from their ships to command hastily assembled reservists of the Garde Mobile .
The rest of the navy retired to ports along the English Channel and remained in port for the rest of the war .
This organization of forces was due to a lack of supplies , forcing each division to seek out basic provisions along with the representatives of the army supply arm that was supposed to aid them .
He told General Abel Douay , commander of the 2nd Division , on 1 August that `` The information I have received makes me suppose that the enemy has no considerable forces very near his advance posts , and has no desire to take the offensive '' .
Two days later , he told MacMahon that he had not found `` a single enemy post ... it looks to me as if the menace of the Bavarians is simply bluff '' .
Even though Ducrot shrugged off the possibility of an attack by the Germans , MacMahon tried to warn the other divisions of his army , without success .
National guard units tried to seize power in Paris on 31 October 1870 and 22 January 1871 .
On 18 March 1871 , when the regular army tried to remove cannons from an artillery park on Montmartre , National Guard units resisted and killed two army generals .
The national government and regular army forces retreated to Versailles and a revolutionary government was proclaimed in Paris .
A Commune was elected , which was dominated by socialists , anarchists and revolutionaries .
In a breakdown of the casualties , Frossard 's II Corps of the Army of the Rhine suffered 621 casualties while inflicting 4,300 casualties on the Prussian First Army under Steinmetz before the Pointe du Jour .
The Prussian Guards Infantry Divisions losses were even more staggering with 8,000 casualties out of 18,000 men .
The Special Guards Jäger lost 19 officers , a surgeon and 431 men out of a total of 700 .
The 2nd Guards Infantry Brigade lost 39 officers and 1,076 men .
The 3rd Guards Infantry Brigade lost 36 officers and 1,060 men .
On the French side , the units holding St. Privat lost more than half their number in the village .
Under these circumstances , the Germans had to continue the war , yet could not pin down any proper military opposition in their vicinity .
As the bulk of the remaining French armies were digging-in near Paris , the German leaders decided to put pressure upon the enemy by attacking Paris .
By September 15 , German troops reached the outskirts of the fortified city .
On September 19 , the Germans surrounded it and erected a blockade , as already established at Metz .
Among these were two major reforms that substantially increased the military power of Germany .
Thus , despite the population of France being greater than the population of all of the German states that participated in the war , the Germans mobilized more soldiers for battle .
The Prussian batteries could thus destroy French artillery with impunity , before being moved forward to directly support infantry attacks .
Bismarck agreed to end the siege and allow food convoys to immediately enter Paris -LRB- including trains carrying millions of German army rations -RRB- , on condition that the Government of National Defence surrender several key fortresses outside Paris to the Prussians .
Without the forts , the French Army would no longer be able to defend Paris .
Communards captured with weapons were routinely shot by the army and Government troops killed from 7,000 -- 30,000 Communards in the fighting and in massacres of men , women , and children during and after the Commune .
Twenty-six courts were established to try more than 40,000 people who had been arrested , which took until 1875 and imposed 95 death sentences , of which 23 were inflicted .
Forced labour for life was imposed on 251 people , 1,160 people were transported to `` a fortified place '' and 3,417 people were transported .
About 20,000 Communards were held in prison hulks until released in 1872 and a great many Communards fled abroad to England , Switzerland , Belgium or the United States .
The survivors were amnestied by a bill introduced by Gambetta in 1880 and allowed to return .
This was partly due to the peacetime organisations of the armies .
Reservists rarely lived more than a day 's travel from their regiment 's depot .
By contrast , French regiments generally served far from their depots , which in turn were not in the areas of France from which their soldiers were drawn .
Reservists often faced several days ' journey to report to their depots , and then another long journey to join their regiments .
Large numbers of reservists choked railway stations , vainly seeking rations and orders .
The bold use of artillery by the Prussians , to silence French guns at long range and then to directly support infantry attacks at close range , proved to be superior to the defensive doctrine employed by French gunners .
This forced gunners to fire at longer range using indirect fire , usually from a position of cover .
Medri Bahri was thus part of the Christian resistance against Imam Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi of Adal 's forces , but later joined the Adalite states and the Ottoman Empire front against Abyssinia in 1572 .
Some sources dating back to 3500 BC .
Shards akin to those of the Kerma culture , another community that flourished in the Nile Valley around the same period , were also found at other local archaeological sites in the Barka valley belonging to the Gash Group .
Under Ezana -LRB- fl .
320 -- 360 -RRB- , Aksum later adopted Christianity .
In the 7th century , early Muslims from Mecca also sought refuge from Quraysh persecution by travelling to the kingdom , a journey known in Islamic history as the First Hijra .
It is also the alleged resting place of the Ark of the Covenant and the purported home of the Queen of Sheba .
In 1888 , the Italian administration launched its first development projects in the new colony .
Besides major infrastructural projects , the colonial authorities invested significantly in the agricultural sector .
Thousands of Eritreans were concurrently enlisted in the army , serving during the Italo-Turkish War in Libya as well as the First and second Italo-Abyssinian Wars .
The resolution called for Eritrea and Ethiopia to be linked through a loose federal structure under the sovereignty of the Emperor .
Eritrea was to have its own administrative and judicial structure , its own flag , and control over its domestic affairs , including police , local administration , and taxation .
There is also a small population of elephants that roam in some parts of the country .
Dik-diks can also be found in many areas .
The endangered African wild ass can be seen in Denakalia Region .
Other local wildlife include bushbucks , duikers , greater kudus , klipspringers , African leopards , oryxs and crocodiles. , The spotted hyena is widespread and fairly common .
To the east of the highlands are the hot , arid coastal plains stretching down to the southeast of the country .
The cooler , more fertile highlands , reaching up to 3000m has a different habitat .
Habitats here vary from the sub-tropical rainforest at Filfil Solomona to the precipitous cliffs and canyons of the southern highlands .
However , the Eritrean government has continually dismissed the accusations as politically motivated .
In these sessions they have answered questions as fundamental as , `` What are human rights ? ''
, `` Who determines what are human rights ? ''
, and `` What should take precedence , human or communal rights ? ''
In Regional Assemblies and religious circles , Eritreans themselves speak out continuously against the use of female circumcision .
Furthermore , they implore rural peoples to cast away this ancient cultural practice .
The state-owned news agency censors news about external events .
In 2015 , The Guardian published an opinion piece claiming ,
Eritrea is a multilingual country .
With 2,540,000 total speakers of a population of 5,254,000 in 2006 , Tigrinya is the most widely spoken language , particularly in the southern and central parts of Eritrea .
Italian , the former colonial language , is widely used in commerce and is taught as a second language in schools , with a few elderly monolinguals .
Due to Eritrea 's relative isolation , information and resources are extremely limited and according to the World Health Organisation -LRB- WHO -RRB- found in 2008 average life expectancy to be slightly less than 63 years .
Immunisation and child nutrition has been tackled by working closely with schools in a multi-sectoral approach ; the number of children vaccinated against measles almost doubled in seven years , from 40.7 % to 78.5 % and the underweight prevalence among children decreased by 12 % in 1995 -- 2002 -LRB- severe underweight prevalence by 28 % -RRB- .
Alongside sowa , people in Eritrea also tend to drink coffee .
Coffee -LRB- Ge'ez ቡን būn -RRB- is offered when visiting friends , during festivities , or as a daily staple of life .
During the coffee ceremony , there are traditions that are upheld .
Eritrea -LRB- / ˌɛrᵻˈtreɪ.ə / or / ˌɛrᵻˈtriːə / ; , officially the State of Eritrea , is a country in East Africa .
Its name Eritrea is based on the Greek name for the Red Sea -LRB- Ἐρυθρὰ Θάλασσα Erythra Thalassa -RRB- , which was first adopted for Italian Eritrea in 1890 .
Other prominent local musicians include the Kunama singer Dehab Faytinga , Ruth Abraha , Bereket Mengisteab , Yemane Baria , and the late Abraham Afewerki .
The name Eritrea is derived from the ancient Greek name for Red Sea -LRB- Ἐρυθρὰ Θάλασσα Erythra Thalassa , based on the adjective ἐρυθρός erythros `` red '' -RRB- .
It was first formally adopted in 1890 , with the formation of Italian Eritrea -LRB- Colonia Eritrea -RRB- .
The territory became the Eritrea Governorate within Italian East Africa in 1936 .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
One of the baboons had distorted isotopic data , so the other 's oxygen isotope values were compared to those of present-day baboon specimens from regions of interest .
The area was then known as Ma'ikele Bahr -LRB- `` between the seas/rivers , '' i.e. the land between the Red Sea and the Mereb river -RRB- .
This Fascist period was characterized by imperial expansion in the name of a `` new Roman Empire '' .
The situation has been further escalated by the continued efforts of the Eritrean and Ethiopian leaders in supporting opposition in one another 's countries .
However , Eritrea still faces many challenges .
Malaria and tuberculosis are common in Eritrea .
Maternal mortality dropped by more than half from 1995 to 2002 , although the figure is still high .
Per capita expenditure on health is low in Eritrea .
Traditional Eritrean attire is quite varied among the ethnic groups of Eritrea .
In recent years , Eritrean athletes have also seen increasing success in the international arena .
The Eritrea national cycling team has experienced a lot of success , winning the continental cycling championship several years in a row .
Berhane was named African Sportsman of the Year in 2013 , ahead of footballers Yaya Touré and Didier Drogba , while Teklehaimanot became the first Eritrean to ride the Vuelta a España in 2012 .
In 2015 Teklehaimanot won the King of the Mountains classification in the Critérium du Dauphine .
It is believed that the area was on the route out of Africa that some scholars suggest was used by early humans to colonize the rest of the Old World .
The polity had come into existence in 1577 , when Muhammed Jasa moved his capital from Harar to Aussa -LRB- Asaita -RRB- with the split of the Adal Sultanate into Aussa and the Sultanate of Harar .
At some point after 1672 , Aussa declined in conjunction with Imam Umar Din bin Adam 's recorded ascension to the throne .
This marked the start of a new and more sophisticated polity that would last into the colonial period .
In the Treaty of Wuchale -LRB- It .
Uccialli -RRB- signed the same year , King Menelik of Shewa , a southern Ethiopian kingdom , recognized the Italian occupation of his rivals ' lands of Bogos , Hamasien , Akkele Guzay , and Serae in exchange for guarantees of financial assistance and continuing access to European arms and ammunition .
He laid claim to both territories in a letter to Franklin D. Roosevelt at the Paris Peace Conference and at the First Session of the United Nations .
In the United Nations , the debate over the fate of the former Italian colonies continued .
The lowest level road is tertiary and serves local interests .
During the wet seasons these roads typically become impassable .
According to a study made by Pew Research Center , 63 % adheres to Christianity and 36 % adheres to Islam .
However , the education infrastructure is inadequate to meet current needs .
There are an average 63 students per classroom at the elementary level and 97 per classroom at the secondary level .
Learning hours at school are often less than six hours per day .
Skill shortages are present at all levels of the education system , and funding for and access to education vary significantly by gender and location .
Illiteracy estimates for Eritrea range from around 40 % to as high as 70 % .
Depleted uranium is preferred over similarly dense metals due to its ability to be easily machined and cast as well as its relatively low cost .
This left a prodigious quantity of uranium as a waste product , since it takes three tonnes of uranium to extract one gram of radium .
This waste product was diverted to the glazing industry , making uranium glazes very inexpensive and abundant .
Initially , four 150-watt light bulbs were lit by the reactor , but improvements eventually enabled it to power the whole facility -LRB- later , the town of Arco became the first in the world to have all its electricity come from nuclear power generated by BORAX-III , another reactor designed and operated by Argonne National Laboratory -RRB- .
The world 's first commercial scale nuclear power station , Obninsk in the Soviet Union , began generation with its reactor AM-1 on 27 June 1954 .
Other early nuclear power plants were Calder Hall in England , which began generation on 17 October 1956 , and the Shippingport Atomic Power Station in Pennsylvania , which began on 26 May 1958 .
Nuclear power was used for the first time for propulsion by a submarine , the USS Nautilus , in 1954 .
Uranium is a naturally occurring element that can be found in low levels within all rock , soil , and water .
Uranium is also the highest-numbered element to be found naturally in significant quantities on Earth and is almost always found combined with other elements .
Other naturally occurring isotopes are fissionable , but not fissile .
Such neutron absorbent materials are often part of reactor control rods -LRB- see nuclear reactor physics for a description of this process of reactor control -RRB- .
strain BSAR-1 has been found to express a high activity alkaline phosphatase -LRB- PhoK -RRB- that has been applied for bioprecipitation of uranium as uranyl phosphate species from alkaline solutions .
The precipitation ability was enhanced by overexpressing PhoK protein in E. coli .
The OECD Nuclear Energy Agency said exploration figures for 2007 would likely match those for 2006 .
The experiments leading to the discovery of uranium 's ability to fission -LRB- break apart -RRB- into lighter elements and release binding energy were conducted by Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann in Hahn 's laboratory in Berlin .
Soon after , Fermi hypothesized that the fission of uranium might release enough neutrons to sustain a fission reaction .
Confirmation of this hypothesis came in 1939 , and later work found that on average about 2.5 neutrons are released by each fission of the rare uranium isotope uranium-235 .
Further work found that the far more common uranium-238 isotope can be transmuted into plutonium , which , like uranium-235 , is also fissile by thermal neutrons .
These discoveries led numerous countries to begin working on the development of nuclear weapons and nuclear power .
All three are radioactive , emitting alpha particles , with the exception that all three of these isotopes have small probabilities of undergoing spontaneous fission , rather than alpha emission .
Many contemporary uses of uranium exploit its unique nuclear properties .
In sufficient concentration , these isotopes maintain a sustained nuclear chain reaction .
This generates the heat in nuclear power reactors , and produces the fissile material for nuclear weapons .
A person can be exposed to uranium -LRB- or its radioactive daughters , such as radon -RRB- by inhaling dust in air or by ingesting contaminated water and food .
The amount of uranium in air is usually very small ; however , people who work in factories that process phosphate fertilizers , live near government facilities that made or tested nuclear weapons , live or work near a modern battlefield where depleted uranium weapons have been used , or live or work near a coal-fired power plant , facilities that mine or process uranium ore , or enrich uranium for reactor fuel , may have increased exposure to uranium .
Houses or structures that are over uranium deposits -LRB- either natural or man-made slag deposits -RRB- may have an increased incidence of exposure to radon gas .
Both oxide forms are solids that have low solubility in water and are relatively stable over a wide range of environmental conditions .
At ambient temperatures , UO 2 will gradually convert to U 3O 8 .
Because of their stability , uranium oxides are generally considered the preferred chemical form for storage or disposal .
Starting in the late Middle Ages , pitchblende was extracted from the Habsburg silver mines in Joachimsthal , Bohemia -LRB- now Jáchymov in the Czech Republic -RRB- , and was used as a coloring agent in the local glassmaking industry .
In the early 19th century , the world 's only known sources of uranium ore were these mines .
It was also used for tinting and shading in early photography .
An ensuing arms race during the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union produced tens of thousands of nuclear weapons that used uranium metal and uranium-derived plutonium-239 .
The security of those weapons and their fissile material following the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991 is an ongoing concern for public health and safety .
See Nuclear proliferation .
Most neutrons released by a fissioning atom of uranium-235 must impact other uranium-235 atoms to sustain the nuclear chain reaction .
At high impact speed , the density , hardness , and pyrophoricity of the projectile enable the destruction of heavily armored targets .
Tank armor and other removable vehicle armor can also be hardened with depleted uranium plates .
Klaproth assumed the yellow substance was the oxide of a yet-undiscovered element and heated it with charcoal to obtain a black powder , which he thought was the newly discovered metal itself -LRB- in fact , that powder was an oxide of uranium -RRB- .
Extensive measures must be employed to extract the metal from its ore .
Uranium ore is crushed and rendered into a fine powder and then leached with either an acid or alkali .
The leachate is subjected to one of several sequences of precipitation , solvent extraction , and ion exchange .
The resulting mixture , called yellowcake , contains at least 75 % uranium oxides U3O8 .
Yellowcake is then calcined to remove impurities from the milling process before refining and conversion .
Initially it was believed that uranium was relatively rare , and that nuclear proliferation could be avoided by simply buying up all known uranium stocks , but within a decade large deposits of it were discovered in many places around the world .
In the late 1960s , UN geologists also discovered major uranium deposits and other rare mineral reserves in Somalia .
The find was the largest of its kind , with industry experts estimating the deposits at over 25 % of the world 's then known uranium reserves of 800,000 tons .
This money was used for improvements and security enhancements at research and storage facilities .
Scientific American reported in February 2006 that in some of the facilities security consisted of chain link fences which were in severe states of disrepair .
Salts of many oxidation states of uranium are water-soluble and may be studied in aqueous solutions .
A few solid and semi-metallic compounds such as UO and US exist for the formal oxidation state uranium -LRB- II -RRB- , but no simple ions are known to exist in solution for that state .
Ions of U3 + liberate hydrogen from water and are therefore considered to be highly unstable .
After one day , one gram of bacteria can encrust themselves with nine grams of uranyl phosphate crystals ; this creates the possibility that these organisms could be used in bioremediation to decontaminate uranium-polluted water .
Even higher temperatures will reversibly remove the hydrogen .
Uranium carbides and uranium nitrides are both relatively inert semimetallic compounds that are minimally soluble in acids , react with water , and can ignite in air to form U 3O 8 .
Both UC and UC 2 are formed by adding carbon to molten uranium or by exposing the metal to carbon monoxide at high temperatures .
Uranium nitrides obtained by direct exposure of the metal to nitrogen include uranium mononitride -LRB- UN -RRB- , uranium dinitride -LRB- UN 2 -RRB- , and diuranium trinitride -LRB- U 2N 3 -RRB- .
This process produces huge quantities of uranium that is depleted of uranium-235 and with a correspondingly increased fraction of uranium-238 , called depleted uranium or ` DU ' .
Uranium is also a reproductive toxicant .
While the CDC has published one study that no human cancer has been seen as a result of exposure to natural or depleted uranium , exposure to uranium and its decay products , especially radon , are widely known and significant health threats .
Exposure to strontium-90 , iodine-131 , and other fission products is unrelated to uranium exposure , but may result from medical procedures or exposure to spent reactor fuel or fallout from nuclear weapons .
Although accidental inhalation exposure to a high concentration of uranium hexafluoride has resulted in human fatalities , those deaths were associated with the generation of highly toxic hydrofluoric acid and uranyl fluoride rather than with uranium itself .
The molecular laser isotope separation method employs a laser beam of precise energy to sever the bond between uranium-235 and fluorine .
This leaves uranium-238 bonded to fluorine and allows uranium-235 metal to precipitate from the solution .
An alternative laser method of enrichment is known as atomic vapor laser isotope separation -LRB- AVLIS -RRB- and employs visible tunable lasers such as dye lasers .
Another method used is liquid thermal diffusion .
Uranium is weakly radioactive because all its isotopes are unstable -LRB- with half-lives of the six naturally known isotopes , uranium-233 to uranium-238 , varying between 69 years and 4.5 billion years -RRB- .
The most common isotopes of uranium are uranium-238 -LRB- which has 146 neutrons and accounts for almost 99.3 % of the uranium found in nature -RRB- and uranium-235 -LRB- which has 143 neutrons , accounting for 0.7 % of the element found naturally -RRB- .
Uranium has the second highest atomic weight of the primordially occurring elements , lighter only than plutonium .
Its density is about 70 % higher than that of lead , but slightly lower than that of gold or tungsten .
It occurs naturally in low concentrations of a few parts per million in soil , rock and water , and is commercially extracted from uranium-bearing minerals such as uraninite .
This is high enough to permit a sustained nuclear fission chain reaction to occur , provided other supporting conditions exist .
However , soluble uranium compounds tend to quickly pass through the body , whereas insoluble uranium compounds , especially when inhaled by way of dust into the lungs , pose a more serious exposure hazard .
Uranium is not absorbed through the skin , and alpha particles released by uranium can not penetrate the skin .
However , they only used the post-nominal letters of the higher grade .
Honorary appointees who later become a citizen of a Commonwealth realm can convert their appointment from honorary to substantive , then enjoy all privileges of membership of the order including use of the title of Sir and Dame for the senior two ranks of the Order .
In many of these systems , the different levels of award and honour reflect the Imperial system they replaced .
I 'd say we deserve ours more . ''
Other criticism centres on the claim that many recipients of the Order are being rewarded with honours for simply doing their jobs ; critics claim that the civil service and judiciary receive far more orders and honours than leaders of other professions .
There is also the related British Empire Medal , whose recipients are affiliated with , but not members of , the order .
In addition , the BEM is awarded by the Cook Islands and by some other Commonwealth nations .
In 2004 , a report entitled `` A Matter of Honour : Reforming Our Honours System '' by a Commons committee recommended to phase out the Order of the British Empire , as its title was `` now considered to be unacceptable , being thought to embody values that are no longer shared by many of the country 's population '' .
Oddly , this meant that it was awarded for lesser acts of gallantry than the George Medal , but , as an Order , was worn before it and listed before it in post-nominal initials .
These do not carry any decoration or insignia that can be worn on the person and may not be used as titles along with individuals ' names .
Foreign recipients , as honorary members , do not contribute to the numbers restricted to the Order as full members do .
The ideas of the Enlightenment undermined the authority of the monarchy and the church , and paved the way for the revolutions of the 18th and 19th centuries .
The influence of science also began appearing more commonly in poetry and literature during the Enlightenment .
Both Rousseau and Locke 's social contract theories rest on the presupposition of natural rights , which are not a result of law or custom , but are things that all men have in pre-political societies , and are therefore universal and inalienable .
Locke also argued against slavery on the basis that enslaving yourself goes against the law of nature ; you can not surrender your own rights , your freedom is absolute and no one can take it from you .
Theologians of the Enlightenment wanted to reform their faith to its generally non-confrontational roots and to limit the capacity for religious controversy to spill over into politics and warfare while still maintaining a true faith in God .
John Locke abandoned the corpus of theological commentary in favor of an `` unprejudiced examination '' of the Word of God alone .
He tried to extract the practical Christian moral code of the New Testament .
The Enlightenment took hold in most European countries , often with a specific local emphasis .
The Enlightenment has always been contested territory .
Its supporters `` hail it as the source of everything that is progressive about the modern world .
For them , it stands for freedom of thought , rational inquiry , critical thinking , religious tolerance , political liberty , scientific achievement , the pursuit of happiness , and hope for the future . ''
However , its detractors accuse it of ` shallow ' rationalism , naïve optimism , unrealistic universalism , and moral darkness .
There is little consensus on the precise beginning of the Age of Enlightenment ; the beginning of the 18th century -LRB- 1701 -RRB- or the middle of the 17th century -LRB- 1650 -RRB- are often used as epochs .
It is argued by several historians and philosophers that the beginning of the Enlightenment is when Descartes shifted the epistemological basis from external authority to internal certainty by his cogito ergo sum published in 1637 .
The modern nation state , in its consolidation of public power , created by counterpoint a private realm of society independent of the state , which allowed for the public sphere .
As the nascent public sphere expanded , it embraced a large variety of institutions ; the most commonly cited were coffee houses and cafés , salons and the literary public sphere , figuratively localized in the Republic of Letters .
This widely available dictionary gave short definitions of words like genius and taste , and was clearly influenced by the Enlightenment movement .
Recently , musicologists have shown renewed interest in the ideas and consequences of the Enlightenment .
Women , as salonnières , were `` the legitimate governors of -LSB- the -RSB- potentially unruly discourse '' that took place within .
The vast majority of the reading public could not afford to own a private library , and while most of the state-run `` universal libraries '' set up in the 17th and 18th centuries were open to the public , they were not the only sources of reading material .
Moving up the classes , a variety of institutions offered readers access to material without needing to buy anything .
Libraries that lent out their material for a small price started to appear , and occasionally bookstores would offer a small lending library to their patrons .
Coffee houses commonly offered books , journals and sometimes even popular novels to their customers .
This is an example of the triple or even quadruple function of the coffee house : reading material was often obtained , read , discussed and even produced on the premises .
However , natural history was often a political affair .
As E. C. Spary writes , the classifications used by naturalists `` slipped between the natural world and the social ... to establish not only the expertise of the naturalists over the natural , but also the dominance of the natural over the social '' .
In this way natural history spread many of the scientific developments of the time , but also provided a new source of legitimacy for the dominant class .
From this basis , naturalists could then develop their own social ideals based on their scientific works .
Other technical dictionaries followed Harris ' model , including Ephraim Chambers ' Cyclopaedia -LRB- 1728 -RRB- , which included five editions , and was a substantially larger work than Harris ' .
The folio edition of the work even included foldout engravings .
The Cyclopaedia emphasized Newtonian theories , Lockean philosophy , and contained thorough examinations of technologies , such as engraving , brewing , and dyeing .
The book was produced specifically for women with an interest in scientific writing and inspired a variety of similar works .
These popular works were written in a discursive style , which was laid out much more clearly for the reader than the complicated articles , treatises , and books published by the academies and scientists .
Charles Leadbetter 's Astronomy -LRB- 1727 -RRB- was advertised as `` a Work entirely New '' that would include `` short and easie -LSB- sic -RSB- Rules and Astronomical Tables . ''
The first French introduction to Newtonianism and the Principia was Eléments de la philosophie de Newton , published by Voltaire in 1738 .
Francesco Algarotti , writing for a growing female audience , published Il Newtonianism per le dame , which was a tremendously popular work and was translated from Italian into English by Elizabeth Carter .
A similar introduction to Newtonianism for women was produced by Henry Pembarton .
His A View of Sir Isaac Newton 's Philosophy was published by subscription .
Extant records of subscribers show that women from a wide range of social standings purchased the book , indicating the growing number of scientifically inclined female readers among the middling class .
During the Enlightenment , women also began producing popular scientific works themselves .
The strongest contribution of the French Academies to the public sphere comes from the concours académiques -LRB- roughly translated as ` academic contests ' -RRB- they sponsored throughout France .
These academic contests were perhaps the most public of any institution during the Enlightenment .
By roughly 1725 , however , this subject matter had radically expanded and diversified , including `` royal propaganda , philosophical battles , and critical ruminations on the social and political institutions of the Old Regime . ''
These penny universities occupied a significant position in Oxford academic life , as they were frequented by those consequently referred to as the `` virtuosi '' , who conducted their research on some of the resulting premises .
According to Cowan , `` the coffeehouse was a place for like-minded scholars to congregate , to read , as well as learn from and to debate with each other , but was emphatically not a university institution , and the discourse there was of a far different order than any university tutorial . ''
The leaders of the Enlightenment included Freemasons such as Diderot , Montesquieu , Voltaire , Pope , Horace Walpole , Sir Robert Walpole , Mozart , Goethe , Frederick the Great , Benjamin Franklin , and George Washington .
It expanded rapidly during the Age of Enlightenment , reaching practically every country in Europe .
Earlier philosophers whose work influenced the Enlightenment included Francis Bacon , Descartes , Locke , and Spinoza .
The major figures of the Enlightenment included Cesare Beccaria , Voltaire , Denis Diderot , Jean-Jacques Rousseau , David Hume , Adam Smith , and Immanuel Kant .
Mary Wollstonecraft was one of England 's earliest feminist philosophers .
Hume and other Scottish Enlightenment thinkers developed a ` science of man ' , which was expressed historically in works by authors including James Burnett , Adam Ferguson , John Millar , and William Robertson , all of whom merged a scientific study of how humans behaved in ancient and primitive cultures with a strong awareness of the determining forces of modernity .
Locke defines the state of nature as a condition in which humans are rational and follow natural law ; in which all men are born equal and with the right to life , liberty and property .
Therefore , Locke said that individuals enter into civil society to protect their natural rights via an `` unbiased judge '' or common authority , such as courts , to appeal to .
Contrastingly , Rousseau 's conception relies on the supposition that `` civil man '' is corrupted , while `` natural man '' has no want he can not fulfill himself .
Natural man is only taken out of the state of nature when the inequality associated with private property is established .
This is embodied in the sovereignty of the general will , the moral and collective legislative body constituted by citizens .
In several nations , rulers welcomed leaders of the Enlightenment at court and asked them to help design laws and programs to reform the system , typically to build stronger national states .
Joseph was over-enthusiastic , announcing so many reforms that had so little support that revolts broke out and his regime became a comedy of errors and nearly all his programs were reversed .
Senior ministers Pombal in Portugal and Struensee in Denmark also governed according to Enlightenment ideals .
More enduring were the cultural achievements , which created a nationalist spirit in Poland .
In the Scottish Enlightenment , Scotland 's major cities created an intellectual infrastructure of mutually supporting institutions such as universities , reading societies , libraries , periodicals , museums and masonic lodges .
The Scottish network was `` predominantly liberal Calvinist , Newtonian , and ` design ' oriented in character which played a major role in the further development of the transatlantic Enlightenment '' .
From Immanuel Kant 's 1784 essay `` Beantwortung der Frage : Was ist Aufklärung ? ''
-LRB- `` Answering the Question : What is Enlightenment ? '' -RRB-
However , scholars have never agreed on a definition of the Enlightenment , or on its chronological or geographical extent .
Not until the late nineteenth century did English scholars agree they were talking about `` the Enlightenment . ''
Meanwhile , the colonial experience -LRB- most European states had colonial empires in the 18th century -RRB- began to expose European society to extremely heterogeneous cultures , leading to the breaking down of `` barriers between cultural systems , religious divides , gender differences and geographical areas '' .
One manifestation of this involved women , who became more involved with music on a social level .
Music publishers begin to print music that amateurs could understand and play .
After these initial genres were popularized , from the mid-century on , amateur groups sang choral music , which then became a new trend for publishers to capitalize on .
The increasing study of the fine arts , as well as access to amateur-friendly published works , led to more people becoming interested in reading and discussing music .
Music magazines , reviews , and critical works which suited amateurs as well as connoisseurs began to surface .
However , it was not until 1682 that periodicals began to be more widely produced .
There was generally low demand for English publications on the Continent , which was echoed by England 's similar lack of desire for French works .
Languages commanding less of an international market -- such as Danish , Spanish and Portuguese -- found journal success more difficult , and more often than not , a more international language was used instead .
French slowly took over Latin 's status as the lingua franca of learned circles .
Similarly , a significant number of women participated -- and won -- the competitions .
The Café Procope in particular became a center of Enlightenment , welcoming such celebrities as Voltaire and Rousseau .
The cafés were one of the various `` nerve centers '' for bruits publics , public noise or rumour .
During the Age of Enlightenment , Freemasons comprised an international network of like-minded men , often meeting in secret in ritualistic programs at their lodges .
they promoted the ideals of the Enlightenment , and helped diffuse these values across Britain and France and other places .
They fostered new codes of conduct -- including a communal understanding of liberty and equality inherited from guild sociability -- `` liberty , fraternity , and equality '' Scottish soldiers and Jacobite Scots brought to the Continent ideals of fraternity which reflected not the local system of Scottish customs but the institutions and ideals originating in the English Revolution against royal absolutism .
The Freemasons displayed a passion for secrecy and created new degrees and ceremonies .
Similar societies , partially imitating Freemasonry , emerged in France , Germany , Sweden and Russia .
The Illuminati was an overtly political group , which most Masonic lodges decidedly were not .
Tutored by Locke , Anthony Ashley-Cooper , 3rd Earl of Shaftesbury wrote in 1706 : `` There is a mighty Light which spreads its self over the world especially in those two free Nations of England and Holland ; on whom the Affairs of Europe now turn '' .
Frederick explained , `` My principal occupation is to combat ignorance and prejudice ... to enlighten minds , cultivate morality , and to make people as happy as it suits human nature , and as the means at my disposal permit . ''
Franklin was influential for his political activism and for his advances in physics .
Thinkers such as Paine , Locke , and Rousseau all take Native American cultural practices as examples of natural freedom .
The Americans closely followed English and Scottish political ideas , as well as some French thinkers such as Montesquieu .
During the Enlightenment there was a great emphasis upon liberty , democracy , republicanism and religious tolerance .
Le Gazetier cuirassé by Charles Théveneau de Morande was a prototype of the genre .
It was Grub Street literature that was most read by the public during the Enlightenment .
Such an environment was especially intimidating to monarchs who derived much of their power from the disparity between classes of people .
If classes were to join together under the influence of Enlightenment thinking , they might recognize the all-encompassing oppression and abuses of their monarchs and , because of their size , might be able to carry out successful revolts .
A genre that greatly rose in importance was that of scientific literature .
Students in Enlightenment universities and academies were taught these subjects to prepare them for careers as diverse as medicine and theology .
As shown by M D Eddy , natural history in this context was a very middle class pursuit and operated as a fertile trading zone for the interdisciplinary exchange of diverse scientific ideas .
Masonic lodges created a private model for public affairs .
They `` reconstituted the polity and established a constitutional form of self-government , complete with constitutions and laws , elections and representatives . ''
In other words , the micro-society set up within the lodges constituted a normative model for society as a whole .
Furthermore , freemasons all across Europe explicitly linked themselves to the Enlightenment as a whole .
In French lodges , for example , the line `` As the means to be enlightened I search for the enlightened '' was a part of their initiation rites .
This did not necessarily link lodges to the irreligious , but neither did this exclude them from the occasional heresy .
Coffeeshops became homes away from home for many who sought , for the first time , to engage in discourse with their neighbors and discuss intriguing and thought-provoking matters , especially those regarding philosophy to politics .
Although many coffeehouse patrons were scholars , a great deal were not .
Coffeehouses attracted a diverse set of people , including not only the educated wealthy but also members of the bourgeoisie and the lower class .
While it may seem positive that patrons , being doctors , lawyers , merchants , etc. represented almost all classes , the coffeeshop environment sparked fear in those who sought to preserve class distinction .
One of the most popular critiques of the coffeehouse claimed that it `` allowed promiscuous association among people from different rungs of the social ladder , from the artisan to the aristocrat '' and was therefore compared to Noah 's Ark , receiving all types of animals , clean or unclean .
This unique culture served as a catalyst for journalism when Joseph Addison and Richard Steele recognized its potential as an audience .
Even in France , Masons did not act as a group .
The Enlightenment included a range of ideas centered on reason as the primary source of authority and legitimacy , and came to advance ideals such as liberty , progress , tolerance , fraternity , constitutional government and ending the abuses of the church and state .
The Enlightenment was marked by increasing empiricism , scientific rigor , and reductionism , along with increased questioning of religious orthodoxy .
While the Philosophes of the French Enlightenment were not revolutionaries , and many were members of the nobility , their ideas played an important part in undermining the legitimacy of the Old Regime and shaping the French Revolution .
After the Revolution , the Enlightenment was followed by an opposing intellectual movement known as Romanticism .
For Locke , this created a natural right in the liberty of conscience , which he said must therefore remain protected from any government authority .
A number of novel ideas about religion developed with the Enlightenment , including Deism and talk of atheism .
Instead , the Deist relies solely on personal reason to guide his creed , which was eminently agreeable to many thinkers of the time .
Atheism was much discussed , but there were few proponents .
Wilson and Reill note that , `` In fact , very few enlightened intellectuals , even when they were vocal critics of Christianity , were true atheists .
Rather , they were critics of orthodox belief , wedded rather to skepticism , deism , vitalism , or perhaps pantheism . ''
That is , since atheists gave themselves to no Supreme Authority and no law , and had no fear of eternal consequences , they were far more likely to disrupt society .
Bayle -LRB- 1647 -- 1706 -RRB- observed that in his day , `` prudent persons will always maintain an appearance of -LSB- religion -RSB- . ''
.
He believed that even atheists could hold concepts of honor and go beyond their own self-interest to create and interact in society .
Locke said that if there were no God and no divine law , the result would be moral anarchy : every individual `` could have no law but his own will , no end but himself .
He would be a god to himself , and the satisfaction of his own will the sole measure and end of all his actions '' .
The word `` public '' implies the highest level of inclusivity -- the public sphere by definition should be open to all .
However , this sphere was only public to relative degrees .
However , demand for reading material extended outside of the realm of the commercial , and outside the realm of the upper and middle classes , as evidenced by the Bibliothèque Bleue .
The concerts also helped them to reach a wider audience .
Handel , for example , epitomized this with his highly public musical activities in London .
It was closely tied to the French state , acting as an extension of a government seriously lacking in scientists .
It helped promote and organize new disciplines , and it trained new scientists .
For example , it was with this in mind that academicians took it upon themselves to disprove the popular pseudo-science of mesmerism .
Within the natural sciences , Edinburgh 's medical also led the way in chemistry , anatomy and pharmacology .
In other parts of Europe , the universities and schools of France and most of Europe were bastions of traditionalism and were not hospitable to the Enlightenment .
In addition to being conducive to Enlightenment ideologies of liberty , self-determination and personal responsibility , it offered a practical theory of the mind that allowed teachers to transform longstanding forms of print and manuscript culture into effective graphic tools of learning for the lower and middle orders of society .
The work , which began publication in 1751 , was composed of thirty-five volumes and over 71 000 separate entries .
A great number of the entries were dedicated to describing the sciences and crafts in detail , and provided intellectuals across Europe with a high-quality survey of human knowledge .
Broadly speaking , Enlightenment science greatly valued empiricism and rational thought , and was embedded with the Enlightenment ideal of advancement and progress .
Societies and academies were also the backbone of the maturation of the scientific profession .
Another important development was the popularization of science among an increasingly literate population .
Science came to play a leading role in Enlightenment discourse and thought .
Scientific academies and societies grew out of the Scientific Revolution as the creators of scientific knowledge in contrast to the scholasticism of the university .
During the Enlightenment , some societies created or retained links to universities .
As the role of universities in institutionalized science began to diminish , learned societies became the cornerstone of organized science .
Official scientific societies were chartered by the state in order to provide technical expertise .
Most societies were granted permission to oversee their own publications , control the election of new members , and the administration of the society .
Clearly a governance philosophy where the king was never wrong was in direct conflict with one whereby citizens by natural law had to consent to the acts and rulings of their government .
Hume 's essay Of the Original Contract argues that governments derived from consent are rarely seen , and civil government is grounded in a ruler 's habitual authority and force .
It is precisely because of the ruler 's authority over-and-against the subject , that the subject tacitly consents ; Hume says that the subjects would `` never imagine that their consent made him sovereign '' , rather the authority did so .
Similarly , Ferguson did not believe citizens built the state , rather polities grew out of social development .
This era produced the first Russian university , library , theatre , public museum , and independent press .
Like other enlightened despots , Catherine the Great played a key role in fostering the arts , sciences , and education .
The national Enlightenment differed from its Western European counterpart in that it promoted further modernization of all aspects of Russian life and was concerned with attacking the institution of serfdom in Russia .
These men of letters constituted a sort of `` substitute aristocracy that was both all-powerful and without real power '' .
The `` literary politics '' that resulted promoted a discourse of equality and was hence in fundamental opposition to the monarchical regime .
De Tocqueville `` clearly designates ... the cultural effects of transformation in the forms of the exercise of power '' .
Nevertheless , it took another century before cultural approach became central to the historiography , as typified by Robert Darnton , The Business of Enlightenment : A Publishing History of the Encyclopédie , 1775 -- 1800 -LRB- 1979 -RRB- .
Enlightenment historiography began in the period itself , from what Enlightenment figures said about their work .
A dominant element was the intellectual angle they took .
D'Alembert 's Preliminary Discourse of l'Encyclopédie provides a history of the Enlightenment which comprises a chronological list of developments in the realm of knowledge -- of which the Encyclopédie forms the pinnacle .
`` For Kant , Enlightenment was mankind 's final coming of age , the emancipation of the human consciousness from an immature state of ignorance . ''
The German scholar Ernst Cassirer called the Enlightenment `` a part and a special phase of that whole intellectual development through which modern philosophic thought gained its characteristic self-confidence and self-consciousness '' .
He previously had supported successful efforts to disestablish the Church of England in Virginia , and authored the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom .
It is important to note , however , that the critical subject matter of these debates did not necessarily translate into opposition to the government .
In other words , the results of the debate quite frequently upheld the status quo .
Once inside , spectators were able to participate in a largely egalitarian form of sociability that helped spread Enlightenment ideas .
While the public sphere is generally an integral component of the social study of the Enlightenment , other historians have questioned whether the public sphere had these characteristics .
Indeed , many publishing companies were conveniently located outside France so as to avoid overzealous French censors .
They would smuggle their merchandise across the border , where it would then be transported to clandestine booksellers or small-time peddlers .
The records of clandestine booksellers may give a better representation of what literate Frenchmen might have truly read , since their clandestine nature provided a less restrictive product choice .
In one case , political books were the most popular category , primarily libels and pamphlets .
However , these works never became part of literary canon , and are largely forgotten today as a result .
A healthy , and legal , publishing industry existed throughout Europe , although established publishers and book sellers occasionally ran afoul of the law .
But many works were sold without running into any legal trouble at all .
The Republic of Letters was the sum of a number of Enlightenment ideals : an egalitarian realm governed by knowledge that could act across political boundaries and rival state power .
Indeed , the men who wrote Diderot 's Encyclopédie arguably formed a microcosm of the larger `` republic '' .
They also advanced Christian enlightenment that upheld `` the legitimacy of God-ordained authority '' -- the Bible -- in which there had to be agreement between the biblical and natural theories .
As the 18th century progressed , the content of encyclopedias also changed according to readers ' tastes .
The Enlightenment 's desacrilization of religion was pronounced in the tree 's design , particularly where theology accounted for a peripheral branch , with black magic as a close neighbour .
As the Encyclopédie gained popularity , it was published in quarto and octavo editions after 1777 .
The extensive , yet affordable encyclopedia came to represent the transmission of Enlightenment and scientific education to an expanding audience .
Boyle was `` a founder of the experimental world in which scientists now live and operate , '' and his method based knowledge on experimentation , which had to be witnessed to provide proper empirical legitimacy .
This is where the Royal Society came into play : witnessing had to be a `` collective act '' , and the Royal Society 's assembly rooms were ideal locations for relatively public demonstrations .
In other words , only civil society were considered for Boyle 's public .
The debating societies discussed an extremely wide range of topics .
After this date everything thus previously rooted in tradition was questioned and often replaced by new concepts in the light of philosophical reason .
Many of the Masons values seemed to greatly appeal to Enlightenment values and thinkers .
Diderot discusses the link between Freemason ideals and the enlightenment in D'Alembert 's Dream , exploring masonry as a way of spreading enlightenment beliefs .
He argues that the lodges only attracted men of similar social backgrounds .
For Porset , the avoidance of thematic and hierarchical systems thus allows free interpretation of the works and becomes an example of egalitarianism .
Along with growth in numbers , dictionaries and encyclopedias also grew in length , often having multiple print runs that sometimes included in supplemented editions .
One of the most important developments that the Enlightenment era brought to the discipline of science was its popularization .
An increasingly literate population seeking knowledge and education in both the arts and the sciences drove the expansion of print culture and the dissemination of scientific learning .
As public interest in natural philosophy grew during the 18th century , public lecture courses and the publication of popular texts opened up new roads to money and fame for amateurs and scientists who remained on the periphery of universities and academies .
More formal works included explanations of scientific theories for individuals lacking the educational background to comprehend the original scientific text .
When CCA1 and LHY are overexpressed -LRB- under constant light or dark conditions -RRB- , plants become arrhythmic , and mRNA signals reduce , contributing to a negative feedback loop .
Gene expression of CCA1 and LHY oscillates and peaks in the early morning , whereas TOC1 gene expression oscillates and peaks in the early evening .
This finding and further computational modeling of TOC1 gene functions and interactions suggest a reframing of the plant circadian clock as a triple negative-component repressilator model rather than the positive/negative-element feedback loop characterizing the clock in mammals .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Behaviors showing rhythms include leaf movement , growth , germination , stomatal/gas exchange , enzyme activity , photosynthetic activity , and fragrance emission , among others .
These rhythms are endogenously generated and self-sustaining and are relatively constant over a range of ambient temperatures .
Important features include two interacting transcription-translation feedback loops : proteins containing PAS domains , which facilitate protein-protein interactions ; and several photoreceptors that fine-tune the clock to different light conditions .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Their sleep cycle is pushed back or forward each `` day '' , depending on whether their `` day '' , their endogenous period , is shorter or longer than 24 hours .
Totally blind subterranean mammals -LRB- e.g. , blind mole rat Spalax sp . -RRB-
are able to maintain their endogenous clocks in the apparent absence of external stimuli .
-LSB- page needed -RSB-
Its major metabolite can also be measured in morning urine .
However , newer research indicates that the melatonin offset may be the more reliable marker .
They found that both sleep offset and melatonin offset are more strongly correlated with phase markers than the onset of sleep .
In addition , the declining phase of the melatonin levels is more reliable and stable than the termination of melatonin synthesis .
This minimum occurred at approximately the middle of the eight hour sleep period for morning types , but closer to waking in evening types .
Extensive experiments were done by Auguste Forel , Ingeborg Beling , and Oskar Wahl to see whether this rhythm was due to an endogenous clock .
However , recent studies show that deletion of clock does not lead to a behavioral phenotype -LRB- the animals still have normal circadian rhythms -RRB- , which questions its importance in rhythm generation .
This was shown by Gene Block in isolated mollusk BRNs .
-LSB- clarification needed -RSB- At the same time , different cells may communicate with each other resulting in a synchronised output of electrical signaling .
Thus , the information of the time of the day as relayed by the eyes travels to the clock in the brain , and , through that , clocks in the rest of the body may be synchronised .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The cryptochrome -LRB- cry -RRB- gene is also a light-sensitive component of the circadian clock and is thought to be involved both as a photoreceptor and as part of the clock 's endogenous pacemaker mechanism .
Cryptochromes 1 -- 2 -LRB- involved in blue -- UVA -RRB- help to maintain the period length in the clock through a whole range of light conditions .
-LSB- page needed -RSB-
What drove circadian rhythms to evolve has been an enigmatic question .
As a result , replication was relegated to the dark .
However , evidence for this is lacking , since the simplest organisms with a circadian rhythm , the cyanobacteria , do the opposite of this - they divide more in the daytime .
The retina of the eye contains `` classical '' photoreceptors -LRB- `` rods '' and `` cones '' -RRB- , which are used for conventional vision .
Although subjects were shielded from time cues -LRB- like clocks -RRB- and daylight , the researchers were not aware of the phase-delaying effects of indoor electric lights .
-LSB- dubious -- discuss -RSB- The subjects were allowed to turn on light when they were awake and to turn it off when they wanted to sleep .
There is also some evidence that the olfactory bulb and prostate may experience oscillations when cultured , suggesting that these structures may also be weak oscillators .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
She has seen major constitutional changes , such as devolution in the United Kingdom , Canadian patriation , and the decolonisation of Africa .
She has also reigned through various wars and conflicts involving many of her realms .
She is the world 's oldest reigning monarch as well as Britain 's longest-lived .
Welsh politicians suggested that she be made Princess of Wales on her 18th birthday .
In post-war Britain , it was not acceptable for the Duke of Edinburgh 's German relations , including his three surviving sisters , to be invited to the wedding .
If Margaret had contracted a civil marriage , she would have been expected to renounce her right of succession .
Eventually , she decided to abandon her plans with Townsend .
They divorced in 1978 ; she did not remarry .
Altrincham was denounced by public figures and slapped by a member of the public appalled by his comments .
The Queen again came under criticism for appointing the prime minister on the advice of a small number of ministers or a single minister .
The crisis fuelled Australian republicanism .
Elizabeth , as monarch of Fiji , supported the attempts of the Governor-General , Ratu Sir Penaia Ganilau , to assert executive power and negotiate a settlement .
The involvement of the younger royals in the charity game show It 's a Royal Knockout was ridiculed and the Queen was the target of satire .
She again undertook an extensive tour of her realms , which began in Jamaica in February , where she called the farewell banquet `` memorable '' after a power cut plunged the King 's House , the official residence of the governor-general , into darkness .
As in 1977 , there were street parties and commemorative events , and monuments were named to honour the occasion .
She inherited an estimated # 70 million estate from her mother in 2002 .
Elizabeth has occasionally faced republican sentiments and severe press criticism of the royal family , but support for the monarchy and her personal popularity remain high .
Two years later , solely in her capacity as Queen of Canada , she revisited the United States and toured Canada .
In 1961 , she toured Cyprus , India , Pakistan , Nepal , and Iran .
Harold Macmillan wrote , `` The Queen has been absolutely determined all through ... She is impatient of the attitude towards her to treat her as ... a film star ... She has indeed ` the heart and stomach of a man ' ... She loves her duty and means to be a Queen . ''
No attempt was made , but a riot did break out while she was in Montreal ; the Queen 's `` calmness and courage in the face of the violence '' was noted .
Parties and events took place throughout the Commonwealth , many coinciding with her associated national and Commonwealth tours .
The celebrations re-affirmed the Queen 's popularity , despite virtually coincident negative press coverage of Princess Margaret 's separation from her husband .
Lessons concentrated on history , language , literature and music .
The book describes Elizabeth 's love of horses and dogs , her orderliness , and her attitude of responsibility .
Others echoed such observations : Winston Churchill described Elizabeth when she was two as `` a character .
She has an air of authority and reflectiveness astonishing in an infant . ''
Her cousin Margaret Rhodes described her as `` a jolly little girl , but fundamentally sensible and well-behaved '' .
He was a prince without a home or kingdom .
Some of the papers played long and loud tunes on the string of Philip 's foreign origin . ''
When she toured Canada and visited President Harry S. Truman in Washington , D.C. , in October 1951 , her private secretary , Martin Charteris , carried a draft accession declaration in case the King died while she was on tour .
Philip broke the news to the new Queen .
Martin Charteris asked her to choose a regnal name ; she chose to remain Elizabeth , `` of course '' .
She was proclaimed queen throughout her realms and the royal party hastily returned to the United Kingdom .
She and the Duke of Edinburgh moved into Buckingham Palace .
Lord Mountbatten claimed the Queen was opposed to the invasion , though Eden denied it .
Eden resigned two months later .
Police later discovered that the shots were blanks .
The Queen 's composure and skill in controlling her mount were widely praised .
Remaining calm and through two calls to the Palace police switchboard , she spoke to Fagan while he sat at the foot of her bed until assistance arrived seven minutes later .
She was educated privately at home .
She began to undertake public duties during World War II , serving in the Auxiliary Territorial Service .
In 1947 , she married Philip , Duke of Edinburgh , with whom she has four children : Charles , Anne , Andrew , and Edward .
Although her birth generated public interest , she was not expected to become queen , as the Prince of Wales was still young , and many assumed that he would marry and have children of his own .
Consequently , Elizabeth 's father became king , and she became heir presumptive .
If her parents had had a later son , she would have lost her position as first-in-line , as her brother would have been heir apparent and above her in the line of succession .
The Duke complained , `` I am the only man in the country not allowed to give his name to his own children . ''
The absence of a formal mechanism within the Conservative Party for choosing a leader meant that , following Eden 's resignation , it fell to the Queen to decide whom to commission to form a government .
The election resulted in a hung parliament ; Heath 's Conservatives were not the largest party , but could stay in office if they formed a coalition with the Liberals .
Do n't worry if it 's not true -- so long as there 's not too much of a fuss about it afterwards . ''
It was reported , most notably in The Sunday Times of 20 July 1986 , that the Queen was worried that Margaret Thatcher 's economic policies fostered social divisions and was alarmed by high unemployment , a series of riots , the violence of a miners ' strike , and Thatcher 's refusal to apply sanctions against the apartheid regime in South Africa .
The sources of the rumours included royal aide Michael Shea and Commonwealth Secretary-General Shridath Ramphal , but Shea claimed his remarks were taken out of context and embellished by speculation .
Thatcher 's biographer John Campbell claimed `` the report was a piece of journalistic mischief-making '' .
Belying reports of acrimony between them , Thatcher later conveyed her personal admiration for the Queen , and the Queen gave two honours in her personal gift -- membership in the Order of Merit and the Order of the Garter -- to Thatcher after her replacement as prime minister by John Major .
The Queen was on holiday with her extended family at Balmoral .
Diana 's two sons by Charles -- Princes William and Harry -- wanted to attend church and so the Queen and Prince Philip took them that morning .
In the broadcast , she expressed admiration for Diana and her feelings `` as a grandmother '' for the two princes .
As a result , much of the public hostility evaporated .
In a message released on Accession Day , she stated : `` In this special year , as I dedicate myself anew to your service , I hope we will all be reminded of the power of togetherness and the convening strength of family , friendship and good neighbourliness ... I hope also that this Jubilee year will be a time to give thanks for the great advances that have been made since 1952 and to look forward to the future with clear head and warm heart '' .
On 4 June , Jubilee beacons were lit around the world .
She does have a deep sense of religious and civic duty , and takes her coronation oath seriously .
A personal note about her faith often features in her annual Christmas message broadcast to the Commonwealth .
In 2000 , she spoke about the theological significance of the millennium marking the 2000th anniversary of the birth of Jesus :
Her mother , Elizabeth , Duchess of York -LRB- later Queen Elizabeth -RRB- , was the youngest daughter of Scottish aristocrat Claude Bowes-Lyon , 14th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne .
She was delivered by Caesarean section at her maternal grandfather 's London house : 17 Bruton Street , Mayfair .
During the war , many of London 's children were evacuated to avoid the frequent aerial bombing .
I wo n't leave without the King .
And the King will never leave . ''
Princesses Elizabeth and Margaret stayed at Balmoral Castle , Scotland , until Christmas 1939 , when they moved to Sandringham House , Norfolk .
At Windsor , the princesses staged pantomimes at Christmas in aid of the Queen 's Wool Fund , which bought yarn to knit into military garments .
She stated : `` We are trying to do all we can to help our gallant sailors , soldiers and airmen , and we are trying , too , to bear our share of the danger and sadness of war .
We know , every one of us , that in the end all will be well . ''
The children remained in Britain .
She became the first reigning monarch of Australia and New Zealand to visit those nations .
During the tour , crowds were immense ; three-quarters of the population of Australia were estimated to have seen her .
Throughout her reign , the Queen has made hundreds of state visits to other countries and tours of the Commonwealth ; she is the most widely travelled head of state .
Tony Benn said that the Queen found Trudeau `` rather disappointing '' .
Trudeau 's supposed republicanism seemed to be confirmed by his antics , such as sliding down banisters at Buckingham Palace and pirouetting behind the Queen 's back in 1977 , and the removal of various Canadian royal symbols during his term of office .
She was particularly interested after the failure of Bill C-60 , which would have affected her role as head of state .
The monarchy came under increased criticism and public scrutiny .
In an unusually personal speech , the Queen said that any institution must expect criticism , but suggested it be done with `` a touch of humour , gentleness and understanding '' .
Two days later , the Prime Minister , John Major , announced reforms to the royal finances planned since the previous year , including the Queen paying income tax from 1993 onwards , and a reduction in the civil list .
In December , Prince Charles and his wife , Diana , formally separated .
The year ended with a lawsuit as the Queen sued The Sun newspaper for breach of copyright when it published the text of her annual Christmas message two days before it was broadcast .
The newspaper was forced to pay her legal fees and donated # 200,000 to charity .
She was celebrated in Canada as the `` longest-reigning sovereign in Canada 's modern era '' .
-LRB- King Louis XIV of France reigned over part of Canada for longer . -RRB-
Discontent with the monarchy reached its peak on the death of Diana , Princess of Wales , though Elizabeth 's personal popularity and support for the monarchy rebounded after her live television broadcast to the world five days after Diana 's death .
Elizabeth has held many titles and honorary military positions throughout the Commonwealth , is Sovereign of many orders in her own countries , and has received honours and awards from around the world .
Additional styles include Defender of the Faith and Duke of Lancaster .
The term may , however , reflect a certain cultural context and particular stage of transition in societies which are gradually dealing with integrating sexual minorities .
Thus , a woman who is attracted to other women , but calls herself heterosexual and only has sexual relations with men , can be said to experience discordance between her sexual orientation -LRB- homosexual or lesbian -RRB- and her sexual identity and behaviors -LRB- heterosexual -RRB- .
However , if they are considered as separate dimensions one can be simultaneously very masculine and very feminine .
Their definitions and examples of how they may be assessed are as follows :
Depending on which component of sexual orientation is being assessed and referenced , different conclusions can be drawn about the prevalence rate of homosexuality which has real world consequences .
For example , if homosexual individuals constitute only 1 % of the general population they are politically easier to ignore or than if they are known to be a constituency that surpasses most ethnic and ad minority groups .
If the number is relatively minor then it is difficult to argue for community based same sex programs and services , mass media inclusion of gay role models , or Gay/Straight Alliances in schools .
Translation and vocabulary obstacles are not limited to the English language .
Other words may pick up new layers or meaning .
For example , the heterosexual Spanish terms marido and mujer for `` husband '' and `` wife '' , respectively , have recently been replaced in Spain by the gender-neutral terms cónyuges or consortes meaning `` spouses '' .
Transgender and cisgender people may be attracted to men , women , or both , although the prevalence of different sexual orientations is quite different in these two populations .
There are a number of culturally specific support networks for LGBT individuals active in the United States .
Certainly , it is ... not a good predictor of past behavior and self-identity , given the developmental process common to most gay men and lesbians -LRB- i.e. , denial of homosexual interests and heterosexual experimentation prior to the coming-out process -RRB- . ''
The Pan American Health Organization further called on governments , academic institutions , professional associations and the media to expose these practices and to promote respect for diversity .
The World Health Organization affiliate further noted that gay minors have sometimes been forced to attend these `` therapies '' involuntarily , being deprived of their liberty and sometimes kept in isolation for several months , and that these findings were reported by several United Nations bodies .
An individual can be assigned a position on the scale in accordance with the following definitions of the points of the scale :
For example , if homosexual is defined by same sex behavior , gay virgins are omitted , heterosexuals engaging in same sex behavior for other reasons than preferred sexual arousal are miscounted , and those with same sex attraction who only have opposite-sex relations are excluded .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Conversely , only an even smaller minority can be considered fully bisexual -LRB- with an equal attraction to both sexes -RRB- .
Nevertheless , Paul Gebhard , subsequent director of the Kinsey Institute for Sex Research , reexamined the data in the Kinsey Reports and concluded that removing the prison inmates and prostitutes barely affected the results .
These categories are aspects of the more nuanced nature of sexual identity and terminology .
The term sexual preference largely overlaps with sexual orientation , but is generally distinguished in psychological research .
A person who identifies as bisexual , for example , may sexually prefer one sex over the other .
Sexual preference may also suggest a degree of voluntary choice , whereas the scientific consensus is that sexual orientation is not a choice .
However , some people may use different labels or none at all '' .
They additionally state that sexual orientation `` is distinct from other components of sex and gender , including biological sex -LRB- the anatomical , physiological , and genetic characteristics associated with being male or female -RRB- , gender identity -LRB- the psychological sense of being male or female -RRB- , and social gender role -LRB- the cultural norms that define feminine and masculine behavior -RRB- '' .
Psychiatrist Anil Aggrawal explains that androphilia , along with gynephilia , `` is needed to overcome immense difficulties in characterizing the sexual orientation of trans men and trans women .
For instance , it is difficult to decide whether a trans man erotically attracted to males is a heterosexual female or a homosexual male ; or a trans woman erotically attracted to females is a heterosexual male or a lesbian female .
In such cases , while defining sexual attraction , it is best to focus on the object of their attraction rather than on the sex or gender of the subject . ''
These newer terms also do not carry the social weight of the former ones . ''
In a major study comparing sexual response in homosexual males and females , Masters and Johnson discuss the difficulty of assigning the Kinsey ratings to participants .
When , there is a lot of heterosexual and homosexual experiences in one 's history it becomes difficult for that individual to be fully objective in assessing the relative amount of each .
Taken all together , the six pairs of questions and responses provide a profile of an individual 's sexual orientation .
Furthermore , reports of same sex behavior usually exceed those of gay , lesbian , or bisexual identification .
The following chart demonstrates how widely the prevalence of homosexuality can vary depending on what age , location and component of sexual orientation is being assessed :
This results in sexual differences between males and females .
An urning can be further categorized by degree of effeminacy .
In the series of pamphlets , Ulrichs outlined a set of questions to determine if a man was an urning .
The definitions of each category of Ulrichs ' classification scheme are as follows :
When applying the scale , Kinsey considered two dimensions of sexual orientation : overt sexual experience and psychosexual reactions .
Furthermore , there are more than two dimensions of sexuality to be considered .
This is addressed by the Klein Sexual Orientation Grid .
Identity and behavior are measured as supplemental information because they are both closely tied to sexual attraction and sexual orientation .
Laumann et al. , -LRB- 1994 -RRB- found that among U.S. adults 20 % of those who would be considered homosexual on one component of orientation were homosexual on the other two dimensions and 70 % responded in a way that was consistent with homosexuality on only one of the three dimensions .
One woman stated `` I 'm mainly straight but I 'm one of those people who , if the right circumstance came along , would change my viewpoint '' .
That is , heterosexual and lesbian women 's sexual arousal to erotic films do not differ significantly by the genders of the participants -LRB- male or female -RRB- or by the type of sexual activity -LRB- heterosexual or homosexual -RRB- .
Influences of culture may complicate the process of measuring sexual orientation .
Integration of sexual orientation with sociocultural identity may be a challenge for LGBT individuals .
Individuals may or may not consider their sexual orientation to define their sexual identity , as they may experience various degrees of fluidity of sexuality , or may simply identify more strongly with another aspect of their identity such as family role .
In contrast , East Asian cultures put a great emphasis on a person 's social role within social hierarchies , and view the self as fluid and malleable .
These differing cultural perspectives have many implications on cognitions of the self , including perception of sexual orientation .
Some other cultures do not recognize a homosexual/heterosexual/bisexual distinction .
For example , an investigation of a small Brazilian fishing village revealed three sexual categories for men : men who have sex only with men -LRB- consistently in a passive role -RRB- , men who have sex only with women , and men who have sex with women and men -LRB- consistently in an active role -RRB- .
While men who consistently occupied the passive role were recognized as a distinct group by locals , men who have sex with only women , and men who have sex with women and men , were not differentiated .
That is , individuals do not choose to be homosexual , heterosexual , bisexual , or asexual .
While current scientific investigation usually seeks to find biological explanations for the adoption of a particular sexual orientation , there are yet no replicated scientific studies supporting any specific biological etiology for sexual orientation .
Non-westernized concepts of male sexuality differ essentially from the way sexuality is seen and classified under the Western system of sexual orientation .
-LSB- unreliable source ? -RSB-
Bagemihl writes , '' ... the point of reference for ` heterosexual ' or ` homosexual ' orientation in this nomenclature is solely the individual 's genetic sex prior to reassignment -LRB- see for example , Blanchard et al. 1987 , Coleman and Bockting , 1988 , Blanchard , 1989 -RRB- .
These labels thereby ignore the individual 's personal sense of gender identity taking precedence over biological sex , rather than the other way around . ''
As a result of this immune effect , alterations in later-born males ' prenatal development have been thought to occur .
These Y-linked proteins would not be recognized in the mother 's immune system because she is female , causing her to develop antibodies which would travel through the placental barrier into the fetal compartment .
For example , a woman may have fantasies or thoughts about sex with other women but never act on these thoughts and only have sex with opposite gender partners .
If sexual orientation was being assessed based on one 's sexual attraction then this individual would be considered homosexual , but her behavior indicates heterosexuality .
In the paper `` Who 's Gay ?
Does It Matter ? ''
There are numerous biological/physiological measures that exist that can measure sexual orientation such as sexual arousal , brain scans , eye tracking , body odour preference , and anatomical variations such as digit-length ratio and right or left handedness .
For example :
Thus , the fact that women are aroused by seeing non-human primates having sex does not mean that women 's sexual orientation includes this type of sexual interest .
A small percentage of people are not sexually attracted to anyone -LRB- asexuality -RRB- .
It is the second largest non-oil company in Texas -- behind AT&T -- and the largest company in the Greater Austin area .
It was a publicly traded company -LRB- NASDAQ : DELL -RRB- , as well as a component of the NASDAQ-100 and S&P 500 , until it was taken private in a leveraged buyout which closed on October 30 , 2013 .
Dell found an opportunity among PC-savvy individuals who liked the convenience of buying direct , customizing their PC to their means , and having it delivered in days .
Dell 's rivals in the PC industry , HP , Gateway and Acer , had a long retail presence and so were well poised to take advantage of the consumer shift .
These models have slightly different model numbers , but almost replicate the ones available from the Dell Store .
In addition , Dell expanded its retail distributions in Australia through an agreement with discount electrical retailer , The Good Guys , known for `` Slashing Prices '' .
Dell agreed to distribute a variety of makes of both desktops and notebooks , including Studio and XPS systems in late 2008 .
The retailer has agreed to distribute a variety of Inspiron and Studio notebooks , with minimal Studio desktops from the Dell range .
As of 2009 -LSB- update -RSB- , Dell continues to run and operate its various kiosks in 18 shopping centres throughout Australia .
Michael Dell and other executives also paid penalties and suffered other sanctions , without admitting or denying the charges .
Dell 's first acquisition occurred in 1999 with the purchase of ConvergeNet Technologies for $ 332 million , after Dell had failed to develop an enterprise storage system in-house ; ConvergeNet 's elegant but complex technology did not fit in with Dell 's commodity-producer business model , forcing Dell to write down the entire value of the acquisition .
Throughout the entire PC industry , declines in prices along with commensurate increases in performance meant that Dell had fewer opportunities to upsell to their customers -LRB- a lucrative strategy of encouraging buyers to upgrade the processor or memory -RRB- .
As a result , the company was selling a greater proportion of inexpensive PCs than before , which eroded profit margins .
Most of the work that used to take place in Dell 's U.S. plants was transferred to contract manufacturers in Asia and Mexico , or some of Dell 's own factories overseas .
On January 8 , 2009 , Dell announced the closure of its manufacturing plant in Limerick , Ireland , with the loss of 1,900 jobs and the transfer of production to its plant in Łodź in Poland .
The announcement came two years after Dell Inc. returned to private ownership , claiming that it faced bleak prospects and would need several years out of the public eye to rebuild its business .
Elliott argued this structure deeply undervalued EMC 's core `` EMC II '' data storage business , and that increasing competition between EMC II and VMware products was confusing the market and hindering both companies .
EMC owns around 80 percent of the stock of VMware .
The proposed acquisition will maintain VMware as a separate company , held via a new tracking stock , while the other parts of EMC will be rolled into Dell .
Dell Inc. has invested -LSB- when ? -RSB-
Indian-made products bear the `` Made in India '' mark .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The board consists of nine directors .
Other board members include Don Carty , William Gray , Judy Lewent , Klaus Luft , Alex Mandl , Michael A. Miles , and Sam Nunn .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
On February 6 , 2007 , the National Recycling Coalition awarded Dell its `` Recycling Works '' award for efforts to promote producer responsibility .
The dorm-room headquartered company sold IBM PC-compatible computers built from stock components .
PC 's Limited advertised its systems in national computer magazines for sale directly to consumers and custom assembled each ordered unit according to a selection of options .
During the same period , rival PC vendors such as Compaq , Gateway , IBM , Packard Bell , and AST Research struggled and eventually left the market or were bought out .
By the mid-2000s many analysts were looking to innovating companies as the next source of growth in the technology sector .
Increasing spending on R&D would have cut into the operating margins that the company emphasized .
With the return of Michael Dell as CEO , the company saw immediate changes in operations , the exodus of many senior vice-presidents and new personnel brought in from outside the company .
Michael Dell announced a number of initiatives and plans -LRB- part of the `` Dell 2.0 '' initiative -RRB- to improve the company 's financial performance .
Dell also managed some success in taking advantage of its high-touch direct sales heritage to establish close relationships and design solutions for clients .
Dell 's market share in the corporate segment was previously a `` moat '' against rivals but this has no longer been the case as sales and profits have fallen precipitously .
Facilities located abroad include Penang , Malaysia ; Xiamen , China ; Bracknell , UK ; Manila , Philippines Chennai , India ; Hyderabad , India ; Noida , India ; Hortolandia and Porto Alegre , Brazil ; Bratislava , Slovakia ; Łódź , Poland ; Panama City , Panama ; Dublin and Limerick , Ireland ; and Casablanca , Morocco .
Concerning the E4300 , rather than honour the discount taking a significant loss , the firm withdrew orders and offered a voucher of up to NT$ 20,000 -LRB- US$ 625 -RRB- a customer in compensation .
Many consumers sued the firm for the unfair compensation .
A court in southern Taiwan ordered the firm to deliver 18 laptops and 76 flat-panel monitors to 31 consumers for NT$ 490,000 -LRB- US$ 15,120 -RRB- , less than a third of the normal price .
The court said the event could hardly be regarded as mistakes , as the prestigious firm said the company mispriced its products twice in Taiwanese website within 3 weeks .
Dell sells personal computers -LRB- PCs -RRB- , servers , data storage devices , network switches , software , computer peripherals , HDTVs , cameras , printers , MP3 players , and electronics built by other manufacturers .
The company has since made additional acquisitions in storage and networking systems , with the aim of expanding their portfolio from offering computers only to delivering complete solutions for enterprise customers .
Margins at retail were thin at best and Dell left the reseller channel in 1994 .
U.S. shipments of desktop PCs were shrinking , and the corporate PC market which purchases PCs in upgrade cycles had largely decided to take a break from buying new systems .
Heavily depending on PCs , Dell had to slash prices to boost sales volumes , while demanding deep cuts from suppliers .
InfoWorld suggested that Dell and other OEMs saw tablets as a short-term , low-investment opportunity running Google Android , an approach that neglected user interface and failed to gain long term market traction with consumers .
The growing popularity of smartphones and tablet computers instead of PCs drove Dell 's consumer segment to an operating loss in Q3 2012 .
The original Dell model was known for high customer satisfaction when PCs sold for thousands but by the 2000s , the company could not justify that level of service when computers in the same lineup sold for hundreds .
Hunter , who noted that Dell 's DNA of cost-cutting `` got in the way , '' aimed to reduce call transfer times and have call center representatives resolve inquiries in one call .
In July 2006 , the company started its Direct2Dell blog , and then in February 2007 , Michael Dell launched IdeaStorm.com , asking customers for advice including selling Linux computers and reducing the promotional `` bloatware '' on PCs .
These initiatives did manage to cut the negative blog posts from 49 % to 22 % , as well as reduce the `` Dell Hell '' prominent on Internet search engines .
In April 2013 , Blackstone withdrew their offer , citing deteriorating business .
The call-center had opened in 2006 after the city of Ottawa won a bid to host it .
These plans were reversed , due to a high Canadian dollar that made the Ottawa staff relatively expensive , and also as part of Dell 's turnaround , which involved moving these call-center jobs offshore to cut costs .
The company had also announced the shutdown of its Edmonton , Alberta office , losing 900 jobs .
Fortune said there was a lot for Dell to like in EMC 's portfolio , but `` does it all add up enough to justify tens of billions of dollars for the entire package ?
Probably not . ''
The Register reported the view of William Blair & Company that the merger would `` blow up the current IT chess board '' , forcing other IT infrastructure vendors to restructure to achieve scale and vertical integration .
The $ 24.4 billion buyout was projected to be the largest leveraged buyout backed by private equity since the 2007 financial crisis .
In January 2001 , the company leased the space in Las Cimas 2 , located along Loop 360 .
Las Cimas 2 housed Dell 's executives , the investment operations , and some corporate functions .
Dell also had an option for 138,000 square feet -LRB- 12,800 m2 -RRB- of space in Las Cimas 3 .
After a slowdown in business required reducing employees and production capacity , Dell decided to sublease its offices in two buildings in the Las Cimas office complex .
By that year roughly 100,000 square feet -LRB- 9,300 m2 -RRB- of that space was absorbed by new subtenants .
In 1989 Dell occupied 127,000 square feet -LRB- 11,800 m2 -RRB- in the Arboretum complex .
In 1993 , Dell submitted a document to Round Rock officials , titled `` Dell Computer Corporate Headquarters , Round Rock , Texas , May 1993 Schematic Design . ''
Despite the filing , during that year the company said that it was not going to move its headquarters .
Dell 's lease in the Arboretum had been scheduled to expire in 1994 .
Dell began manufacturing in Limerick in 1991 and went on to become Ireland 's largest exporter of goods and its second-largest company and foreign investor .
European Manufacturing Facility 1 -LRB- EMF1 , opened in 1990 -RRB- and EMF3 form part of the Raheen Industrial Estate near Limerick .
EMF2 -LRB- previously a Wang facility , later occupied by Flextronics , situated in Castletroy -RRB- closed in 2002 , -LSB- citation needed -RSB- and Dell Inc. has consolidated production into EMF3 -LRB- EMF1 now -LSB- when ? -RSB-
contains only offices -RRB- .
Subsidies from the Polish government did keep Dell for a long time .
After ending assembly in the Limerick plant the Cherrywood Technology Campus in Dublin was the largest Dell office in the republic with over 1200 people in sales -LRB- mainly UK & Ireland -RRB- , support -LRB- enterprise support for EMEA -RRB- and research and development for cloud computing , but no more manufacturing except Dell 's Alienware subsidiary , which manufactures PCs in an Athlone , Ireland plant .
Whether this facility will remain in Ireland is not certain .
Both Gartner and IDC estimated that in the third quarter of 2006 , HP shipped more units worldwide than Dell did .
In 2006 , Dell acknowledged that it had problems with customer service .
Despite significant investment in this space , Dell continues to face public scrutiny with even the company 's own website littered with complaints regarding the issue escalation process .
-LSB- original research ? -RSB-
The direct review process is a typical legal appeal .
If the appellate court finds that no significant legal errors occurred in the capital sentencing hearing , the appellate court will affirm the judgment , or let the sentence stand .
If the appellate court finds that significant legal errors did occur , then it will reverse the judgment , or nullify the sentence and order a new capital sentencing hearing .
Lastly , if the appellate court finds that no reasonable juror could find the defendant eligible for the death penalty , a rarity , then it will order the defendant acquitted , or not guilty , of the crime for which he/she was given the death penalty , and order him sentenced to the next most severe punishment for which the offense is eligible .
If the federal courts refuse to issue a writ of habeas corpus , an execution date may be set .
The first use of the gallows after the moratorium was the hanging of Westley Allan Dodd in Washington on January 5 , 1993 .
Although lethal injection dominates as a method of execution , some states allow prisoners on death row to choose the method used to execute them .
No other states allow this .
The Supreme Court has never ruled the death penalty to be per se unconstitutional .
Present-day statutes from across the nation use the same words and phrases , requiring modern executions to take place within a wall or enclosure to exclude public view .
§ 31-14-12 , required executions be conducted in a `` room or place enclosed from public view . ''
Similarly , a dormant Massachusetts law , see Mass. .
Gen. Law ch .
279 § 60 , required executions to take place `` within an enclosure or building . ''
Ohio Revised Code § 2949.22 requires that '' -LSB- t -RSB- he enclosure shall exclude public view . ''
Similarly , Tennessee Code § 40-23-116 requires `` an enclosure '' for `` strict seclusion and privacy . ''
Texas has accounted for over one-third of modern executions -LRB- although only two death sentences were imposed in Texas during 2015 , with the courts preferring to issue sentences of life without parole instead -RRB- and over four times as many as Oklahoma , the state with the second-highest number .
As of November 2008 , there is only one person on death row facing capital punishment who has not been convicted of murder .
At times when a death sentence is affirmed on direct review , it is considered final .
Yet , supplemental methods to attack the judgment , though less familiar than a typical appeal , do remain .
These supplemental remedies are considered collateral review , that is , an avenue for upsetting judgments that have become otherwise final .
-LRB- If the case is a federal death penalty case , it proceeds immediately from direct review to federal habeas corpus . -RRB-
Although all states have some type of collateral review , the process varies widely from state to state .
Generally , the purpose of these collateral proceedings is to permit the prisoner to challenge his sentence on grounds that could not have been raised reasonably at trial or on direct review .
State collateral review , though an important step in that it helps define the scope of subsequent review through federal habeas corpus , is rarely successful in and of itself .
The theory is that a prisoner bringing such a challenge is not attacking directly his judgment of death , but rather the means by which that the judgment will be carried out .
Therefore , the Supreme Court held in the Hill case that a prisoner can use Section 1983 rather than habeas corpus to bring the lawsuit .
Yet , as Clarence Hill 's own case shows , lower federal courts have often refused to hear suits challenging methods of execution on the ground that the prisoner brought the claim too late and only for the purposes of delay .
A single blow from an axe cut the rope that held the large four-sided platform , and the prisoners -LRB- except for one whose rope had broken and who had to be re-hanged -RRB- fell to their deaths .
The purpose of federal habeas corpus is to ensure that state courts , through the process of direct review and state collateral review , have done at least a reasonable job in protecting the prisoner 's federal constitutional rights .
New Mexico may yet execute two condemned inmates sentenced prior to abolition , and Nebraska has ten death row inmates who may still be executed despite abolition .
Several states have never had capital punishment , the first being Michigan , which abolished it shortly after entering the Union .
Attempts to change the provision have failed .
If the state has no death penalty , the judge must choose a state with the death penalty for carrying out the execution .
The complex has so far been the only location used for federal executions post-Gregg .
The result of these two decisions means that the death penalty in the United States is largely restricted to cases where the defendant took the life of another human being .
The current federal kidnapping statute , however , may be exempt because the death penalty applies if the victim dies in the perpetrator 's custody , not necessarily by his hand , thus stipulating a resulting death , which was the wording of the objection .
In addition , the Federal government retains the death penalty for non-murder offenses that are considered crimes against the state , including treason , espionage , and crimes under military jurisdiction .
The death rows of New York and Massachusetts were disestablished , and attempts to restore the death penalty were unsuccessful .
As noted in the introduction to this article , the American public has maintained its position of support for capital punishment for murder .
However , when given a choice between the death penalty and life imprisonment without parole , support has traditionally been significantly lower than polling which has only mentioned the death penalty as a punishment .
In 2010 , for instance , one poll showed 49 percent favoring the death penalty and 46 percent favoring life imprisonment while in another 61 % said they preferred another punishment to the death penalty .
In a five-to-four decision , the Supreme Court struck down the impositions of the death penalty in each of the consolidated cases as unconstitutional .
The five justices in the majority did not produce a common opinion or rationale for their decision , however , and agreed only on a short statement announcing the result .
Death penalty opponents often argue that this statistic shows how perilously close states have come to undertaking wrongful executions ; proponents point out that the statistic refers only to those exonerated in law , and that the truly innocent may be a smaller number .
Statistics likely understate the actual problem of wrongful convictions because once an execution has occurred there is often insufficient motivation and finance to keep a case open , and it becomes unlikely at that point that the miscarriage of justice will ever be exposed .
The death penalty is sought and applied more often in some jurisdictions , not only between states but within states .
Texas gave 2 percent of murderers a death sentence , less than the national average .
Since no one has yet been sentenced to death for such non-death capital offenses , the Supreme Court has not ruled on their constitutionality .
He said : `` They were n't expecting such passion from people in opposition to the death penalty .
There 's a widely held perception that all Americans are united in favor of executions , but this message came across loud and clear that many people are not happy with it . ''
He predicted the debate would now be conducted with renewed energy .
This means African Americans are less likely to be executed on a per capita basis .
However , according to a 2003 Amnesty International report , blacks and whites were the victims of murder in almost equal numbers , yet 80 percent of the people executed since 1977 were convicted of murders involving white victims .
The legal administration of the death penalty in the United States is complex .
Recently , a narrow and final fifth level of process -- -LRB- 5 -RRB- the Section 1983 challenge -- has become increasingly important .
Two Kentucky hangings were conducted after Galena in which numerous persons were present within a wooden stockade , that of John `` Peter '' Montjoy in Covington , Kentucky on December 17 , 1937 , and that of Harold Van Venison in Covington on June 3 , 1938 .
An estimated 400 witnesses were present for the hanging of Lee Simpson in Ryegate , Montana , on December 30 , 1939 .
The different numbers are largely definitional , rather than substantive .
Freedam 's statistics looks at the percentage of all death penalty cases reversed , while the others look only at cases not reversed prior to habeas corpus review .
The last use of the gas chamber between the first gassing on February 8 , 1924 and the moratorium was when Colorado gassed Luis Monge on June 2 , 1967 .
Due to the slow process of appeals , it was highly unusual for a condemned person to be under 18 at the time of execution .
No one has been under age 19 at time of execution since at least 1964 .
Since the reinstatement of the death penalty in 1976 , 22 people have been executed for crimes committed under the age of 18 .
Twenty-one were 17 at the time of the crime .
The last person to be executed for a crime committed as a juvenile was Scott Hain on April 3 , 2003 in Oklahoma .
State laws have not been updated to conform with this decision .
In the American legal system , unconstitutional laws do not need to be repealed ; instead , they are held to be unenforceable .
-LRB- See also List of juvenile offenders executed in the United States -RRB-
Several states enacted laws which required executions to be conducted within a `` wall '' or `` enclosure '' to `` exclude public view . ''
Missouri executions conducted after 1919 were not `` public '' because they were conducted behind closed walls , and the general public was not permitted to attend .
Kentucky and Montana have executed two prisoners against their will -LRB- KY : 1997 and 1999 , MT : 1995 and 1998 -RRB- and one volunteer , respectively -LRB- KY : 2008 , MT : 2006 -RRB- .
Since the drug manufacturers began taking these steps and the EU regulation ended the importation of drugs produced in Europe , the resulting shortage of execution drugs has led to or influenced decisions to impose moratoria in Arkansas , California , Kentucky , Louisiana , Mississippi , Montana , Nevada , North Carolina , and Tennessee .
However , it was eventually decided that children might step on joysticks left on the floor and their durability was also questioned .
Nintendo released 17 launch titles : 10-Yard Fight , Baseball , Clu Clu Land , Duck Hunt , Excitebike , Golf , Gyromite , Hogan 's Alley , Ice Climber , Kung Fu , Pinball , Soccer , Stack-Up , Tennis , Wild Gunman , Wrecking Crew , and Super Mario Bros. h -LSB- ' -RSB- Some varieties of these launch games contained Famicom chips with an adapter inside the cartridge so they would play on North American consoles , which is why the title screen of Gyromite has the Famicom title `` Robot Gyro '' and the title screen of Stack-Up has the Famicom title `` Robot Block '' .
By 1990 , the NES had outsold all previously released consoles worldwide .
Unlike NES games , official Famicom cartridges were produced in many colors of plastic .
Adapters , similar in design to the popular accessory Game Genie , are available that allow Famicom games to be played on an NES .
In Japan , several companies manufactured the cartridges for the Famicom .
As the Nintendo Entertainment System grew in popularity and entered millions of American homes , some small video rental shops began buying their own copies of NES games , and renting them out to customers for around the same price as a video cassette rental for a few days .
Nintendo received no profit from the practice beyond the initial cost of their game , and unlike movie rentals , a newly released game could hit store shelves and be available for rent on the same day .
Nintendo lost the lawsuit , but did win on a claim of copyright infringement .
Video rental shops continued the practice of renting video games and still do today .
Both controllers had a Turbo feature , a feature where one tap of the button represented multiple taps .
The NES Advantage had two knobs that adjusted the firing rate of the turbo button from quick to Turbo , as well as a `` Slow '' button that slowed down the game by rapidly pausing the game .
The `` Slow '' button did not work with games that had a pause menu or pause screen and can interfere with jumping and shooting .
Its wing-like shape made it easier to hold than the Advantage and it also improved on the joystick .
Turbo features were also featured on the NES Satellite , the NES Four Score , and the U-Force .
It contains RAM for the game to load into and an extra single-cycle wavetable-lookup sound chip .
This process would cost less than cartridges and users could take the disk back to a vending booth and have it rewritten with a new game .
Most of this region saw a 1986 release .
Instead , during the first year of Nintendo 's successor console the Super Famicom -LRB- named Super Nintendo Entertainment System outside Japan -RRB- , the Famicom remained the second highest-selling video game console in Japan , outselling the newer and more powerful NEC PC Engine and Sega Mega Drive by a wide margin .
Nintendo 's near monopoly on the home video game market left it with a degree of influence over the industry .
In addition , multiple revisions were made to the NES PCBs to prevent these games from working .
-LRB- also known by the portmanteau abbreviation Famicom -LRB- ファミコン , Famikon ? -RRB-
In South Korea , it was known as the Hyundai Comboy -LRB- 현대 컴보이 Hyeondae Keomboi -RRB- and was distributed by SK Hynix which then was known as Hyundai Electronics .
The lockout chip required constant communication with the chip in the game to work .
Alternatively , the console would turn on but only show a solid white , gray , or green screen .
These attempted solutions often became notable in their own right and are often remembered alongside the NES .
Many of the most frequent attempts to fix this problem instead ran the risk of damaging the cartridge and/or system .
Subsequent plans to market a Famicom console in North America featuring a keyboard , cassette data recorder , wireless joystick controller and a special BASIC cartridge under the name `` Nintendo Advanced Video System '' likewise never materialized .
In addition , the AV Famicom joined its international counterpart and dropped the hardwired controllers in favor of detachable controller ports .
`` Computer game makers -LSB- are -RSB- scared stiff '' , the magazine said , stating that Nintendo 's popularity caused most competitors to have poor sales during the previous Christmas and resulted in serious financial problems for some .
A variety of games for the FDS were released by Nintendo -LRB- including some like Super Mario Bros. which had already been released on cartridge -RRB- and third party companies such as Konami and Taito .
A few unlicensed titles were made as well .
However , its limitations became quickly apparent as larger ROM chips were introduced , allowing cartridges with greater than 128k of space .
More advanced memory management chips -LRB- MMC -RRB- soon appeared and the FDS quickly became obsolete .
Although most hardware clones were not produced under license by Nintendo , certain companies were granted licenses to produce NES-compatible devices .
The Twin Famicom was compatible with both Famicom cartridges and Famicom Disk System disks .
It was available in two colors -LRB- red and black -RRB- and used hardwired controllers -LRB- as did the original Famicom -RRB- , but it featured a different case design .
The SHARP 19SC111 television was a television which included a built-in Famicom .
The back of the cartridge bears a label with instructions on handling .
Production and software revision codes were imprinted as stamps on the back label to correspond with the software version and producer .
Unlicensed carts were produced in black , robin egg blue , and gold , and are all slightly different shapes than standard NES cartridges .
For promotion of DuckTales : Remastered , Capcom sent 150 limited-edition gold NES cartridges with the original game , featuring the Remastered art as the sticker , to different gaming news agencies .
During the FTC probe , Nintendo changed the terms of its publisher licensing agreements to eliminate the two-year rule and other restrictive terms .
GameSpy remarked that Nintendo 's punishment was particularly weak giving the case 's findings , although it has been speculated that the FTC did not want to damage the video game industry in the United States .
The NES can be emulated on many other systems , most notably the PC .
It was described as being the first NES emulation software that could be used by a non-expert .
There have since been many other emulators .
The Virtual Console for the Wii , Nintendo 3DS and Wii U also offers emulation of many NES games .
The original NES -LRB- but not the top-loading NES-101 -RRB- contained the 10NES lockout chip , which significantly increased the challenges faced by unlicensed developers .
Tinkerers at home in later years discovered that disassembling the NES and cutting the fourth pin of the lockout chip would change the chip 's mode of operation from `` lock '' to `` key '' , removing all effects and greatly improving the console 's ability to play legal games , as well as bootlegs and converted imports .
NES consoles sold in different regions had different lockout chips , so games marketed in one region would not work on consoles from another region .
Since two types of lockout chip were used in Europe , European NES game boxes often had an `` A '' or `` B '' letter on the front , indicating whether the game is compatible with UK/Italian/Australian consoles -LRB- A -RRB- , or the rest of Europe -LRB- B -RRB- .
Rest-of-Europe games typically had text on the box stating `` This game is not compatible with the Mattel or NES versions of the Nintendo Entertainment System '' .
Similarly , UK/Italy/Australia games stated `` This game is only compatible with the Mattel or NES versions of the Nintendo Entertainment System '' .
Following a series of arcade game successes in the early 1980s , Nintendo made plans to create a cartridge-based console called the Famicom .
Because 65xx CPUs had not been manufactured or sold in Japan up to that time , no cross-development software was available and it had to be produced from scratch .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
A number of special controllers designed for use with specific games were released for the system , though very few such devices proved particularly popular .
The system 's launch represented not only a new product , but also a reframing of the severely damaged home video game market segment as a whole .
In terms of product identity , a single game such as Pac-Man would appear in many versions on many different game consoles and computers , with large variations in graphics , sound , and general quality between the versions .
For its complete North American release , the Nintendo Entertainment System was progressively released over the ensuing years in four different bundles : the Deluxe Set , the Control Deck , the Action Set and the Power Set .
In 1989 , the Power Set included the console , two game controllers , a NES Zapper , a Power Pad , and a triple Game Pak containing Super Mario Bros , Duck Hunt , and World Class Track Meet .
In 1990 , a Sports Set bundle was released , including the console , an NES Satellite infrared wireless multitap adapter , four game controllers , and a dual Game Pak containing Super Spike V'Ball and Nintendo World Cup .
Two more bundle packages were later released using the original model NES console .
The Challenge Set of 1992 included the console , two controllers , and a Super Mario Bros. 3 Game Pak for a retail price of US$ 89.99 .
It included only the console and two controllers , and no longer was bundled with a cartridge .
Instead , it contained a book called the Official Nintendo Player 's Guide , which contained detailed information for every NES game made up to that point .
Others have been produced with certain specialized markets in mind , such as an NES clone that functions as a rather primitive personal computer , which includes a keyboard and basic word processing software .
The NES was released after the `` video game crash '' of the early 1980s , whereupon many retailers and adults had regarded electronic games as being merely a passing fad , and many believed at first that the NES was another fad .
Tengen 's antitrust claims against Nintendo were never finally decided .
It also loads cartridges through a covered slot on the top of the unit and uses non-hardwired controllers .
.
Since the new controllers do n't have microphones on them like the second controller on the original console , certain games such as the Disk System version of The Legend of Zelda and Raid on Bungeling Bay will have certain tricks that can not be replicated when played on an HVC-101 Famicom without a modded controller .
However , the HVC-101 Famicom is compatible with most NES controllers due to having the same controller port .
However , this peripheral was never released outside Japan .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The console 's 2 kB of onboard RAM may be used for tile maps and attributes on the NES board and 8 kB of tile pattern ROM or RAM may be included on a cartridge .
Up to 25 simultaneous colors may be used without writing new values mid-frame : a background color , four sets of three tile colors and four sets of three sprite colors .
The NES palette is based on NTSC rather than RGB values .
A total of 64 sprites may be displayed onscreen at a given time without reloading sprites mid-screen .
Encouraged by these successes , Nintendo soon turned its attention to the North American market .
This violation of Atari 's exclusive license with Nintendo to publish the game for its own computer systems delayed the implementation of Nintendo 's game console marketing contract with Atari .
To differentiate Nintendo 's new home platform from the early 1980s ' common perception of a troubled and shallow video game market , the company freshened its product nomenclature and positioning , and it established a strict product approval and licensing policy .
The packaging of the launch lineup of NES games bore pictures of a very close representation of the actual onscreen graphics of the game , which were of sufficiently recognizable quality on their own .
Symbols on the launch games ' packaging clearly indicated the genre of the game , in order to reduce consumer confusion .
The initial seal stated , `` This seal is your assurance that Nintendo has approved and guaranteed the quality of this product '' .
Relatively few games made use of this feature .
Nintendo 's intention , however , was to reserve a large part of NES game revenue for itself .
As a result , some publishers lost more money due to distress sales of remaining inventory at the end of the NES era than they ever earned in profits from sales of the games .
Because Nintendo controlled the production of all cartridges , it was able to enforce strict rules on its third-party developers , which were required to sign a contract by Nintendo that would obligate these parties to develop exclusively for the system , order at least 10,000 cartridges , and only make five games per year .
This was an average figure , with some publishers receiving much higher amounts and others almost none .
GameSpy noted that Nintendo 's `` iron-clad terms '' made the company many enemies during the 1980s .
Some developers tried to circumvent the five game limit by creating additional company brands like Konami 's Ultra Games label ; others tried circumventing the 10NES chip .
When Nintendo released the NES in the US , the design styling was deliberately different from that of other game consoles .
Nintendo wanted to distinguish its product from those of competitors and to avoid the generally poor reputation that game consoles had acquired following the video game crash of 1983 .
The newly designed connector worked quite well when both the connector and the cartridges were clean and the pins on the connector were new .
Unfortunately , the ZIF connector was not truly zero insertion force .
Frequent insertion and removal of cartridges caused the pins to wear out from repeated usage over the years and the ZIF design proved more prone to interference by dirt and dust than an industry-standard card edge connector .
Many players would try to alleviate issues in the game caused by this corrosion by blowing into the cartridges , then reinserting them , which actually hurt the copper connectors by speeding up the tarnishing .
Nintendo would ship the necessary replacement parts only to shops that had enrolled in the authorization program .
In a recent trend , many sites have sprung up to offer Nintendo repair parts , guides , and services that replace those formerly offered by the authorized repair centers .
Video output connections varied from one model of the console to the next .
When the console was released in North America and Europe , support for composite video through RCA connectors was added in addition to the RF modulator .
Finally , the PlayChoice-10 utilized an inverted RGB video output .
A thriving market of unlicensed NES hardware clones emerged during the climax of the console 's popularity .
Initially , such clones were popular in markets where Nintendo never issued a legitimate version of the console .
It connects to a television via a combined A/V and RF Switch cable .
By actuating the green button , a user can toggle between an A/V Cable or RF Switch connection .
Other estimates place Ashkenazi Jews as making up about 75 % of Jews worldwide .
In the 10th-century History of Armenia of Yovhannes Drasxanakertc ' i -LRB- 1.15 -RRB- Ashkenaz was associated with Armenia , as it was occasionally in Jewish usage , where its denotation extended at times to Adiabene , Khazaria , Crimea and areas to the east .
In modern times , Samuel Krauss identified the Biblical `` Ashkenaz '' with Khazaria .
No evidence has yet been found of a Jewish presence in antiquity in Germany beyond its Roman border , nor in Eastern Europe .
Jews in former Roman territories faced new challenges as harsher anti-Jewish Church rulings were enforced .
They have played a prominent role in the economy , media , and politics of Israel since its founding .
That is to say , all Jewish immigrants who arrived in Israel were strongly encouraged to `` melt down '' their own particular exilic identities within the general social `` pot '' in order to become Israeli .
Yiddishkeit is specifically the Jewishness of Ashkenazi Jews .
Before the Haskalah and the emancipation of Jews in Europe , this meant the study of Torah and Talmud for men , and a family and communal life governed by the observance of Jewish Law for men and women .
But with modernization , Yiddishkeit now encompasses not just Orthodoxy and Hasidism , but a broad range of movements , ideologies , practices , and traditions in which Ashkenazi Jews have participated and somehow retained a sense of Jewishness .
Broadly speaking , a Jew is one who associates culturally with Jews , supports Jewish institutions , reads Jewish books and periodicals , attends Jewish movies and theater , travels to Israel , visits historical synagogues , and so forth .
It is a definition that applies to Jewish culture in general , and to Ashkenazi Yiddishkeit in particular .
Nowadays , relations are getting better .
In some instances , Ashkenazi communities have accepted significant numbers of Sephardi newcomers , sometimes resulting in intermarriage .
Assuming this reference point the linkage disequilibrium in the Ashkenazi Jewish population was interpreted as `` matches signs of interbreeding or ` admixture ' between Middle Eastern and European populations '' .
Bray et al. therefore postulate that these results reflect not the population antiquity but a history of mixing between genetically distinct populations in Europe .
However , it 's possible that the relaxation of marriage prescription in the ancestors of Ashkenazim that drove their heterozygosity up , while the maintenance of the FBD rule in native Middle Easterners have been keeping their heterozygosity values in check .
Ashkenazim distinctiveness as found in the Bray et al. study , therefore , may come from their ethnic endogamy -LRB- ethnic inbreeding -RRB- , which allowed them to `` mine '' their ancestral gene pool in the context of relative reproductive isolation from European neighbors , and not from clan endogamy -LRB- clan inbreeding -RRB- .
Consequently , their higher diversity compared to Middle Easterners stems from the latter 's marriage practices , not necessarily from the former 's admixture with Europeans .
These diverging conclusions focus particularly on the extent of the European genetic origin observed in Ashkenazi maternal lineages .
Sometime in the early medieval period , the Jews of central and eastern Europe came to be called by this term .
By the high medieval period , Talmudic commentators like Rashi began to use Ashkenaz/Eretz Ashkenaz to designate Germany , earlier known as Loter , where , especially in the Rhineland communities of Speyer , Worms and Mainz , the most important Jewish communities arose .
In addition , Jews from southern Italy , fleeing religious persecution , began to move into central Europe .
-LRB- Church legislation banned Christians from lending money in exchange for interest . -RRB-
From Charlemagne 's time to the present , Jewish life in northern Europe is well documented .
By the 11th century , when Rashi of Troyes wrote his commentaries , Jews in what came to be known as `` Ashkenaz '' were known for their halakhic learning , and Talmudic studies .
They were criticized by Sephardim and other Jewish scholars in Islamic lands for their lack of expertise in Jewish jurisprudence -LRB- dinim -RRB- and general ignorance of Hebrew linguistics and literature .
It was written with Hebrew letters , and heavily influenced by Hebrew and Aramaic .
The answer to why there was so little assimilation of Jews in central and eastern Europe for so long would seem to lie in part in the probability that the alien surroundings in central and eastern Europe were not conducive , though contempt did not prevent some assimilation .
The story is told that a German-speaking Palestinian Jew saved the life of a young German man surnamed Dolberger .
Sephardi communities suffered similar depletions in a few countries , including Greece , the Netherlands and the former Yugoslavia .
Many of the surviving Ashkenazi Jews emigrated to countries such as Israel , Canada , Argentina , Australia , and the United States after the war .
Different groups of religious Jews in different geographic areas historically adopted different customs and interpretations .
For this reason , observant Jews at times find it important for religious reasons to ascertain who their household 's religious ancestors are in order to know what customs their household should follow .
These times include , for example , when two Jews of different ethnic background marry , when a non-Jew converts to Judaism and determines what customs to follow for the first time , or when a lapsed or less observant Jew returns to traditional Judaism and must determine what was done in his or her family 's past .
-LRB- There are numerous Ashkenazi Jewish anglophones and Russian-speakers as well , although English and Russian are not originally Jewish languages . -RRB-
The research demonstrates the endogamy of the Jewish population in Europe and lends further credence to the idea of Ashkenazi Jews as an ethnic group .
This trend keeps Ashkenazi genes prevalent and also helps researchers further study the genes of Ashkenazi Jews with relative ease .
Ashkenazi Jews have a noted history of achievement in Western societies in the fields of exact and social sciences , literature , finance , politics , media , and others .
In those societies where they have been free to enter any profession , they have a record of high occupational achievement , entering professions and fields of commerce where higher education is required .
Ashkenazi Jews have won a large number of the Nobel awards .
In comparison with data available from other relevant populations in the region , Jews were found to be more closely related to groups in the north of the Fertile Crescent .
A later 2005 study by Nebel et al. , found a similar level of 11.5 % of male Ashkenazim belonging to R1a1a -LRB- M17 + -RRB- , the dominant Y-chromosome haplogroup in Central and Eastern Europeans .
They established communities throughout Central and Eastern Europe , which had been their primary region of concentration and residence until recent times , evolving their own distinctive characteristics and diasporic identities .
The intrusive n in the Biblical name is likely due to a scribal error confusing a waw ו with a nun נ .
The authors explained that `` the most parsimonious explanation for these observations is a common genetic origin , which is consistent with an historical formulation of the Jewish people as descending from ancient Hebrew and Israelite residents of the Levant '' .
While Jewish monotheism was not deeply affected by Greek Polytheism , the Greek way of living was attractive for many wealthier Jews .
The Stobi Synagogue in Macedonia , was built on the ruins of a more ancient synagogue in the 4th century , while later in the 5th century , the synagogue was transformed into Christian basilica .
These factors are sheer demography showing the migration patterns of Jews from Southern and Western Europe to Central and Eastern Europe .
Jews of any non-Ashkenazi background , including Mizrahi , Yemenite , Kurdish and others who have no connection with the Iberian Peninsula , have similarly come to be lumped together as Sephardic .
In this respect , the counterpart of Ashkenazi is Sephardic , since most non-Ashkenazi Orthodox Jews follow Sephardic rabbinical authorities , whether or not they are ethnically Sephardic .
With the integration of Jews from around the world in Israel , North America , and other places , the religious definition of an Ashkenazi Jew is blurring , especially outside Orthodox Judaism .
After the Vichy years and the Holocaust , the French Jewish population was augmented once again , first by Ashkenazi refugees from Central Europe , and later by Sephardi immigrants and refugees from North Africa , many of them francophone .
A nusach is defined by a liturgical tradition 's choice of prayers , order of prayers , text of prayers and melodies used in the singing of prayers .
Genome-wide association studies have also been employed to yield findings relevant to genetic origins .
Additionally , Behar et al. suggested that the rest of Ashkenazi mtDNA is originated from ~ 150 women , and that most of those were also likely of Middle Eastern origin .
In reference specifically to Haplogroup K , they suggested that although it is common throughout western Eurasia , `` the observed global pattern of distribution renders very unlikely the possibility that the four aforementioned founder lineages entered the Ashkenazi mtDNA pool via gene flow from a European host population '' .
Jewish troops were among the Syrian soldiers transferred there , and replenished from the Middle East , after 175 C.E. Jews and especially Syrians came from Antioch , Tarsus and Cappadocia .
Others came from Italy and the Hellenized parts of the Roman empire .
The excavations suggest they first lived in isolated enclaves attached to Roman legion camps , and intermarried among other similar oriental families within the military orders of the region.Raphael Patai states that later Roman writers remarked that they differed little in either customs , manner of writing , or names from the people among whom they dwelt ; and it was especially difficult to differentiate Jews from the Syrians .
Over this period of several hundred years , some have suggested , Jewish economic activity was focused on trade , business management , and financial services , due to several presumed factors : Christian European prohibitions restricting certain activities by Jews , preventing certain financial activities -LRB- such as `` usurious '' loans -RRB- between Christians , high rates of literacy , near universal male education , and ability of merchants to rely upon and trust family members living in different regions and countries .
It may correspond to a Greek word that may have existed in the Greek dialect of the Palestinian Jews , or the text is corrupted from `` Germanica . ''
In this respect , a religiously Ashkenazi Jew is an Israeli who is more likely to support certain religious interests in Israel , including certain political parties .
These political parties result from the fact that a portion of the Israeli electorate votes for Jewish religious parties ; although the electoral map changes from one election to another , there are generally several small parties associated with the interests of religious Ashkenazi Jews .
New developments in Judaism often transcend differences in religious practice between Ashkenazi and Sephardic Jews .
The Sephardic carriers of the surname would have some Ashkenazi ancestors since the surname was adopted by families who were initially of Ashkenazic origins who moved to Sephardi countries and joined those communities .
Ashkenazi would be formally adopted as the family surname having started off as a nickname imposed by their adopted communities .
A study of haplotypes of the Y-chromosome , published in 2000 , addressed the paternal origins of Ashkenazi Jews .
The proportion of male genetic admixture in Ashkenazi Jews amounts to less than 0.5 % per generation over an estimated 80 generations , with `` relatively minor contribution of European Y chromosomes to the Ashkenazim , '' and a total admixture estimate `` very similar to Motulsky 's average estimate of 12.5 % . ''
This supported the finding that `` Diaspora Jews from Europe , Northwest Africa , and the Near East resemble each other more closely than they resemble their non-Jewish neighbors . ''
`` Past research found that 50 -- 80 percent of DNA from the Ashkenazi Y chromosome , which is used to trace the male lineage , originated in the Near East , '' Richards said .
In 2013 , however , a study of Ashkenazi mitochondrial DNA by a team led by Martin B. Richards of the University of Huddersfield in England reached different conclusions , again corroborating the pre-2006 origin hypothesis .
Testing was performed on the full 16,600 DNA units composing mitochondrial DNA -LRB- the 2006 Behar study had only tested 1,000 units -RRB- in all their subjects , and the study found that the four main female Ashkenazi founders had descent lines that were established in Europe 10,000 to 20,000 years in the past while most of the remaining minor founders also have a deep European ancestry .
The study states that the great majority of Ashkenazi maternal lineages were not brought from the Near East -LRB- i.e. , they were non-Israelite -RRB- , nor were they recruited in the Caucasus -LRB- i.e. , they were non-Khazar -RRB- , but instead they were assimilated within Europe , primarily of Italian and Old French origins .
Richards summarized the findings on the female line as such : '' -LSB- N -RSB- one -LSB- of the mtDNA -RSB- came from the North Caucasus , located along the border between Europe and Asia between the Black and Caspian seas .
All of our presently available studies including my own , should thoroughly debunk one of the most questionable , but still tenacious , hypotheses : that most Ashkenazi Jews can trace their roots to the mysterious Khazar Kingdom that flourished during the ninth century in the region between the Byzantine Empire and the Persian Empire . ''
According to the study these findings `` point to a significant role for the conversion of women in the formation of Ashkenazi communities . ''
The IBD segment sharing and the proximity of European Jews to each other and to southern European populations suggested similar origins for European Jewry and refuted large-scale genetic contributions of Central and Eastern European and Slavic populations to the formation of Ashkenazi Jewry '' , as both groups -- the Middle Eastern Jews and European/Syrian Jews -- shared common ancestors in the Middle East about 2500 years ago .
The study examines genetic markers spread across the entire genome and shows that the Jewish groups -LRB- Ashkenazi and non Ashkenazi -RRB- share large swaths of DNA , indicating close relationships and that each of the Jewish groups in the study -LRB- Iranian , Iraqi , Syrian , Italian , Turkish , Greek and Ashkenazi -RRB- has its own genetic signature but is more closely related to the other Jewish groups than to their fellow non-Jewish countrymen .
Atzmon 's team found that the SNP markers in genetic segments of 3 million DNA letters or longer were 10 times more likely to be identical among Jews than non-Jews .
Results of the analysis also tally with biblical accounts of the fate of the Jews .
It was also found that any two Ashkenazi Jewish participants in the study shared about as much DNA as fourth or fifth cousins .
`` Thus , analysis of Ashkenazi Jews together with a large sample from the region of the Khazar Khaganate corroborates the earlier results that Ashkenazi Jews derive their ancestry primarily from populations of the Middle East and Europe , that they possess considerable shared ancestry with other Jewish populations , and that there is no indication of a significant genetic contribution either from within or from north of the Caucasus region '' , the authors concluded .
The origins of the Ashkenazim are obscure , and many theories have arisen speculating about their ultimate provenance .
Jews were required to pay a poll tax until the reign of Emperor Julian in 363 .
In the late Roman Empire , Jews were free to form networks of cultural and religious ties and enter into various local occupations .
But , after Christianity became the official religion of Rome and Constantinople in 380 , Jews were increasingly marginalized .
Thus Baldwin V , Count of Flanders , invited Jacob ben Yekutiel and his fellow Jews to settle in his lands ; and soon after the Norman Conquest of England , William the Conqueror likewise extended a welcome to continental Jews to take up residence there .
Bishop Rüdiger Huzmann called on the Jews of Mainz to relocate to Speyer .
In all of these decisions , the idea that Jews had the know-how and capacity to jump-start the economy , improve revenues , and enlarge trade seems to have played a prominent role .
Typically Jews relocated close to the markets and churches in town centres , where , though they came under the authority of both royal and ecclesiastical powers , they were accorded administrative autonomy .
During the 12th century , the word appears quite frequently .
In the Mahzor Vitry , the kingdom of Ashkenaz is referred to chiefly in regard to the ritual of the synagogue there , but occasionally also with regard to certain other observances .
France 's blended Jewish community is typical of the cultural recombination that is going on among Jews throughout the world .
One consisted of Sephardic Jews , originally refugees from the Inquisition and concentrated in the southwest , while the other community was Ashkenazi , concentrated in formerly German Alsace , and speaking mainly Yiddish .
The two communities were so separate and different that the National Assembly emancipated them separately in 1790 and 1791 .
Various studies have arrived at diverging conclusions regarding both the degree and the sources of the non-Levantine admixture in Ashkenazim , particularly in respect to the extent of the non-Levantine genetic origin observed in Ashkenazi maternal lineages , which is in contrast to the predominant Levantine genetic origin observed in Ashkenazi paternal lineages .
Collectively , Ashkenazi Jews are less genetically diverse than other Jewish ethnic divisions .
Before 2006 , geneticists had largely attributed the ethnogenesis of most of the world 's Jewish populations , including Ashkenazi Jews , to Israelite Jewish male migrants from the Middle East and `` the women from each local population whom they took as wives and converted to Judaism . ''
In his view this suggested `` that Jewish men had arrived from the Middle East , taken wives from the host population and converted them to Judaism , after which there was no further intermarriage with non-Jews . ''
The results showed `` a consistent and reproducible distinction between ` northern ' and ` southern ' European population groups '' .
Most northern , central , and eastern Europeans -LRB- Finns , Swedes , English , Irish , Germans , and Ukrainians -RRB- showed > 90 % in the `` northern '' population group , while most individual participants with southern European ancestry -LRB- Italians , Greeks , Portuguese , Spaniards -RRB- showed > 85 % in the `` southern '' group .
Both Ashkenazi Jews as well as Sephardic Jews showed > 85 % membership in the `` southern '' group .
Referring to the Jews clustering with southern Europeans , the authors state the results were `` consistent with a later Mediterranean origin of these ethnic groups '' .
Athanasius is a renowned Christian theologian , a Church Father , the chief defender of Trinitarianism against Arianism , and a noted Egyptian leader of the fourth century .
T. Gilmartin , -LRB- Professor of History , Maynooth , 1890 -RRB- , writes in Church History , Vol .
The proclamation of the new prince 's accession was the signal for a pagan outbreak against the still dominant Arian faction in Alexandria .
An edict had been put forth by Julian permitting the exiled bishops of the `` Galileans '' to return to their `` towns and provinces '' .
But the saint seems to have divined what was preparing in secret against him .
It later served as an inspiration to Christian monastics in both the East and the West .
He sent for the children and discovered that one of the boys -LRB- Athanasius -RRB- had acted as bishop .
Athanasius recounts being a student , as well as being educated by the Martyrs of the Great -LRB- tenth -RRB- and last persecution of Christianity by pagan Rome .
His successor as bishop of Alexandria , Alexander of Alexandria -LRB- 312 -- 328 -RRB- was an Origenist as well as a documented mentor of Athanasius .
According to Sozomen , Bishop Alexander `` invited Athanasius to be his commensal and secretary .
He had been well educated , and was versed in grammar and rhetoric , and had already , while still a young man , and before reaching the episcopate , given proof to those who dwelt with him of his wisdom and acumen '' .
Athanasius was also familiar with the theories of various philosophical schools , and in particular with the developments of Neo-Platonism .
Ultimately , Athanasius would modify the philosophical thought of the School of Alexandria away from the Origenist principles such as the `` entirely allegorical interpretation of the text '' .
Ar .
68 , Orat .
iv .
29 -RRB- .
In his letter to Emperor Constantius , he presents a defense of himself bearing unmistakable traces of a study of Demosthenes de Corona .
In about 319 , when Athanasius was a deacon , a presbyter named Arius came into a direct conflict with Alexander of Alexandria .
It appears that Arius reproached Alexander for what he felt were misguided or heretical teachings being taught by the bishop .
Arius 's theological views appear to have been firmly rooted in Alexandrian Christianity , and his Christological views were certainly not radical at all .
That council also denounced various heresies and schisms , many of which continued to preoccupy his 45-year-long episcopate -LRB- c. 8 June 328 -- 2 May 373 -RRB- .
This gave rise to the expression `` Athanasius contra mundum '' or `` Athanasius against the world '' .
He established contacts with the hermits and monks of the desert , including Pachomius , which proved very valuable to him over the years .
The two , together , set out for Sardica .
A full Council of the Church was convened / summoned there in deference to the Roman pontiff 's wishes .
The travel was a mammoth task in itself .
.
-LSB- The Council was convoked for the purpose of inquiring into the charges against Athanasius and other bishops , on account of which they were deposed from their sees by the Semi-Arian Synod of Antioch -LRB- 341 -RRB- , and went into exile .
It was called according to Socrates , -LRB- E. H. ii .
20 -RRB- by the two Emperors , Constans and Constantius ; but , according to Baronius by Pope Julius -LRB- 337 -- 352 -RRB- , -LRB- Ad an .
343 -RRB- .
One hundred and seventy six attended .
Eusebian bishops objected to the admission of Athanasius and other deposed bishops to the Council , except as accused persons to answer the charges brought against them .
The Eusebians , seeing they had no chance of having their views carried , retired to Philoppopolis in Thrace , Philippopolis -LRB- Thracia -RRB- , where they held an opposition council , under the presidency of the Patriarch of Antioch , and confirmed the decrees of the Synod of Antioch . -RSB-
.
Two conciliar letters were prepared , one to the clergy and faithful of Alexandria , the other to the bishops of Egypt and Libya , in which the will of the Council was made known .
Meanwhile , the Eusebian party had gone to Philippopolis , where they issued an anathema against Athanasius and his supporters .
The persecution against the orthodox party broke out with renewed vigour , and Constantius was induced to prepare drastic measures against Athanasius and the priests who were devoted to him .
Orders were given that if the Saint attempt to re-enter his see , he should be put to death .
Athanasius , accordingly , withdrew from Sardica to Naissus in Mysia , where he celebrated the Easter festival of the year 344 .
It was Hosius who presided over the Council of Sardica , as he did for the First Council of Nicaea , which like the 341 synod , found Athanasius innocent .
& .
He celebrated his last Easter in exile in Aquileia in April 345 , received by bishop Fortunatianus .
With his friends scattered , the saintly Hosius in exile , and Pope Liberius denounced as acquiescing in Arian formularies , Athanasius could hardly hope to escape .
It was the beginning of his third exile .
T. Gilmartin , -LRB- Professor of History , Maynooth , 1890 -RRB- , writes in Church History , Vol .
1 , Ch XVII : The Arians sought the approval of an Ecumenical Council .
They sought to hold two councils .
The two met in autumn of 359 .
At Seleucia , one hundred and fifty bishops , of which one hundred and five were semi-Arian .
The semi-Arians refused to accept anything less than the `` Homoiousion '' , -LRB- see : Homoiousian -RRB- , formulary of faith .
The Imperial Prefect was obliged to disband , without agreeing on any creed .
Acacius , the leader of the `` Homoean '' party went to Constantinople , where the Sirmian formulary of faith was approved by the `` Home Synod '' , -LRB- consisted of those bishops who happened to be present at the Court for the time -RRB- , and a decree of deposition issued against the leaders of the semi-Arians .
At Rimini were over four hundred of which eighty were Arian , the rest were orthodox .
Each party sent a deputation to the Emperor to say there was no probability to agreement , and asked for the bishops to return to their dioceses .
For the purpose of wearing-down the orthodox bishops ; -LRB- Sulpitius Severius says -RRB- , Constantius delayed his answer for several months , and finally prevailed on them to accept the Sirmian creed .
With characteristic energy he set to work to re-establish the somewhat shattered fortunes of the orthodox party and to purge the theological atmosphere of uncertainty .
To clear up the misunderstandings that had arisen in the course of the previous years , an attempt was made to determine still further the significance of the Nicene formularies .
The edict was communicated to the bishop by Pythicodorus Trico , who , though described in the `` Chronicon Athanasianum '' -LRB- XXXV -RRB- as a `` philosopher '' , seems to have behaved with brutal insolence .
In the first part , Athanasius attacks several pagan practices and beliefs .
The second part presents teachings on the redemption .
Athanasius was thus elected , as Gregory tells us ... '' -LRB- Pope Gregory I , would have full access to the Vatican Archives -RRB- .
His writings were well regarded by all Church fathers who followed , in both the West and the East , who noted their rich devotion to the Word-become-man , great pastoral concern , and profound interest in monasticism .
Athanasius is counted as one of the four great Eastern Doctors of the Church in the Roman Catholic Church .
He is venerated by the Oriental and Eastern Orthodox Churches , the Roman Catholic Church , the Lutherans , and the Anglican Communion .
The accusation must have seemed plausible .
The Orthodox Church places his year of birth around 297 .
There , Eusebius of Nicomedia and other supporters of Arius deposed Athanasius .
On 6 November , both sides of the dispute met with Emperor Constantine I in Constantinople .
.
Nonetheless , during his later exile , with no access to a copy of the Scriptures , Athanasius could quote from memory every verse in the Old Testament with a supposed reference to the Trinity without missing any .
An Alexandria local council in 350 replaced -LRB- or reaffirmed -RRB- Athanasius in his see .
Athanasius was thus elected , as Gregory tells us ... '' -LRB- Pope Gregory I , would have full access to the Vatican Archives -RRB- .
He sent him , indeed , five hundred pieces of gold `` to bear his charges '' but Liberius refused them , saying , he might bestow them on his flatters ; as he did also a like present from the empress , bidding the messenger learn to believe in Christ , and not to persecute the Church of God .
Attempts were made to leave the presents in The Church , but Liberius threw them out .
The emperor was reduced to silence on every article , but being the more out of patience , ordered him into banishment .
Liberius went into exile .
Constantius , after two years went to Rome to celebrate the twentieth year of his reign .
The ladies joined in a petition to him that he would restore Liberius .
He subscribed the condemnation of Athanasius , and a confession or creed which had been framed by the Arians at Sirmium .
And he no sooner had recovered his see that he declared himself for the Creed of Niceae , as Theodoret testifies .
-LRB- Theodoret , Hist .
lib .
ii .
c. 17 . -RRB-
.
The Emperor knew what he wanted people to believe .
So did the bishops at his court .
Athanasius stuck by the orthodox creed .
Constantius was an avowed Arian , became sole ruler in 350 , at the death of his brother , Constans .
T. Gilmartin , -LRB- Professor of History , Maynooth , 1890 -RRB- , writes in Church History , Vol .
1 , Ch XVII : By Constantius 's order , the sole ruler of The Roman Empire at the death of his brother Constans , the Council of Arles in 353 , was held , which was presided over by Vincent , Bishop of Capua , in the name of Pope Liberius .
Milan was named as the place , here three hundred bishops assembled , most from the West , only a few from the East , in 355 .
They met in the Church of Milan .
Shortly , the Emperor ordered them to a hall in the Imperial Palace , thus ending any free debate .
He threatened any who refused with exile and death .
All , with the exception of Dionysius -LRB- bishop of Milan -RRB- , and the two Papal Legates , viz. , Eusebius of Vercelli and Lucifer of Cagliari , consented to the Arian Creed and the condemnation of Athanasius .
The decrees were forwarded to the Pope for approval , but were rejected , because of the violence to which the bishops were subjected .
Athanasius appealed for unity among all those who had faith in Christianity , even if they differed on matters of terminology .
This prepared the groundwork for his definition of the orthodox doctrine of the Trinity .
However , the council also was directed against those who denied the divinity of the Holy Spirit , the human soul of Christ , and Christ 's divinity .
Some early reports state that Athanasius spent this period of exile at his family 's ancestral tomb in a Christian cemetery .
-LRB- Soz. , `` Hist .
Eccl . ''
, VI , xii ; Soc. , `` Hist .
Eccl . ''
, IV , xii -RRB- .
Athanasius compiled the list to resolve questions about such texts as The Epistle of Barnabas .
For they hold the places , but you the Apostolic Faith .
Let us consider whether is the greater , the place or the Faith .
Who then has lost more , or who possesses more ?
He who holds the place , or he who holds the Faith ?
This Gospel in itself is the greatest support of Athanasius 's stand .
The Last Gospel of The Mass , The Eucharist , St John -LSB- 1:1 -- 14 -RSB- , together with the prayer ; `` Placeat tibi '' , the Blessing , are all private devotions that have been gradually absorbed by the liturgical service .
The beginning of John 's Gospel was much used as an object of special devotion throughout the Middle Ages .
It became a firm custom with exceptions in using an other Gospel in use from 1920 .
A Prayer Card for the St John 's Gospel .
Also :
Moreover , many labelled `` Arian '' did not consider themselves followers of Arius .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
By 1910 , Seattle was one of the 25 largest cities in the country .
However , the Great Depression severely damaged the city 's economy .
In 1994 the Internet retail giant Amazon was founded in Seattle .
The stream of new software , biotechnology , and Internet companies led to an economic revival , which increased the city 's population by almost 50,000 between 1990 and 2000 .
The Seattle metropolitan area of around 3.6 million inhabitants is the 15th largest metropolitan area in the United States .
In 1855 , nominal land settlements were established .
This violence originated with unemployed whites who were determined to drive the Chinese from Seattle -LRB- anti-Chinese riots also occurred in Tacoma -RRB- .
Authorities declared martial law and federal troops arrived to put down the disorder .
Few of those working men found lasting wealth , however ; it was Seattle 's business of clothing the miners and feeding them salmon that panned out in the long run .
Along with Seattle , other cities like Everett , Tacoma , Port Townsend , Bremerton , and Olympia , all in the Puget Sound region , became competitors for exchange , rather than mother lodes for extraction , of precious metals .
The boom lasted well into the early part of the 20th century and funded many new Seattle companies and products .
Other Seattle companies founded during this period include Nordstrom and Eddie Bauer .
Seattle brought in the Olmsted Brothers landscape architecture firm to design a system of parks and boulevards .
After the war , the local economy dipped .
Many people left the area to look for work elsewhere , and two local real estate agents put up a billboard reading `` Will the last person leaving Seattle -- Turn out the lights . ''
His activities soon expanded , and the thrifty Greek went on and became one of America 's greatest theater and movie tycoons .
A 1912 city development plan by Virgil Bogue went largely unused .
Seattle was mildly prosperous in the 1920s but was particularly hard hit in the Great Depression , experiencing some of the country 's harshest labor strife in that era .
In 1993 , the movie Sleepless in Seattle brought the city further national attention .
Lake Washington 's waters flow to Puget Sound through the Lake Washington Ship Canal -LRB- consisting of two man-made canals , Lake Union , and the Hiram M. Chittenden Locks at Salmon Bay , ending in Shilshole Bay on Puget Sound -RRB- .
Yet another boom began as the city emerged from the Great Recession .
Other strong quakes occurred on January 26 , 1700 -LRB- estimated at 9 magnitude -RRB- , December 14 , 1872 -LRB- 7.3 or 7.4 -RRB- , April 13 , 1949 -LRB- 7.1 -RRB- , and April 29 , 1965 -LRB- 6.5 -RRB- .
The 1965 quake caused three deaths in Seattle directly , and one more by heart failure .
Although the Seattle Fault passes just south of the city center , neither it nor the Cascadia subduction zone has caused an earthquake since the city 's founding .
The city itself is hilly , though not uniformly so .
The Wallingford , Mount Baker , and Crown Hill neighborhoods are technically located on hills as well .
The break in the ridge between First Hill and Beacon Hill is man-made , the result of two of the many regrading projects that reshaped the topography of the city center .
Annual precipitation has ranged from 23.78 in -LRB- 604 mm -RRB- in 1952 to 55.14 in -LRB- 1,401 mm -RRB- in 1950 ; for water year -LRB- October 1 -- September 30 -RRB- precipitation , the range is 23.16 in -LRB- 588 mm -RRB- in 1976 -- 77 to 51.82 in -LRB- 1,316 mm -RRB- in 1996 -- 97 .
The city of Bremerton , about 15 mi -LRB- 24 km -RRB- west of downtown Seattle , receives 56.4 in -LRB- 1,430 mm -RRB- of precipitation annually .
By comparison , Fort Myers , Florida reports thunder on 93 days per year , Kansas City on 52 , and New York City on 25 .
Despite being on the margin of the rain shadow of the Olympic Mountains , the city has a reputation for frequent rain .
In an average year , at least 0.01 inches -LRB- 0.25 mm -RRB- of precipitation falls on 150 days , more than nearly all U.S. cities east of the Rocky Mountains .
It is cloudy 201 days out of the year and partly cloudy 93 days .
In the convergence zone , air arriving from the north meets air flowing in from the south .
When the air currents meet , they are forced upward , resulting in convection .
Thunderstorms caused by this activity are usually weak and can occur north and south of town , but Seattle itself rarely receives more than occasional thunder and small hail showers .
This moderate snow event was officially the 12th snowiest calendar day at the airport since 1948 and snowiest since November 1985 .
Much of the city of Seattle proper received somewhat lesser snowfall accumulations .
Locations to the south of Seattle received more , with Olympia and Chehalis receiving 14 to 18 in -LRB- 36 to 46 cm -RRB- .
From January 31 to February 2 , 1916 , another heavy snow event occurred with 29 in -LRB- 74 cm -RRB- of snow on the ground by the time the event was over .
With official records dating to 1948 , the largest single-day snowfall is 20.0 in -LRB- 51 cm -RRB- on January 13 , 1950 .
Seasonal snowfall has ranged from zero in 1991 -- 92 to 67.5 in -LRB- 171 cm -RRB- in 1968 -- 69 , with trace amounts having occurred as recently as 2009 -- 10 .
The month of January 1950 was particularly severe , bringing 57.2 in -LRB- 145 cm -RRB- of snow , the most of any month along with the aforementioned record cold .
Autumn , winter , and early spring are frequently characterized by rain .
The hottest officially recorded temperature was 103 °F -LRB- 39 °C -RRB- on July 29 , 2009 ; the coldest recorded temperature was 0 °F -LRB- − 18 °C -RRB- on January 31 , 1950 ; the record cold daily maximum is 16 °F -LRB- − 9 °C -RRB- on January 14 , 1950 , while , conversely , the record warm daily minimum is 71 °F -LRB- 22 °C -RRB- the day the official record high was set .
Light rain & drizzle are the predominant forms of precipitation during the remainder of the year ; for instance , on average , less than 1.6 in -LRB- 41 mm -RRB- of rain falls in July and August combined when rain is rare .
On occasion , Seattle experiences somewhat more significant weather events .
Precipitation totals exceeded 13.8 in -LRB- 350 mm -RRB- in some areas with winds topping out at 209 km/h -LRB- 130 mph -RRB- along coastal Oregon .
It became the second wettest event in Seattle history when a little over 130 mm -LRB- 5.1 in -RRB- of rain fell on Seattle in a 24-hour period .
In recent years , the city has experienced steady population growth , and has been faced with the issue of accommodating more residents .
The Chinese population in the Seattle area has origins in mainland China , Hong Kong , Southeast Asia , and Taiwan .
According to a 2012 HistoryLink study , Seattle 's 98118 ZIP code -LRB- in the Columbia City neighborhood -RRB- was one of the most diverse ZIP Code Tabulation Areas in the United States .
The 2010 census showed that Seattle was one of the whitest big cities in the country , although its proportion of white residents has been gradually declining .
Still , very large companies dominate the business landscape .
Other Fortune 500 companies popularly associated with Seattle are based in nearby Puget Sound cities .
Warehouse club chain Costco -LRB- # 22 -RRB- , the largest retail company in Washington , is based in Issaquah .
Weyerhaeuser , the forest products company -LRB- # 363 -RRB- , is based in Federal Way .
Finally , Bellevue is home to truck manufacturer Paccar -LRB- # 168 -RRB- .
Other major companies in the area include Nintendo of America in Redmond , T-Mobile US in Bellevue , Expedia Inc. in Bellevue and Providence Health & Services -- the state 's largest health care system and fifth largest employer -- in Renton .
There are also many successful independent artisanal espresso roasters and cafés .
Vulcan Inc. , the holding company of billionaire Paul Allen , is behind most of the development projects in the region .
While some see the new development as an economic boon , others have criticized Nickels and the Seattle City Council for pandering to Allen 's interests at taxpayers ' expense .
Also in 2006 , Expansion Magazine ranked Seattle among the top 10 metropolitan areas in the nation for climates favorable to business expansion .
In 2013 , however , the magazine ranked Seattle No. 9 on its list of the Best Places for Business and Careers .
Seattle 's economy is driven by a mix of older industrial companies , and `` new economy '' Internet and technology companies , service , design and clean technology companies .
Seattle also has large lesbian , gay , bisexual , and transgender populations .
In addition , the 900-seat Romanesque Revival Town Hall on First Hill hosts numerous cultural events , especially lectures and recitals .
Seattle has been a regional center for the performing arts for many years .
The Seattle Youth Symphony Orchestras -LRB- SYSO -RRB- is the largest symphonic youth organization in the United States .
The city also boasts lauded summer and winter chamber music festivals organized by the Seattle Chamber Music Society .
From 1869 until 1982 , Seattle was known as the `` Queen City '' .
Seattle residents are known as Seattleites .
The Frye Art Museum is a free museum on First Hill .
Regional history collections are at the Loghouse Museum in Alki , Klondike Gold Rush National Historical Park , the Museum of History and Industry and the Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture .
Industry collections are at the Center for Wooden Boats and the adjacent Northwest Seaport , the Seattle Metropolitan Police Museum , and the Museum of Flight .
Regional ethnic collections include the Nordic Heritage Museum , the Wing Luke Asian Museum and the Northwest African American Museum .
Seattle was also home to a previous Major League Baseball franchise in 1969 : the Seattle Pilots .
The SuperSonics relocated to Oklahoma City , Oklahoma and became the Oklahoma City Thunder for the 2008 -- 09 season .
The Seahawks ' CenturyLink Field has hosted NFL playoff games in 2006 , 2008 , 2011 , 2014 and 2015 .
The Sounders have not won the MLS Cup but have , however , won the MLS Supporters ' Shield in 2014 and the Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup on four occasions : 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , and 2014 .
Support for issues such as same-sex marriage and reproductive rights are largely taken for granted in local politics .
It has also elected an openly gay mayor , Ed Murray , and a socialist councillor , Kshama Sawant .
For the first time in United States history , an openly gay black woman was elected to public office when Sherry Harris was elected as a Seattle city councillor in 1991 .
A 2008 United States Census Bureau survey showed that Seattle had the highest percentage of college and university graduates of any major U.S. city .
Seattle also has numerous commercial radio stations .
In a March 2012 report by the consumer research firm Arbitron , the top FM stations were KRWM -LRB- adult contemporary format -RRB- , KIRO-FM -LRB- news/talk -RRB- , and KISW -LRB- active rock -RRB- while the top AM stations were KOMO -LRB- AM -RRB- -LRB- all news -RRB- , KJR -LRB- AM -RRB- -LRB- all sports -RRB- , KIRO -LRB- AM -RRB- -LRB- all sports -RRB- .
There is also the Seattle Daily Journal of Commerce , and the University of Washington publishes The Daily , a student-run publication , when school is in session .
The most prominent weeklies are the Seattle Weekly and The Stranger ; both consider themselves `` alternative '' papers .
There are also several ethnic newspapers , including the The Facts , Northwest Asian Weekly and the International Examiner , and numerous neighborhood newspapers .
Seattle is one of the few cities in North America whose bus fleet includes electric trolleybuses .
Sound Transit currently provides an express bus service within the metropolitan area ; two Sounder commuter rail lines between the suburbs and downtown ; its Central Link light rail line , which opened in 2009 , between downtown and Sea-Tac Airport gives the city its first rapid transit line that has intermediate stops within the city limits .
This left an extensive network of privately owned buses -LRB- later public -RRB- as the only mass transit within the city and throughout the region .
Only two roads , Interstate 5 and State Route 99 -LRB- both limited-access highways -RRB- , run uninterrupted through the city from north to south .
Seattle has the 8th worst traffic congestion of all American cities , and is 10th among all North American cities .
A study by Newsweek International in 2006 cited the University of Washington as the twenty-second best university in the world .
From 2004 to 2009 , the annual number of unlinked public transportation trips increased by approximately 21 % .
After rejecting a roads and transit measure in 2007 , Seattle-area voters passed a transit only measure in 2008 to increase ST Express bus service , extend the Link Light Rail system , and expand and improve Sounder commuter rail service .
A light rail line from downtown heading south to Sea-Tac Airport began service on December 19 , 2009 , giving the city its first rapid transit line with intermediate stations within the city limits .
In the first stage the information must be changed so that it may be put into the encoding process .
This entails that information is maintained over short periods of time .
Such information must be located and returned to the consciousness .
Confusion with recalling acoustically similar letters rather than visually similar letters implies that the letters were encoded acoustically .
For example , in recalling a ten-digit telephone number , a person could chunk the digits into three groups : first , the area code -LRB- such as 123 -RRB- , then a three-digit chunk -LRB- 456 -RRB- and lastly a four-digit chunk -LRB- 7890 -RRB- .
This may be reflected in some countries in the tendency to display telephone numbers as several chunks of two to four numbers .
On the other hand , we can remember telephone numbers for many years through repetition ; this information is said to be stored in long-term memory .
The model also shows all the memory stores as being a single unit whereas research into this shows differently .
Recognition of sounds such as spoken numbers , letters , words and easily identifiable noises -LRB- such as doorbells and cats meowing -RRB- were all impacted .
Long-term memory , on the other hand , is maintained by more stable and permanent changes in neural connections widely spread throughout the brain .
Without the hippocampus , new memories are unable to be stored into long-term memory , as learned from patient Henry Molaison after removal of both his hippocampi , and there will be a very short attention span .
The ability to look at an item and remember what it looked like with just a split second of observation , or memorization , is the example of sensory memory .
With very short presentations , participants often report that they seem to `` see '' more than they can actually report .
Subjects were presented with a grid of 12 letters , arranged into three rows of four .
After a brief presentation , subjects were then played either a high , medium or low tone , cuing them which of the rows to report .
Based on these partial report experiments , Sperling was able to show that the capacity of sensory memory was approximately 12 items , but that it degraded very quickly -LRB- within a few hundred milliseconds -RRB- .
This type of memory can not be prolonged via rehearsal .
With episodic memory , individuals are able to recall specific events such as birthday parties and weddings .
Another major way to distinguish different memory functions is whether the content to be remembered is in the past , retrospective memory , or in the future , prospective memory .
In contrast , prospective memory is memory for future intentions , or remembering to remember -LRB- Winograd , 1988 -RRB- .
Prospective memory can be further broken down into event - and time-based prospective remembering .
Hebb distinguished between short-term and long-term memory .
He postulated that any memory that stayed in short-term storage for a long enough time would be consolidated into a long-term memory .
This is also true for stimulation of the amygdala .
Excessive or prolonged stress -LRB- with prolonged cortisol -RRB- may hurt memory storage .
Patients with amygdalar damage are no more likely to remember emotionally charged words than nonemotionally charged ones .
The hippocampus is important for explicit memory .
The hippocampus is also important for memory consolidation .
The input comes from secondary and tertiary sensory areas that have processed the information a lot already .
Hippocampal damage may also cause memory loss and problems with memory storage .
This memory loss includes , retrograde amnesia which is the loss of memory for events that occurred shortly before the time of brain damage .
The latter component is also called engram or memory traces -LRB- Semon 1904 -RRB- .
It can best be summarized as remember how to do something .
Procedural memory involved in motor learning depends on the cerebellum and basal ganglia .
It is the section of memory where we carry out thought processes and use them to learn and reason about topics .
Older adults tend to exhibit deficits on tasks that involve knowing the temporal order in which they learned information ; source memory tasks that require them to remember the specific circumstances or context in which they learned information ; and prospective memory tasks that involve remembering to perform an act at a future time .
In other words , when asked to imitate a two-step action sequence -LRB- such as putting a toy car in the base and pushing in the plunger to make the toy roll to the other end -RRB- , 9-month-olds tend to imitate the actions of the sequence in the correct order -LRB- step 1 and then step 2 -RRB- .
Declarative memory can be further sub-divided into semantic memory , concerning principles and facts taken independent of context ; and episodic memory , concerning information specific to a particular context , such as a time and place .
Episodic memory , on the other hand , is used for more personal memories , such as the sensations , emotions , and personal associations of a particular place or time .
These are key events in one 's life that can be remembered clearly .
One is able to place in memory information that resembles objects , places , animals or people in sort of a mental image .
Visual memory can result in priming and it is assumed some kind of perceptual representational system underlies this phenomenon .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In response to stressful situations , the brain releases hormones and neurotransmitters -LRB- ex .
glucocorticoids and catecholamines -RRB- which affect memory encoding processes in the hippocampus .
In this study , 48 healthy female and male university students participated in either a stress test or a control group .
Those randomly assigned to the stress test group had a hand immersed in ice cold water -LRB- the reputable SECPT or ` Socially Evaluated Cold Pressor Test ' -RRB- for up to three minutes , while being monitored and videotaped .
Both the stress and control groups were then presented with 32 words to memorize .
Twenty-four hours later , both groups were tested to see how many words they could remember -LRB- free recall -RRB- as well as how many they could recognize from a larger list of words -LRB- recognition performance -RRB- .
The results showed a clear impairment of memory performance in the stress test group , who recalled 30 % fewer words than the control group .
Although interference can lead to forgetting , it is important to keep in mind that there are situations when old information can facilitate learning of new information .
A growing body of research now indicates that infants as young as 6-months can recall information after a 24-hour delay .
In addition , studies have shown that with age , infants can store information faster .
Whereas 14-month-olds can recall a three-step sequence after being exposed to it once , 6-month-olds need approximately six exposures in order to be able to remember it .
Brain areas involved in the neuroanatomy of memory such as the hippocampus , the amygdala , the striatum , or the mammillary bodies are thought to be involved in specific types of memory .
Damage to certain areas in patients and animal models and subsequent memory deficits is a primary source of information .
However , rather than implicating a specific area , it could be that damage to adjacent areas , or to a pathway traveling through the area is actually responsible for the observed deficit .
The more long term the exposure to stress is , the more impact it may have .
However , short term exposure to stress also causes impairment in memory by interfering with the function of the hippocampus .
Prenatal stress also hinders the ability to learn and memorize by disrupting the development of the hippocampus and can lead to unestablished long term potentiation in the offspring of severely stressed parents .
Stressful life experiences may be a cause of memory loss as a person ages .
Glucocorticoids that are released during stress damage neurons that are located in the hippocampal region of the brain .
This directly relates to traumatic events in one 's past such as kidnappings , being prisoners of war or sexual abuse as a child .
Sleep does not affect acquisition or recall while one is awake .
Therefore , sleep has the greatest effect on memory consolidation .
During sleep , the neural connections in the brain are strengthened .
This enhances the brain 's abilities to stabilize and retain memories .
This process implicates that memories are reactivated during sleep , but that the process does n't enhance every memory .
It also implicates that qualitative changes are made to the memories when they are transferred to long-term store during sleep .
When you are sleeping , the hippocampus replays the events of the day for the neocortex .
When you do not get enough sleep it makes it more difficult to learn as these neural connections are not as strong , resulting in a lower retention rate of memories .
Sleep deprivation makes it harder to focus , resulting in inefficient learning .
Furthermore , some studies have shown that sleep deprivation can lead to false memories as the memories are not properly transferred to long-term memory .
Therefore , it is important to get the proper amount of sleep so that memory can function at the highest level .
One of the primary functions of sleep is thought to be the improvement of the consolidation of information , as several studies have demonstrated that memory depends on getting sufficient sleep between training and test .
This study examined 17 subjects , -LRB- average age 53 -RRB- with normal memory performance .
Eight subjects were asked to follow a `` brain healthy '' diet , relaxation , physical , and mental exercise -LRB- brain teasers and verbal memory training techniques -RRB- .
Much of the current knowledge of memory has come from studying memory disorders , particularly amnesia .
Amnesia can result from extensive damage to : -LRB- a -RRB- the regions of the medial temporal lobe , such as the hippocampus , dentate gyrus , subiculum , amygdala , the parahippocampal , entorhinal , and perirhinal cortices or the -LRB- b -RRB- midline diencephalic region , specifically the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus and the mammillary bodies of the hypothalamus .
Retention testing took place the following day , either in the same room with the vanilla scent again present , or in a different room without the fragrance .
The memory performance of subjects who experienced stress during the object-location task decreased significantly when they were tested in an unfamiliar room without the vanilla scent -LRB- an incongruent context -RRB- ; however , the memory performance of stressed subjects showed no impairment when they were tested in the original room with the vanilla scent -LRB- a congruent context -RRB- .
Findings revealed that those participants who repeatedly imagined performing such an act were more likely to think that they had actually performed that act during the first session of the experiment .
Similarly , Garry and her colleagues -LRB- 1996 -RRB- asked college students to report how certain they were that they experienced a number of events as children -LRB- e.g. , broke a window with their hand -RRB- and then two weeks later asked them to imagine four of those events .
That is , when asked to imagine the events they were more confident that they experienced the events .
Although people often think that memory operates like recording equipment , it is not the case .
The molecular mechanisms underlying the induction and maintenance of memory are very dynamic and comprise distinct phases covering a time window from seconds to even a lifetime .
To illustrate , consider a classic study conducted by Elizabeth Loftus and John Palmer -LRB- 1974 -RRB- in which people were instructed to watch a film of a traffic accident and then asked about what they saw .
The researchers found that the people who were asked , `` How fast were the cars going when they smashed into each other ? ''
gave higher estimates than those who were asked , `` How fast were the cars going when they hit each other ? ''
Furthermore , when asked a week later whether they have seen broken glass in the film , those who had been asked the question with smashed were twice more likely to report that they have seen broken glass than those who had been asked the question with hit .
Thus , the wording of the questions distorted viewers ' memories of the event .
Importantly , the wording of the question led people to construct different memories of the event -- those who were asked the question with smashed recalled a more serious car accident than they had actually seen .
In contrast to this is cramming : an intensive memorization in a short period of time .
The so-called Method of loci uses spatial memory to memorize non-spatial information .
With a changing society , more citizens have begun to press for acknowledging multiracial ancestry .
The term may also include Americans of mixed-race ancestry who self-identify with just one group culturally and socially -LRB- cf. the one-drop rule -RRB- .
Creolization , assimilation and integration have been continuing processes .
They `` lived in native communities for years , learned native languages fluently , attended native councils , and often fought alongside their native companions . ''
More numerous and typical were traders and trappers , who married Indigenous American women from tribes on the frontier and had families with them .
Not all abandoned their `` natural '' mixed-race children .
Because the women were free , their mixed-race children were born free ; they and their descendants formed most of the families of free people of color during the colonial period in Virginia .
The men , however , selected Hawaiian women who were thinner and paler in complexion .
Many families were multiracial .
Similar laws had been proposed but not passed in the late nineteenth century in South Carolina and Virginia , for instance .
They maintained these until forced to change in the 1960s and after by enforcement of federal legislation authorizing oversight of practices to protect the constitutional rights of African Americans and other minority citizens .
The phenomenon known as `` passing as white '' is difficult to explain in other countries or to foreign students .
Typical questions are : `` Should n't Americans say that a person who is passing as white is white , or nearly all white , and has previously been passing as black ? ''
or `` To be consistent , should n't you say that someone who is one-eighth white is passing as black ? ''
... A person who is one-fourth or less American Indian or Korean or Filipino is not regarded as passing if he or she intermarries with and joins fully the life of the dominant community , so the minority ancestry need not be hidden .
Population testing is still being done .
In addition , not all Native Americans have been tested , so scientists do not know for sure that Native Americans have only the genetic markers they have identified .
Prior to the one-drop rule , different states had different laws regarding color .
Since the late twentieth century , the number of African and Caribbean ethnic African immigrants have increased in the United States .
They suggest that the term `` African-American '' should refer strictly to the descendants of African slaves and free people of color who survived the slavery era in the United States .
They met and worked together in Dakota Territory when she was Superintendent of Indian Education and he was a doctor for the reservations .
They noted there is popular belief in a high rate of Native American admixture that is not supported by the data that has been collected .
-LRB- Reference is coming -RRB-
They had six children of record ; four Hemings children survived into adulthood , and he freed them all , among the very few slaves he freed .
Two were allowed to `` escape '' to the North in 1822 , and two were granted freedom by his will upon his death in 1826 .
It was socially advantageous for the Hemings children to identify as white , in keeping with their appearance and the majority proportion of their ancestry .
Although born into slavery , the Hemings children were legally white under Virginia law of the time .
After the Civil War , racial segregation forced African Americans to share more of a common lot in society than they might have given widely varying ancestry , educational and economic levels .
African Americans began to create common cause -- regardless of their multiracial admixture or social and economic stratification .
They worked to get their children educated and socially mobile .
Further details are given in the article : Race -LRB- U.S. census -RRB- .
The association of slavery with a `` race '' led to slavery as a racial caste .
But , most families of free people of color formed in Virginia before the American Revolution were the descendants of unions between white women and African men , who frequently worked and lived together in the looser conditions of the early colonial period .
While interracial marriage was later prohibited , white men frequently took sexual advantage of slave women , and numerous generations of multiracial children were born .
The latter categories remained within an overall black or colored category , but before the Civil War , in Virginia and some other states , a person of one-eighth or less black ancestry was legally white .
Some members of these categories passed temporarily or permanently as white .
Early contact between Indigenous Americans and Europeans was often charged with tension , but also had moments of friendship , cooperation , and intimacy .
Marriages took place in both English and Latin colonies between European men and Native women .
Genealogists have begun to find plantation records , court records , land deeds and other sources to trace African-American families and individuals before 1870 .
Similarly , Native Americans did not generally learn to read and write English , although some did in the nineteenth century .
This same promise was extracted from the Huron Nation in 1764 , and from the Delaware Nation in 1765 , though there is no record of slaves ever being returned .
Because of this , many tribes encouraged marriage between the two groups , to create stronger , healthier children from the unions .
Interracial relationships , common-law marriages , and marriages occurred since the earliest colonial years , especially before slavery hardened as a racial caste associated with people of African descent in the British colonies .
The change increased white men 's ability to use slave women sexually , as they had no responsibility for the children .
As master as well as father of mixed-race children born into slavery , the men could use these people as servants or laborers or sell them as slaves .
-LRB- The practice of providing for the children was more common in French and Spanish colonies , where a class of free people of color developed who became educated and property owners . -RRB-
Many other white fathers abandoned the mixed-race children and their mothers to slavery .
The one-drop rule originated in some Southern United States in the late 19th century , likely in response to whites ' attempt to maintain white supremacy and limit black political power following the Democrats ' regaining control of state legislatures in the late 1870s .
These include `` Bi Racial , Combination , Everything , Many , Mixed , Multi National , Multiple , Several and Various '' .
In addition , an example of African slaves ' escaping from European colonists and being absorbed by Indigenous Americans occurred as far back as 1526 .
The Spanish settlement was named San Miguel de Gualdape .
In 1526 , the first African slaves fled the colony and took refuge with local Indigenous Americans .
They refused to be put into just one category .
If the tribe had a patrilineal system , like the Omaha , the children of white fathers were considered white .
The Northern mill owner would not sell his own children into slavery .
By the 1890s the profound effect of adrenal extracts on many different tissue types had been discovered , setting off a search both for the mechanism of chemical signalling and efforts to exploit these observations for the development of new drugs .
The blood pressure raising and vasoconstrictive effects of adrenal extracts were of particular interest to surgeons as hemostatic agents and as treatment for shock , and a number of companies developed products based on adrenal extracts containing varying purities of the active substance .
While highly effective , the requirement for injection limited the use of norepinephrine -LSB- clarification needed -RSB- and orally active derivatives were sought .
Under pressure from Toronto University and a potential patent challenge by academic scientists who had independently developed a similar purification method , an agreement was reached for non-exclusive production of insulin by multiple companies .
Phenobarbital was among the most widely used drugs for the treatment of epilepsy through the 1970s , and as of 2014 , remains on the World Health Organizations list of essential medications .
Arsphenamine was prepared as part of a campaign to synthesize a series of such compounds , and found to exhibit partially selective toxicity .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The modern pharmaceutical industry traces its roots to two sources .
The development of synthetic chemical methods allowed scientists to systematically vary the structure of chemical substances , and growth in the emerging science of pharmacology expanded their ability to evaluate the biological effects of these structural changes .
Early progress toward the development of vaccines occurred throughout this period , primarily in the form of academic and government-funded basic research directed toward the identification of the pathogens responsible for common communicable diseases .
During the years 1940-1955 , the rate of decline in the U.S. death rate accelerated from 2 % per year to 8 % per year , then returned to the historical rate of 2 % per year .
The dramatic decline in the immediate post-war years has been attributed to the rapid development of new treatments and vaccines for infectious disease that occurred during these years .
The vaccine process was never patented , but was instead given to pharmaceutical companies to manufacture as a low-cost generic .
The contamination appears to have originated both in the original cell stock and in monkey tissue used for production .
This was unaffordable for most South African citizens , and so the South African government committed to providing ARVs at prices closer to what people could afford .
To do so , they would need to ignore the patents on drugs and produce generics within the country -LRB- using a compulsory license -RRB- , or import them from abroad .
Prior to the 20th century drugs were generally produced by small scale manufacturers with little regulatory control over manufacturing or claims of safety and efficacy .
To the extent that such laws did exist , enforcement was lax .
A drug was considered misbranded if it contained alcohol , morphine , opium , cocaine , or any of several other potentially dangerous or addictive drugs , and if its label failed to indicate the quantity or proportion of such drugs .
Reconciling patents and universal access to medicine would require an efficient international policy of price discrimination .
There are several different schemes used to defraud the health care system which are particular to the pharmaceutical industry .
Manufacturers henceforth had to prove to FDA that their drugs were effective as well as safe before they could go on the US market .
Several thousand newborns in Europe and elsewhere suffered the teratogenic effects of thalidomide .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The history of the development of oral contraceptives is thus closely tied to the birth control movement and the efforts of activists Margaret Sanger , Mary Dennett , and Emma Goldman .
The original formulation incorporated vastly excessive doses of hormones , and caused severe side effects .
For his `` pioneering research into a new class of molecules '' for `` lowering cholesterol , '' -LSB- sentence fragment -RSB-
Drug discovery and development is very expensive ; of all compounds investigated for use in humans only a small fraction are eventually approved in most nations by government appointed medical institutions or boards , who have to approve new drugs before they can be marketed in those countries .
This approval comes only after heavy investment in pre-clinical development and clinical trials , as well as a commitment to ongoing safety monitoring .
Drugs which fail part-way through this process often incur large costs , while generating no revenue in return .
Following charges of illegal marketing , two of the settlements set records last year for the largest criminal fines ever imposed on corporations .
Some prominent medical schools have since tightened rules on faculty acceptance of such payments by drug companies .
In many non-US western countries a ` fourth hurdle ' of cost effectiveness analysis has developed before new technologies can be provided .
This focuses on the efficiency -LRB- in terms of the cost per QALY -RRB- of the technologies in question rather than their efficacy .
Treatments must represent ` value for money ' and a net benefit to society .
The second and third best selling were Enbrel and Remicade , respectively .
The top three best-selling drugs in the United States in 2013 were Abilify -LRB- $ 6.3 billion , -RRB- Nexium -LRB- $ 6 billion -RRB- and Humira -LRB- $ 5.4 billion -RRB- .
The development and approval of generics is less expensive , allowing them to be sold at a lower price .
Often the owner of the branded drug will introduce a generic version before the patent expires in order to get a head start in the generic market .
Phase I generally studies toxicity using healthy volunteers .
Phase II can include pharmacokinetics and dosing in patients , and Phase III is a very large study of efficacy in the intended patient population .
Advertising is common in healthcare journals as well as through more mainstream media routes .
In some countries , notably the US , they are allowed to advertise directly to the general public .
In some countries , notably the US , pharmaceutical companies also employ lobbyists to influence politicians .
There has been increasing controversy surrounding pharmaceutical marketing and influence .
As the constant campaigning exhausted the resources and manpower of the state , the Umayyads , weakened by the Third Muslim Civil War of 744 -- 747 CE , were finally toppled by the Abbasid Revolution in 750 CE/132 AH .
A branch of the family fled across North Africa to Al-Andalus , where they established the Caliphate of Córdoba , which lasted until 1031 before falling due to the Fitna of al-Ándalus .
In the Hasan-Muawiya treaty , Hasan ibn Ali handed over power to Muawiya on the condition that he be just to the people and keep them safe and secure , and after his death he not establish a dynasty .
This brought to an end the era of the Rightly Guided Caliphs for the Sunnis , and Hasan ibn Ali was also the last Imam for the Shias to be a Caliph .
At the time , the Umayyad taxation and administrative practice were perceived as unjust by some Muslims .
The Christian and Jewish population had still autonomy ; their judicial matters were dealt with in accordance with their own laws and by their own religious heads or their appointees , although they did pay a poll tax for policing to the central state .
The welfare state of both the Muslim and the non-Muslim poor started by Umar ibn al Khattab had also continued .
The relations between the Muslims and the Christians in the state were stable in this time .
The Umayyads were involved in frequent battles with the Christian Byzantines without being concerned with protecting themselves in Syria , which had remained largely Christian like many other parts of the empire .
Prominent positions were held by Christians , some of whom belonged to families that had served in Byzantine governments .
The employment of Christians was part of a broader policy of religious assimilation that was necessitated by the presence of large Christian populations in the conquered provinces , as in Syria .
This policy also boosted Muawiya 's popularity and solidified Syria as his power base .
The Umayyad Caliphate -LRB- Arabic : الخلافة الأموية , trans .
This caliphate was centered on the Umayyad dynasty -LRB- Arabic : الأمويون , al-ʾUmawiyyūn , or بنو أمية , Banū ʾUmayya , `` Sons of Umayya '' -RRB- , hailing from Mecca .
Syria remained the Umayyads ' main power base thereafter , and Damascus was their capital .
The Umayyads continued the Muslim conquests , incorporating the Caucasus , Transoxiana , Sindh , the Maghreb and the Iberian Peninsula -LRB- Al-Andalus -RRB- into the Muslim world .
Most historians -LSB- who ? -RSB-
Uthman placed some of the trusted members of his clan at prominent and strong positions throughout the state .
Uthman also appointed as governor of Kufa his half-brother , Walid ibn Uqba , who was accused by Hashmites of leading prayer while under the influence of alcohol .
Uthman also consolidated Muawiyah 's governorship of Syria by granting him control over a larger area and appointed his foster brother Abdullah ibn Saad as the Governor of Egypt .
However , since Uthman never named an heir , he can not be considered the founder of a dynasty .
Because Medina had been home to Muhammad and his family , including Husayn , word of his death and the imprisonment of his family led to a large opposition movement .
The Grand Mosque in Medina was severely damaged and widespread pillaging caused deep-seated dissent .
At some point during the siege , the Kaaba was badly damaged in a fire .
The destruction of the Kaaba and Grand Mosque became a major cause for censure of the Umayyads in later histories of the period .
The two families are therefore considered to be different clans -LRB- those of Hashim and of Umayya , respectively -RRB- of the same tribe -LRB- that of the Quraish -RRB- .
However Muslim Shia historians suspect that Umayya was an adopted son of Abd Shams so he was not a blood relative of Abd Manaf ibn Qusai .
Umayya was later discarded from the noble family .
Sunni historians disagree with this and view Shia claims as nothing more than outright polemics due to their hostility to the Umayyad family in general .
They point to the fact that the grand sons of Uthman , Zaid bin amr bin uthman bin affan and Abdullah bin Amr bin Uthman got married to the Sukaina and Fatima the daughters of Hussein son of Ali to show closeness of Banu hashem and Bani Ummayah .
The battle was stopped before either side had achieved victory , and the two parties agreed to arbitrate their dispute .
Seven months later , in February 658 , the two arbitrators met at Adhruh , about 10 miles north west of Maan in Jordon .
Amr ibn al-As convinced Abu Musa Ashaari that both Ali and Muawiyah should step down and a new Caliph be elected .
Ali and his supporters were stunned by the decision which had lowered the Caliph to the status of the rebellious Muawiyah I. Ali was therefore outwitted by Muawiyah and Amr .
Ali refused to accept the verdict and found himself technically in breach of his pledge to abide by the arbitration .
This put Ali in a weak position even amongst his own supporters .
The most vociferous opponents in Ali 's camp were the very same people who had forced Ali into the ceasefire .
They broke away from Ali 's force , rallying under the slogan , `` arbitration belongs to God alone . ''
Although Ali won the battle , the constant conflict had begun to affect his standing , and in the following years some Syrians seem to have acclaimed Muawiyah as a rival caliph .
The Quran and Muhammad talked about racial equality and justice as in The Farewell Sermon .
Tribal and nationalistic differences were discouraged .
But after Muhammad 's passing , the old tribal differences between the Arabs started to resurface .
Each wanted the capital of the newly established Islamic State to be in their area .
If he felt that a governor or a commander was becoming attracted to wealth , he had him removed from his position .
This fueled the opposition of Abu Sufyan ibn Harb , the grandson of Umayya , to Muhammad and to Islam .
Abu Sufyan sought to exterminate the adherents of the new religion by waging another battle with Muslims based in Medina only a year after the Battle of Badr .
He did this to avenge the defeat at Badr .
Within five years after his defeat in the Battle of Uhud , however , Muhammad took control of Mecca and announced a general amnesty for all .
Umar is honored for his attempt to resolve the fiscal problems attendant upon conversion to Islam .
This situation may actually have made widespread conversion to Islam undesirable from the point of view of state revenue , and there are reports that provincial governors actively discouraged such conversions .
He soon met with resistance from several factions , owing to his relative political inexperience .
Muawiyah I , the governor of Syria , a relative of Uthman ibn al-Affan and Marwan I , wanted the culprits arrested .
Marwan I manipulated everyone and created conflict .
Aisha , the wife of Muhammad , and Talhah and Al-Zubayr , two of the companions of Muhammad , went to Basra to tell Ali to arrest the culprits who murdered Uthman .
Marwan I and other people who wanted conflict manipulated everyone to fight .
The two sides clashed at the Battle of the Camel in 656 , where Ali won a decisive victory .
Early Muslim armies stayed in encampments away from cities because Umar feared that they might get attracted to wealth and luxury .
In the process , they might turn away from the worship of God and start accumulating wealth and establishing dynasties .
Marwan I had previously been excluded from positions of responsibility .
Hearing about Husayn 's opposition to Yazid I , the people of Kufa sent to Husayn asking him to take over with their support .
Ubayd-Allah bin Ziyad managed to disperse the crowd that gathered around Muslim bin Agail and captured him .
Realizing Ubayd-Allah bin Ziyad had been instructed to prevent Husayn from establishing support in Kufa , Muslim bin Agail requested a message to be sent to Husayn to prevent his immigration to Kufa .
While Ibn al-Zubayr would stay in Mecca until his death , Husayn decided to travel on to Kufa with his family , unaware of the lack of support there .
Husayn and his family were intercepted by Yazid I 's forces led by Amru bin Saad , Shamar bin Thi Al-Joshan , and Hussain bin Tamim , who fought Al-Husayn and his male family members until they were killed .
There were 200 people in Husayn 's caravan , many of whom were women , including his sisters , wives , daughters and their children .
The women and children from Husayn 's camp were taken as prisoners of war and led back to Damascus to be presented to Yazid I .
They remained imprisoned until public opinion turned against him as word of Husayn 's death and his family 's capture spread .
They were then granted passage back to Medina .
The sole adult male survivor from the caravan was Ali ibn Husayn who was with fever too ill to fight when the caravan was attacked .
The conquest of Sindh and Punjab , in modern-day Pakistan , although costly , were major gains for the Umayyad Caliphate .
After this the Arab chroniclers admit that the Caliph Mahdi `` gave up the project of conquering any part of India . ''
This had led some historians , both medieval and modern , to suggest that the Dome of the Rock was built as a destination for pilgrimage to rival the Kaaba , which was under the control of Ibn al-Zubayr .
At the same time , he waged unceasing war against the Byzantine Roman Empire .
Yazid died while the siege was still in progress , and the Umayyad army returned to Damascus , leaving Ibn al-Zubayr in control of Mecca .
The troops of al-Mukhtar engaged in battles both with the Umayyads in 686 , defeating them at the river Khazir near Mosul , and with Ibn al-Zubayr in 687 , at which time the revolt of al-Mukhtar was crushed .
Ibn al-Zubayr was killed in the attack .
Geographically , the empire was divided into several provinces , the borders of which changed numerous times during the Umayyad reign .
As the central power of the Umayyad rulers waned in the later years of the dynasty , some governors neglected to send the extra tax revenue to Damascus and created great personal fortunes .
Both areas had already been partially conquered , but remained difficult to govern .
Once again , a particular difficulty concerned the question of the conversion of non-Arabs , especially the Sogdians of Transoxiana .
After this defeat , al-Harith 's movement seems to have been dissolved , but the problem of the rights of non-Arab Muslims would continue to plague the Umayyads .
This tradition allowed the Abbasids to rally the supporters of the failed revolt of Mukhtar , who had represented themselves as the supporters of Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyya .
In India the Arab armies were defeated by the south Indian Chalukya dynasty and by the north Indian Pratiharas Dynasty in the 8th century and the Arabs were driven out of India .
In the Caucasus , the confrontation with the Khazars peaked under Hisham : the Arabs established Derbent as a major military base and launched several invasions of the northern Caucasus , but failed to subdue the nomadic Khazars .
The conflict was arduous and bloody , and the Arab army even suffered a major defeat at the Battle of Marj Ardabil in 730 .
With limited resources Muawiyah went about creating allies .
His marriage to Maysum was politically motivated .
The Kalb tribe had remained largely neutral when the Muslims first went into Syria .
After the plague that killed much of the Muslim Army in Syria , by marrying Maysum , Muawiyah started to use the Jacobite Christians , against the Romans .
Muawiya 's wife Maysum -LRB- Yazid 's mother -RRB- was also a Jacobite Christian .
With limited resources and the Byzantine just over the border , Muawiyah worked in cooperation with the local Christian population .
To stop Byzantine harassment from the sea during the Arab-Byzantine Wars , in 649 Muawiyah set up a navy ; manned by Monophysitise Christians , Copts and Jacobite Syrian Christians sailors and Muslim troops .
Imam Abu Muhammad Adbullah ibn Abdul Hakam stated that Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz also stopped the personal allowance offered to his relatives stating that he could only give them an allowance if he gave an allowance to everyone else in the empire .
When successive governments tried to reverse Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz 's tax policies it created rebellion .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- At this point Marwan mobilized his troops from Harran and advanced toward Iraq .
In January 750 the two forces met in the Battle of the Zab , and the Umayyads were defeated .
The books written later in the Abbasid period in Iran are more anti Umayyad .
This anti Arab feeling also influenced the books on Islamic history .
Al-Tabri was also written in Iran during that period .
It was a collection preserving everything for future generations to codify and for future generations to judge if it was true or false .
The Diwan of Umar , assigning annuities to all Arabs and to the Muslim soldiers of other races , underwent a change in the hands of the Umayyads .
The Umayyads meddled with the register and the recipients regarded pensions as the subsistence allowance even without being in active service .
Hisham reformed it and paid only to those who participated in battle .
On the pattern of the Byzantine system the Umayyads reformed their army organization in general and divided it into five corps : the centre , two wings , vanguards and rearguards , following the same formation while on march or on a battle field .
The Umayyad cavalry used plain and round saddles .
The heavy engines , siege machines and baggage were carried on camels behind the army .
The Umayyad Caliph Abd al-Malik developed a regular postal service .
Relays of horses were used for the conveyance of dispatches between the caliph and his agents and officials posted in the provinces .
Primarily the service met the needs of Government officials , but travellers and their important dispatches were also benefitted by the system .
The postal carriages were also used for the swift transport of troops .
They were able to carry fifty to a hundred men at a time .
They were given a legally protected status as second-class citizens as long as they accepted and acknowledged the political supremacy of the ruling Muslims .
They were allowed to have their own courts , and were given freedom of their religion within the empire .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Although they could not hold the highest public offices in the empire , they had many bureaucratic positions within the government .
The Umayyad caliphate was marked both by territorial expansion and by the administrative and cultural problems that such expansion created .
Therefore , they held to a less universalist conception of Islam than did many of their rivals .
Many Muslims criticized the Umayyads for having too many non-Muslim , former Roman administrators in their government .
The taxes to the central government were calculated and negotiated by the peoples political representatives .
The Central government got paid for the services it provided and the local government got the money for the services it provided .
Many Christian cities also used some of the taxes on maintain their churches and run their own organizations .
These new converts continues to pay the same taxes that were previously negotiated .
The distinction seems to indicate that the Umayyads `` regarded themselves as God 's representatives at the head of the community and saw no need to share their religious power with , or delegate it to , the emergent class of religious scholars . ''
In fact , it was precisely this class of scholars , based largely in Iraq , that was responsible for collecting and recording the traditions that form the primary source material for the history of the Umayyad period .
These bituminous sands contain 166 billion barrels -LRB- 26.4 × 10 ^ 9 m3 -RRB- of commercially established oil reserves , giving Canada the third largest oil reserves in the world .
and produce over 2.3 million barrels per day -LRB- 370 × 10 ^ 3 m3/d -RRB- of heavy crude oil and synthetic crude oil .
It is found on many different artifacts of tools and ceremonial items .
For example , it was used on rattles to adhere gourds or turtle shells to rattle handles .
It was also used in decorations .
Small round shell beads were often set in asphaltum to provide decorations .
The asphalt/bitumen in the removed material can be reactivated and put back to use in new pavement mixes .
The backs of tippers carrying asphalt/bitumen , as well as some handling equipment , are also commonly sprayed with a releasing agent before filling to aid release .
It is a significant fact that the first use of asphalt by the ancients was in the nature of a cement for securing or joining together various objects , and it thus seems likely that the name itself was expressive of this application .
From the Greek , the word passed into late Latin , and thence into French -LRB- asphalte -RRB- and English -LRB- `` asphaltum '' and `` asphalt '' -RRB- .
In American English , asphalt -LRB- or asphalt cement -RRB- is the carefully refined residue from the distillation process of selected crude oils .
Another archaic term for asphalt/bitumen is `` pitch '' .
Nonetheless , large amounts of asphalt occur in concentrated form in nature .
These remains were deposited in the mud on the bottom of the ocean or lake where the organisms lived .
Two smaller but still very large formations occur in the Peace River oil sands and the Cold Lake oil sands , to the west and southeast of the Athabasca oil sands , respectively .
Of the Alberta bitumen deposits , only parts of the Athabasca oil sands are shallow enough to be suitable for surface mining .
The bitumen was thinly coated onto a pewter plate which was then exposed in a camera .
-LSB- not in citation given -RSB-
In 1876 , asphalt-based paving was used to pave Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington , DC , in time for the celebration of the national centennial .
On the London stockmarket , there were various claims as to the exclusivity of asphalt quality from France , Germany and England .
The value of the deposit was obvious from the start , but the means of extracting the bitumen were not .
The nearest town , Fort McMurray , Alberta was a small fur trading post , other markets were far away , and transportation costs were too high to ship the raw bituminous sand for paving .
Other roads in Alberta were paved with oil sands , but it was generally not economic .
Eventually Fitzsimmons ran out of money and the plant was taken over by the Alberta government .
Today the Bitumount plant is a Provincial Historic Site .
This is particularly common in areas such as the US Gulf coast , where refineries were designed to process Venezuelan and Mexican oil , and in areas such as the US Midwest where refineries were rebuilt to process heavy oil as domestic light oil production declined .
A number of technologies allow asphalt/bitumen to be mixed at much lower temperatures .
Asphalt emulsions are used in a wide variety of applications .
Chipseal involves spraying the road surface with asphalt emulsion followed by a layer of crushed rock , gravel or crushed slag .
Slurry seal involves the creation of a mixture of asphalt emulsion and fine crushed aggregate that is spread on the surface of a road .
Because of oil price increases after 2003 , producing bitumen became highly profitable , but as a result of the decline after 2014 it became uneconomic to build new plants again .
By 2014 , Canadian crude asphalt/bitumen production averaged about 2.3 million barrels -LRB- 370,000 m3 -RRB- per day and was projected to rise to 4.4 million barrels -LRB- 700,000 m3 -RRB- per day by 2020 .
Other uses include cattle sprays , fence-post treatments , and waterproofing for fabrics .
Pitch is another term sometimes used at times to refer to asphalt/bitumen , as in Pitch Lake .
A pamphlet dated 1621 , by `` a certain Monsieur d'Eyrinys , states that he had discovered the existence -LRB- of asphaltum -RRB- in large quantities in the vicinity of Neufchatel '' , and that he proposed to use it in a variety of ways -- `` principally in the construction of air-proof granaries , and in protecting , by means of the arches , the water-courses in the city of Paris from the intrusion of dirt and filth '' , which at that time made the water unusable .
`` He expatiates also on the excellence of this material for forming level and durable terraces '' in palaces , `` the notion of forming such terraces in the streets not one likely to cross the brain of a Parisian of that generation '' .
Then , in the 1830s , there was a surge of interest , and asphalt became widely used `` for pavements , flat roofs , and the lining of cisterns , and in England , some use of it had been made of it for similar purposes '' .
Its rise in Europe was `` a sudden phenomenon '' , after natural deposits were found `` in France at Osbann -LRB- BasRhin -RRB- , the Parc -LRB- l'Ain -RRB- and the Puy-de-la-Poix -LRB- Puy-de-Dome -RRB- '' , although it could also be made artificially .
Trials were made of the pavement in 1838 on the footway in Whitehall , the stable at Knightsbridge Barracks , `` and subsequently on the space at the bottom of the steps leading from Waterloo Place to St. James Park '' .
However , detailed studies have shown these materials to be distinct .
Due to pressure from the rising of the Rocky Mountains in southwestern Alberta , 80 to 55 million years ago , the oil was driven northeast hundreds of kilometres into underground sand deposits left behind by ancient river beds and ocean beaches , thus forming the oil sands .
It is mixed with traditional bitumen to improve both the viscoelastic properties and the resistance to ageing .
The earlier word ` asphaltum ' is now archaic and not commonly used .
However , ` asphalt ' is also commonly used as a shortened form of ` asphalt concrete ' -LRB- therefore equivalent to the British ` asphalt ' or ` tarmac ' -RRB- .
In Australian English , bitumen is often used as the generic term for road surfaces .
In Canadian English , the word bitumen is used to refer to the vast Canadian deposits of extremely heavy crude oil , while asphalt is used for the oil refinery product used to pave roads and manufacture roof shingles and various waterproofing products .
Diluted bitumen -LRB- diluted with naphtha to make it flow in pipelines -RRB- is known as dilbit in the Canadian petroleum industry , while bitumen `` upgraded '' to synthetic crude oil is known as syncrude and syncrude blended with bitumen as synbit .
Bituminous rock is a form of sandstone impregnated with bitumen .
The tar sands of Alberta , Canada are a similar material .
Due to its highly viscous nature , asphalt/bitumen cement must be heated so it can be mixed with the aggregates at the asphalt mixing facility .
The temperature required varies depending upon characteristics of the asphalt/bitumen and the aggregates , but warm-mix asphalt technologies allow producers to reduce the temperature required .
After extraction from the sand , the bitumen is fed into a bitumen upgrader which converts it into a light crude oil equivalent .
This synthetic substance is fluid enough to be transferred through conventional oil pipelines and can be fed into conventional oil refineries without any further treatment .
It is obtained as the `` heavy '' -LRB- i.e. , difficult to distill -RRB- fraction .
The resulting material is typically further treated to extract small but valuable amounts of lubricants and to adjust the properties of the material to suit applications .
This step makes the product harder and more viscous .
The insoluble matter , consisting mainly of silica ore , ranges from 8 % to 17 % .
The Duchess avoided the court because she was scandalised by the presence of King William 's bastard children , and perhaps prompted the emergence of Victorian morality by insisting that her daughter avoid any appearance of sexual impropriety .
Appalled , Albert travelled to Cambridge , where his son was studying , to confront him .
By the beginning of December , Albert was very unwell .
Victoria was devastated .
He had been `` killed by that dreadful business '' , she said .
She entered a state of mourning and wore black for the remainder of her life .
She avoided public appearances , and rarely set foot in London in the following years .
An array of mementos commemorating her extended family , friends and servants were laid in the coffin with her , at her request , by her doctor and dressers .
As she was laid to rest at the mausoleum , it began to snow .
The parties did not undertake a formal engagement , but assumed that the match would take place in due time .
At the time , it was customary for the prime minister to appoint members of the Royal Household , who were usually his political allies and their spouses .
`` Everyone likes flattery , '' he said , `` and when you come to royalty you should lay it on with a trowel . ''
With the phrase `` we authors , Ma'am '' , he complimented her .
Victoria found Gladstone 's demeanour far less appealing ; he spoke to her , she is thought to have complained , as though she were `` a public meeting rather than a woman '' .
The following day , she participated in a procession and attended a thanksgiving service in Westminster Abbey .
By this time , Victoria was once again extremely popular .
Victoria dismissed their complaints as racial prejudice .
My poor darling Affie gone too '' , she wrote in her journal .
`` It is a horrible year , nothing but sadness & horrors of one kind & another . ''
She experienced unpopularity during the first years of her widowhood , but was well liked during the 1880s and 1890s , when she embodied the empire as a benevolent matriarchal figure .
She objected on the grounds of the King 's disapproval , but her mother dismissed his complaints as motivated by jealousy , and forced Victoria to continue the tours .
Ponsonby and Randall Davidson , Dean of Windsor , who had both seen early drafts , advised Victoria against publication , on the grounds that it would stoke the rumours of a love affair .
The manuscript was destroyed .
He was `` the dearest of my dear sons '' , she lamented .
Beatrice and Henry planned to marry , but Victoria opposed the match at first , wishing to keep Beatrice at home to act as her companion .
After a year , she was won around to the marriage by Henry and Beatrice 's promise to remain living with and attending her .
Privately , Victoria attempted to influence government policy and ministerial appointments ; publicly , she became a national icon who was identified with strict standards of personal morality .
The Prince Regent and the Duke of York were estranged from their wives , who were both past child-bearing age , so the two eldest brothers were unlikely to have any further children .
The Dukes of Kent and Clarence married on the same day 12 months before Victoria 's birth , but both of Clarence 's daughters -LRB- born in 1819 and 1820 respectively -RRB- died as infants .
She showed interest in Albert 's education for the future role he would have to play as her husband , but she resisted attempts to rush her into wedlock .
The following day , Victoria drove the same route , though faster and with a greater escort , in a deliberate attempt to provoke Francis to take a second aim and catch him in the act .
As expected , Francis shot at her , but he was seized by plain-clothes policemen , and convicted of high treason .
Edward Oxford felt that the attempts were encouraged by his acquittal in 1840 .
As Victoria was riding in a carriage , Pate struck her with his cane , crushing her bonnet and bruising her forehead .
Both Hamilton and Pate were sentenced to seven years ' transportation .
Leopold arranged for Victoria 's mother to invite her Coburg relatives to visit her in May 1836 , with the purpose of introducing Victoria to Albert .
Victoria was aware of the various matrimonial plans and critically appraised a parade of eligible princes .
After the visit she wrote , '' -LSB- Albert -RSB- is extremely handsome ; his hair is about the same colour as mine ; his eyes are large and blue , and he has a beautiful nose and a very sweet mouth with fine teeth ; but the charm of his countenance is his expression , which is most delightful . ''
Victoria believed the rumours .
At first , Lady Flora refused to submit to a naked medical examination , until in mid-February she eventually agreed , and was found to be a virgin .
Conroy , the Hastings family and the opposition Tories organised a press campaign implicating the Queen in the spreading of false rumours about Lady Flora .
To general rejoicing , he pulled through .
Mother and son attended a public parade through London and a grand service of thanksgiving in St Paul 's Cathedral on 27 February 1872 , and republican feeling subsided .
The Queen hated being pregnant , viewed breast-feeding with disgust , and thought newborn babies were ugly .
Through early January , she felt `` weak and unwell '' , and by mid-January she was `` drowsy ... dazed , -LSB- and -RSB- confused '' .
In 1867 , Walter Bagehot wrote that the monarch only retained `` the right to be consulted , the right to encourage , and the right to warn '' .
Despite this destruction , much of the diaries still exist .
Part of Victoria 's extensive correspondence has been published in volumes edited by A. C. Benson , Hector Bolitho , George Earle Buckle , Lord Esher , Roger Fulford , and Richard Hough among others .
Later organisations with a similar aim emerged in the United States , but distinguished the names of the degrees from those of male masonry .
However , Pike , although undoubtedly learned , was not a spokesman for Freemasonry and was also controversial among Freemasons in general .
Notably , his book carries in the preface a form of disclaimer from his own Grand Lodge .
In some jurisdictions Installed Master is valued as a separate rank , with its own secrets to distinguish its members .
In other jurisdictions , the grade is not recognised , and no inner ceremony conveys new secrets during the installation of a new Master of the Lodge .
Briefly eclipsed during the French Revolution , French Freemasonry continued to grow in the next century .
For the Continental lodges , however , having a different approach to Freemasonry was not a reason for severing masonic ties .
A number of Papal pronouncements have been issued against Freemasonry .
This has been generally affirmed throughout the whole Eastern Orthodox Church .
It is reputed to be the oldest Masonic Lodge in the world .
When the military Lodge left North America , those fifteen men were given the authority to meet as a Lodge , but not to initiate Masons .
As with the rest of U.S. Freemasonry , Prince Hall Freemasonry soon grew and organised on a Grand Lodge system for each state .
The lodges , however , continued to meet , which gave rise , in 1959 , to a body of women practising continental Freemasonry .
There are additional degrees , which vary with locality and jurisdiction , and are usually administered by different bodies than the craft degrees .
The fraternity is administratively organised into independent Grand Lodges -LRB- or sometimes Grand Orients -RRB- , each of which governs its own Masonic jurisdiction , which consists of subordinate -LRB- or constituent -RRB- Lodges .
The idea of Masonic brotherhood probably descends from a 16th-century legal definition of a brother as one who has taken an oath of mutual support to another .
The new Scottish rite body admitted blacks , and the resolution of the Grand Orient the following year that neither colour , race , nor religion could disqualify a man from Masonry prompted the Grand Lodge to withdraw recognition , and it persuaded other American Grand Lodges to do the same .
Unlike its predecessor , the 1983 Code of Canon Law did not explicitly name Masonic orders among the secret societies it condemns .
It states : `` A person who joins an association which plots against the Church is to be punished with a just penalty ; one who promotes or takes office in such an association is to be punished with an interdict . ''
This named omission of Masonic orders caused both Catholics and Freemasons to believe that the ban on Catholics becoming Freemasons may have been lifted , especially after the perceived liberalisation of Vatican II .
The faithful who enroll in Masonic associations are in a state of grave sin and may not receive Holy Communion . ''
Those Grand Lodges in amity with UGLE deny the Church 's claims .
The UGLE now states that `` Freemasonry does not seek to replace a Mason 's religion or provide a substitute for it . ''
Even in modern democracies , Freemasonry is sometimes viewed with distrust .
While a parliamentary inquiry found that there has been no evidence of wrongdoing , it was felt that any potential loyalties Masons might have , based on their vows to support fellow Masons , should be transparent to the public .
In addition to business , the meeting may perform a ceremony to confer a Masonic degree or receive a lecture , which is usually on some aspect of Masonic history or ritual .
Some will further explore the ritual and symbolism of the craft , others will focus their involvement on the social side of the Lodge , while still others will concentrate on the charitable functions of the lodge .
Essentially , every Grand Lodge will hold that its landmarks -LRB- its requirements , tenets and rituals -RRB- are Regular , and judge other Grand Lodges based on those .
During these three rituals , the candidate is progressively taught the meanings of the Lodge symbols , and entrusted with grips , signs and words to signify to other Masons that he has been so initiated .
Many English Lodges joined the new regulatory body , which itself entered a period of self-publicity and expansion .
These two Grand Lodges vied for supremacy until the Moderns promised to return to the ancient ritual .
Widespread segregation in 19th - and early 20th-century North America made it difficult for African-Americans to join Lodges outside of Prince Hall jurisdictions -- and impossible for inter-jurisdiction recognition between the parallel U.S. Masonic authorities .
While they were not , therefore , recognised as regular , they were part of Freemasonry `` in general '' .
In the past , few members of the Church of England would have seen any incongruity in concurrently adhering to Anglican Christianity and practicing Freemasonry .
In recent decades , however , reservations about Freemasonry have increased within Anglicanism , perhaps due to the increasing prominence of the evangelical wing of the church .
Under Licio Gelli 's leadership , in the late 1970s , P2 became involved in the financial scandals that nearly bankrupted the Vatican Bank .
This UN plan specified borders for new Arab and Jewish states and also specified an area of Jerusalem and its environs which was to be administered by the UN under an international regime .
The borders of the new state were not specified in the declaration .
Neighboring Arab armies invaded the former Palestinian mandate on the next day and fought the Israeli forces .
Israel has since fought several wars with neighboring Arab states , in the course of which it has occupied the West Bank , Sinai Peninsula -LRB- 1956 -- 57 , 1967 -- 82 -RRB- , part of Southern Lebanon -LRB- 1982 -- 2000 -RRB- , Gaza Strip -LRB- 1967 -- 2005 ; still considered occupied after 2005 disengagement -RRB- and the Golan Heights .
It extended its laws to the Golan Heights and East Jerusalem , but not the West Bank .
Efforts to resolve the Israeli -- Palestinian conflict have not resulted in peace .
However , peace treaties between Israel and both Egypt and Jordan have successfully been signed .
Israel 's occupation of Gaza , the West Bank and East Jerusalem is the world 's longest military occupation in modern times .
-LSB- note 2 -RSB-
It shares land borders with Lebanon to the north , Syria in the northeast , Jordan on the east , the Palestinian territories -LRB- which are claimed by the State of Palestine and are partially controlled by Israel -RRB- comprising the West Bank and Gaza Strip to the east and west , respectively , and Egypt to the southwest .
It contains geographically diverse features within its relatively small area .
Israeli sovereignty over Jerusalem is internationally unrecognized .
-LSB- note 1 -RSB-
The great majority of Israeli Arabs are Sunni Muslims , with smaller but significant numbers of semi-settled Negev Bedouins ; the rest are Christians and Druze .
Other far smaller minorities include Maronites , Samaritans , Dom people and Roma , Black Hebrew Israelites , other Sub-Saharan Africans , Armenians , Circassians , Vietnamese boat people , and others .
Israel also hosts a significant population of non-citizen foreign workers and asylum seekers from Africa and Asia .
Israel is a representative democracy with a parliamentary system , proportional representation and universal suffrage .
The prime minister serves as head of government and the Knesset serves as the legislature .
The country benefits from a highly skilled workforce and is among the most educated countries in the world with the one of the highest percentage of its citizens holding a tertiary education degree .
The names Land of Israel and Children of Israel have historically been used to refer to the biblical Kingdom of Israel and the entire Jewish people respectively .
Jacob 's twelve sons became the ancestors of the Israelites , also known as the Twelve Tribes of Israel or Children of Israel .
The earliest known archaeological artifact to mention the word `` Israel '' is the Merneptah Stele of ancient Egypt -LRB- dated to the late 13th century BCE -RRB- .
Subsequent Israelite kingdoms and states ruled intermittently over the next four hundred years , and are known from various extra-biblical sources .
From the middle of the 8th century BCE Israel came into increasing conflict with the expanding neo-Assyrian empire .
Sargon 's son , Sennacherib , tried and failed to conquer Judah .
Assyrian records say he leveled 46 walled cities and besieged Jerusalem , leaving after receiving extensive tribute .
According to the Hebrew Bible , he destroyed Solomon 's Temple and exiled the Jews to Babylon .
The defeat was also recorded by the Babylonians -LRB- see the Babylonian Chronicles -RRB- .
In 538 BCE , Cyrus the Great of Persia conquered Babylon and took over its empire .
Cyrus issued a proclamation granting subjugated nations -LRB- including the people of Judah -RRB- religious freedom -LRB- for the original text , which corroborates the biblical narrative only in very broad terms , see the Cyrus Cylinder -RRB- .
The Greek conquests largely skipped the region without any resistance or interest .
Incorporated into Ptolemaic and finally Seleucid Empires , the southern Levant was heavily hellenized , building the tensions between Judeans and Greeks .
With the decline of Herodians , Judea , transformed into a Roman province , became the site of a violent struggle of Jews against Greco-Romans , culminating in the Jewish-Roman Wars , ending in wide-scale destruction , expulsions , and genocide .
Nevertheless , there was a continuous small Jewish presence and Galilee became its religious center .
The Mishnah and part of the Talmud , central Jewish texts , were composed during the 2nd to 4th centuries CE in Tiberias and Jerusalem .
The region came to be populated predominantly by Greco-Romans on the coast and Samaritans in the hill-country .
Through the 5th and 6th centuries , the dramatic events of the repeated Samaritan revolts reshaped the land , with massive destruction to Byzantine Christian and Samaritan societies and a resulting decrease of the population .
At this time , a full thousand years after the fall of the Jewish state , there were Jewish communities all over the country .
Fifty of them are known and include Jerusalem , Tiberias , Ramleh , Ashkelon , Caesarea , and Gaza .
According to Albert of Aachen , the Jewish residents of Haifa were the main fighting force of the city , and `` mixed with Saracen -LSB- Fatimid -RSB- troops '' , they fought bravely for close to a month until forced into retreat by the Crusader fleet and land army .
However , Joshua Prawer expressed doubt over the story , noting that Albert did not attend the Crusades and that such a prominent role for the Jews is not mentioned by any other source .
-LSB- undue weight ?
-- discuss -RSB-
In time , Saladin issued a proclamation inviting Jews to return and settle in Jerusalem , and according to Judah al-Harizi , they did : `` From the day the Arabs took Jerusalem , the Israelites inhabited it . ''
Al-Harizi compared Saladin 's decree allowing Jews to re-establish themselves in Jerusalem to the one issued by the Persian king Cyrus the Great over 1,600 years earlier .
Jerusalem , although left without the protection of any city walls since 1219 , also saw a flurry of new construction projects centred around the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound -LRB- the Temple Mount -RRB- .
The ban remained in place until Israel took control of the building in 1967 .
The hopes and yearnings of Jews living in exile are an important theme of the Jewish belief system .
In the second half of the 18th century , Eastern European opponents of Hasidism , known as the Perushim , settled in Palestine .
In 1896 , Herzl published Der Judenstaat -LRB- The State of the Jews -RRB- , offering his vision of a future Jewish state ; the following year he presided over the first Zionist Congress .
During World War I , British Foreign Secretary Arthur Balfour sent the Balfour Declaration of 1917 to Baron Rothschild -LRB- Walter Rothschild , 2nd Baron Rothschild -RRB- , a leader of the British Jewish community , that stated that Britain intended for the creation of a Jewish `` national home '' within the Palestinian Mandate .
The population of the area at this time was predominantly Arab and Muslim , with Jews accounting for about 11 % , and Arab Christians at about 9.5 % of the population .
Finally , the rise of Nazism and the increasing persecution of Jews in 1930s Europe led to the Fifth Aliyah , with an influx of a quarter of a million Jews .
This was a major cause of the Arab revolt of 1936 -- 39 during which the British Mandate authorities alongside the Zionist militias of Haganah and Irgun killed 5,032 Arabs and wounded 14,760 , resulting in over ten percent of the adult male Palestinian Arab population killed , wounded , imprisoned or exiled .
The British introduced restrictions on Jewish immigration to Palestine with the White Paper of 1939 .
With countries around the world turning away Jewish refugees fleeing the Holocaust , a clandestine movement known as Aliyah Bet was organized to bring Jews to Palestine .
91 people of various nationalities were killed and 46 were injured .
The hotel was the site of the central offices of the British Mandatory authorities of Palestine , principally the Secretariat of the Government of Palestine and the Headquarters of the British Armed Forces in Palestine and Transjordan .
The attack initially had the approval of the Haganah -LRB- the principal Jewish paramilitary group in Palestine -RRB- .
It was conceived as a response to Operation Agatha -LRB- a series of widespread raids , including one on the Jewish Agency , conducted by the British authorities -RRB- and was the deadliest directed at the British during the Mandate era -LRB- 1920 -- 1948 -RRB- .
The Haganah joined Irgun and Lehi in an armed struggle against British rule .
At the same time , hundreds of thousands of Jewish Holocaust survivors and refugees sought a new life far from their destroyed communities in Europe .
The Yishuv attempted to bring these refugees to Palestine but many were turned away or rounded up and placed in detention camps in Atlit and Cyprus by the British .
On 29 November 1947 , the General Assembly adopted a resolution recommending the adoption and implementation of the Plan of Partition with Economic Union as Resolution 181 -LRB- II -RRB- .
The Plan attached to the resolution was essentially that proposed by the majority of the Committee in the Report of 3 September 1947 .
The apparent purpose of the invasion was to prevent the establishment of the Jewish state at inception , and some Arab leaders talked about driving the Jews into the sea .
The Arab league stated that the invasion was to restore law and order and to prevent further bloodshed .
Both groups facilitated regular immigration logistics like arranging transportation , but the latter also engaged in clandestine operations in countries , particularly in the Middle East and Eastern Europe , where the lives of Jews were believed to be in danger and exit from those places was difficult .
An influx of Holocaust survivors and Jews from Arab and Muslim lands immigrated to Israel during the first 3 years and the number of Jews increased from 700,000 to 1,400,000 , many of whom faced persecution in their original countries .
The immigrants came to Israel for differing reasons .
There were others that did it for the promise of a better life in Israel and a small number that were expelled from their homelands , such as British and French Jews in Egypt after the Suez Crisis .
During this period , food , clothes and furniture had to be rationed in what became known as the Austerity Period .
In 1956 , Great Britain and France aimed at regaining control of the Suez Canal , which the Egyptians had nationalized -LRB- see the Suez Crisis -RRB- .
The continued blockade of the Suez Canal and Straits of Tiran to Israeli shipping , together with the growing amount of Fedayeen attacks against Israel 's southern population , and recent Arab grave and threatening statements , prompted Israel to attack Egypt .
Israel joined a secret alliance with Great Britain and France and overran the Sinai Peninsula but was pressured to withdraw by the United Nations in return for guarantees of Israeli shipping rights in the Red Sea via the Straits of Tiran and the Canal -LSB- citation needed -RSB- .
By 1966 , Israeli-Arab relations had deteriorated to the point of actual battles taking place between Israeli and Arab forces .
Other Arab states mobilized their forces .
Israel reiterated that these actions were a casus belli .
On 5 June 1967 , Israel launched a pre-emptive strike against Egypt .
Jordan , Syria and Iraq responded and attacked Israel .
In a Six-Day War , Israel defeated Jordan and captured the West Bank , defeated Egypt and captured the Gaza Strip and Sinai Peninsula , and defeated Syria and captured the Golan Heights .
The Israeli government responded with an assassination campaign against the organizers of the massacre , a bombing and a raid on the PLO headquarters in Lebanon .
The 1977 Knesset elections marked a major turning point in Israeli political history as Menachem Begin 's Likud party took control from the Labor Party .
The PLO soon resumed its policy of attacks against Israel .
In the next few years , the PLO infiltrated the south and kept up a sporadic shelling across the border .
Israel carried out numerous retaliatory attacks by air and on the ground .
No Israeli legislation has defined the territory of Israel and no act specifically included East Jerusalem therein .
The position of the majority of UN member states is reflected in numerous resolutions declaring that actions taken by Israel to settle its citizens in the West Bank , and impose its laws and administration on East Jerusalem , are illegal and have no validity .
The reactor was under construction just outside Baghdad .
Following a series of PLO attacks in 1982 , Israel invaded Lebanon that year to destroy the bases from which the PLO launched attacks and missiles into northern Israel .
In the first six days of fighting , the Israelis destroyed the military forces of the PLO in Lebanon and decisively defeated the Syrians .
In 1985 , Israel responded to a Palestinian terrorist attack in Cyprus by bombing the PLO headquarters in Tunis .
Israel withdrew from most of Lebanon in 1986 , but maintained a borderland buffer zone in southern Lebanon until 2000 , from where Israeli forces engaged in conflict with Hezbollah .
Over the following six years , the Intifada became more organised and included economic and cultural measures aimed at disrupting the Israeli occupation .
Despite public outrage , Israel heeded US calls to refrain from hitting back and did not participate in that war .
The following year , Shimon Peres on behalf of Israel , and Mahmoud Abbas for the PLO , signed the Oslo Accords , which gave the Palestinian National Authority the right to govern parts of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip .
The PLO also recognized Israel 's right to exist and pledged an end to terrorism .
Arab public support for the Accords was damaged by the continuation of Israeli settlements and checkpoints , and the deterioration of economic conditions .
Israeli public support for the Accords waned as Israel was struck by Palestinian suicide attacks .
During the summit , Barak offered a plan for the establishment of a Palestinian state .
The proposed state included the entirety of the Gaza Strip and over 90 % of the West Bank with Jerusalem as a shared capital , although some argue that the plan was to annex areas which would lead to a cantonization of the West Bank into three blocs , which the Palestinian delegation likened to South African `` bantustans '' , a loaded word that was disputed by the Israeli and American negotiators .
Each side blamed the other for the failure of the talks .
Some commentators contend that the uprising was pre-planned by Yasser Arafat due to the collapse of peace talks .
During his tenure , Sharon carried out his plan to unilaterally withdraw from the Gaza Strip and also spearheaded the construction of the Israeli West Bank barrier , ending the Intifada .
By this time 1,100 Israelis had been killed , mostly in suicide bombings .
In July 2006 , a Hezbollah artillery assault on Israel 's northern border communities and a cross-border abduction of two Israeli soldiers precipitated the month-long Second Lebanon War .
In May 2008 , Israel confirmed it had been discussing a peace treaty with Syria for a year , with Turkey as a go-between .
However , at the end of the year , Israel entered another conflict as a ceasefire between Hamas and Israel collapsed .
The Gaza War lasted three weeks and ended after Israel announced a unilateral ceasefire .
Despite neither the rocket launchings nor Israeli retaliatory strikes having completely stopped , the fragile ceasefire remained in order .
Israel started another operation in Gaza following an escalation of rocket attacks by Hamas in July 2014 .
However Israel is so narrow that the exclusive economic zone in the Mediterranean is double the land area of the country .
The total area under Israeli law , including East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights , is 22,072 square kilometers -LRB- 8,522 sq mi -RRB- , and the total area under Israeli control , including the military-controlled and partially Palestinian-governed territory of the West Bank , is 27,799 square kilometers -LRB- 10,733 sq mi -RRB- .
Despite its small size , Israel is home to a variety of geographic features , from the Negev desert in the south to the inland fertile Jezreel Valley , mountain ranges of the Galilee , Carmel and toward the Golan in the north .
Further south is the Arabah , ending with the Gulf of Eilat , part of the Red Sea .
Unique to Israel and the Sinai Peninsula are makhteshim , or erosion cirques .
The DSF forms the transform boundary between the African Plate to the west and the Arabian Plate to the east .
The Golan Heights and all of Jordan are part of the Arabian Plate , while the Galilee , West Bank , Coastal Plain , and Negev along with the Sinai Peninsula are on the African Plate .
The entire Jordan Valley segment is thought to have ruptured repeatedly , for instance during the last two major earthquakes along this structure in 749 and 1033 .
Given the fragile political situation of the Middle East region and the presence there of major holy sites , a quake reaching magnitude 7 on the Richter scale could have dire consequences for world peace .
Temperatures in Israel vary widely , especially during the winter .
The area of Beersheba and the Northern Negev has a semi-arid climate with hot summers , cool winters and fewer rainy days than the Mediterranean climate .
At the other extreme mountainous regions can be windy , cold , and areas at elevation of 750 meters or more -LRB- same elevation as Jerusalem -RRB- will usually receive at least one snowfall each year .
From May to September , rain in Israel is rare .
1,760,400 Arabs comprised 20.7 % of the population , while non-Arab Christians and people who have no religion listed in the civil registry made up 4.4 % .
Over the last decade , large numbers of migrant workers from Romania , Thailand , China , Africa , and South America have settled in Israel .
Exact figures are unknown , as many of them are living in the country illegally , but estimates run in the region of 203,000 .
In 2011 , there were 250,000 Jews living in East Jerusalem .
The total number of Israeli settlers is over 500,000 -LRB- 6.5 % of the Israeli population -RRB- .
The country 's Law of Return grants all Jews and those of Jewish ancestry the right to Israeli citizenship .
Over three quarters , or 75.5 % , of the population are Jews from a diversity of Jewish backgrounds .
Around 4 % of Israelis -LRB- 300,000 -RRB- , ethnically defined as `` others '' , are Russian descendants of Jewish origin or family who are not Jewish according to rabbinical law , but were eligible for Israeli citizenship under the Law of Return .
Jews from Europe and the former Soviet Union and their descendants born in Israel , including Ashkenazi Jews , constitute approximately 50 % of Jewish Israelis .
Jews who left or fled Arab and Muslim countries and their descendants , including both Mizrahi and Sephardi Jews , form most of the rest of the Jewish population .
Hebrew is the primary language of the state and is spoken everyday by the majority of the population , and Arabic is spoken by the Arab minority and Hebrew is taught in Arab schools .
English was an official language during the Mandate period ; it lost this status after the creation of Israel , but retains a role comparable to that of an official language , as may be seen in road signs and official documents .
Many Israelis communicate reasonably well in English , as many television programs are broadcast in English with subtitles and the language is taught from the early grades in elementary school .
In addition , Israeli universities offer courses in the English language on various subjects .
As a country of immigrants , many languages can be heard on the streets .
Due to mass immigration from the former Soviet Union and Ethiopia -LRB- some 130,000 Ethiopian Jews live in Israel -RRB- , Russian and Amharic are widely spoken .
The Christian population primarily comprises Arab Christians , but also includes post-Soviet immigrants , the foreign laborers of multinational origins , and followers of Messianic Judaism , considered by most Christians and Jews to be a form of Christianity .
Members of many other religious groups , including Buddhists and Hindus , maintain a presence in Israel , albeit in small numbers .
Out of more than one million immigrants from the former Soviet Union in Israel , about 300,000 are considered not Jewish by the Orthodox rabbinate .
Other locations of religious importance in Israel are Nazareth -LRB- holy in Christianity as the site of the Annunciation of Mary -RRB- , Tiberias and Safed -LRB- two of the Four Holy Cities in Judaism -RRB- , the White Mosque in Ramla -LRB- holy in Islam as the shrine of the prophet Saleh -RRB- , and the Church of Saint George in Lod -LRB- holy in Christianity and Islam as the tomb of Saint George or Al Khidr -RRB- .
The administrative center of the Bahá ' í Faith and the Shrine of the Báb are located at the Bahá ' í World Centre in Haifa ; the leader of the faith is buried in Acre .
Apart from maintenance staff , there is no Bahá ' í community in Israel , although it is a destination for pilgrimages .
A few miles south of the Bahá ' í World Centre is the Middle East centre of the reformist Ahmadiyya movement .
Its mixed neighbourhood of Jews and Ahmadi Arabs is the only one of its kind in the country .
Education in Israel is highly valued in the national culture with its historical values dating back to Ancient Israel and was viewed as one fundamental blocks of ancient Israelite life .
Israeli culture views higher education as the key to higher mobility and socioeconomic status in Israeli society .
The emphasis of education within Israeli society goes to the gulf within the Jewish diaspora from the Renaissance and Enlightenment Movement all the way to the roots of Zionism in the 1880s .
Jewish communities in the Levant were the first to introduce compulsory education for which the organized community , not less than the parents , was responsible for the education of the next generation of Jews .
With contemporary Jewish culture 's strong emphasis , promotion of scholarship and learning and the strong propensity to promote cultivation of intellectual pursuits as well as the nations high university educational attainment rate exemplifies how highly Israeli society values higher education .
The Israeli education system has been praised for various reasons , including its high quality and its major role in spurring Israel 's economic development and technological boom .
In addition , nearly twice as many Israelis aged 55 -- 64 held a higher education degree compared to other OECD countries , with 47 percent holding an academic degree compared with the OECD average of 25 % .
The State Education Law , passed in 1953 , established five types of schools : state secular , state religious , ultra orthodox , communal settlement schools , and Arab schools .
The public secular is the largest school group , and is attended by the majority of Jewish and non-Arab pupils in Israel .
Most Arabs send their children to schools where Arabic is the language of instruction .
Education is compulsory in Israel for children between the ages of three and eighteen .
Schooling is divided into three tiers -- primary school -LRB- grades 1 -- 6 -RRB- , middle school -LRB- grades 7 -- 9 -RRB- , and high school -LRB- grades 10 -- 12 -RRB- -- culminating with Bagrut matriculation exams .
In Arab , Christian and Druze schools , the exam on Biblical studies is replaced by an exam on Muslim , Christian or Druze heritage .
Christian Arabs are one of the most educated groups in Israel .
Maariv have describe the Christian Arabs sectors as `` the most successful in education system '' , since Christian Arabs fared the best in terms of education in comparison to any other group receiving an education in Israel .
Israeli children from Russian-speaking families have a higher bagrut pass rate at high-school level .
Although amongst immigrant children born in the FSU , the bagrut pass rate is highest amongst those families from Western FSU states of Russia , Ukraine , Belarus and Moldova -LRB- at 62.6 % -RRB- , and lower amongst those from Central Asian and Caucasian FSU states .
In 2003 , over half of all Israeli twelfth graders earned a matriculation certificate .
The Technion , the Hebrew University , and the Weizmann Institute consistently ranked among world 's 100 top universities by the prestigious ARWU academic ranking .
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem and Tel Aviv University are ranked among the world 's top 100 universities by Times Higher Education magazine .
Other major universities in the country include Bar-Ilan University , the University of Haifa , The Open University , and Ben-Gurion University of the Negev .
Ariel University , in the West Bank , is the newest university institution , upgraded from college status , and the first in over thirty years .
Israel 's seven research universities -LRB- excluding the Open University -RRB- are consistently ranked among top 500 in the world .
A member of parliament supported by a parliamentary majority becomes the prime minister -- usually this is the chair of the largest party .
The prime minister is the head of government and head of the cabinet .
At the lowest level are magistrate courts , situated in most cities across the country .
Above them are district courts , serving as both appellate courts and courts of first instance ; they are situated in five of Israel 's six districts .
In the latter role , the Supreme Court rules as a court of first instance , allowing individuals , both citizens and non-citizens , to petition against the decisions of state authorities .
Although Israel supports the goals of the International Criminal Court , it has not ratified the Rome Statute , citing concerns about the ability of the court to remain free from political impartiality .
Court cases are decided by professional judges rather than juries .
Marriage and divorce are under the jurisdiction of the religious courts : Jewish , Muslim , Druze , and Christian .
A committee of Knesset members , Supreme Court justices , and Israeli Bar members carries out the election of judges .
Administration of Israel 's courts -LRB- both the `` General '' courts and the Labor Courts -RRB- is carried by the Administration of Courts , situated in Jerusalem .
Both General and Labor courts are paperless courts : the storage of court files , as well as court decisions , are conducted electronically .
All of the Judea and Samaria Area and parts of the Jerusalem and North districts are not recognized internationally as part of Israel .
Israel 's largest municipality , in population and area , is Jerusalem with 773,800 residents in an area of 126 square kilometres -LRB- 49 sq mi -RRB- -LRB- in 2009 -RRB- .
Israeli government statistics on Jerusalem include the population and area of East Jerusalem , which is widely recognized as part of the Palestinian territories under Israeli occupation .
Tel Aviv , Haifa , and Rishon LeZion rank as Israel 's next most populous cities , with populations of 393,900 , 265,600 , and 227,600 respectively .
Since Israel 's capture of these territories , Israeli settlements and military installations have been built within each of them .
Israel has applied civilian law to the Golan Heights and East Jerusalem and granted their inhabitants permanent residency status and the ability to apply for citizenship .
The West Bank , outside of the Israeli settlements within the territory , has remained under direct military rule , and Palestinians in this area can not become Israeli citizens .
Only Britain recognized this annexation and Jordan has since ceded its claim to the territory to the PLO .
The West Bank was occupied by Israel in 1967 during the Six-Day War .
From their occupation in 1967 until 1993 , the Palestinians living in these territories were under Israeli military administration .
Since the Israel -- PLO letters of recognition , most of the Palestinian population and cities have been under the internal jurisdiction of the Palestinian Authority , and only partial Israeli military control , although Israel has on several occasions redeployed its troops and reinstated full military administration during periods of unrest .
In response to increasing attacks as part of the Second Intifada , the Israeli government started to construct the Israeli West Bank barrier .
In 2005 , as part of Israel 's unilateral disengagement plan , Israel removed all of its settlers and forces from the territory .
Israel does not consider the Gaza Strip to be occupied territory and declared it a `` foreign territory '' .
That view has been disputed by numerous international humanitarian organizations and various bodies of the United Nations .
Gaza has a border with Egypt and an agreement between Israel , the European Union and the PA governed how border crossing would take place -LRB- it was monitored by European observers -RRB- .
Egypt adhered to this agreement under Mubarak and prevented access to Gaza until April 2011 when it announced it was opening its border with Gaza .
Despite the peace treaty between Israel and Egypt , Israel is still widely considered an enemy country among Egyptians .
Under Israeli law , Lebanon , Syria , Saudi Arabia , Iraq , Iran , Sudan , and Yemen are enemy countries , and Israeli citizens may not visit them without permission from the Ministry of the Interior .
Iran had diplomatic relations with Israel under the Pahlavi dynasty but withdrew its recognition of Israel during the Islamic Revolution .
As a result of the 2008 -- 09 Gaza War , Mauritania , Qatar , Bolivia , and Venezuela suspended political and economic ties with Israel .
Their bilateral relations are multidimensional and the United States is the principal proponent of the Arab-Israeli peace process .
The United States and Israeli views differ on some issues , such as the Golan Heights , Jerusalem , and settlements .
Germany 's strong ties with Israel include cooperation on scientific and educational endeavors and the two states remain strong economic and military partners .
The UK has kept full diplomatic relations with Israel since its formation having had two visits from heads of state in 2007 .
The UK is seen as having a `` natural '' relationship with Israel on account of the British Mandate for Palestine .
Turkey 's ties to the other Muslim-majority nations in the region have at times resulted in pressure from Arab and Muslim states to temper its relationship with Israel .
Relations between Israel and Greece have improved since 1995 due to the decline of Israeli-Turkish relations .
The two countries have a defense cooperation agreement and in 2010 , the Israeli Air Force hosted Greece 's Hellenic Air Force in a joint exercise at the Uvda base .
Israel is the second largest importer of Greek products in the Middle East .
The joint Cyprus-Israel oil and gas explorations centered on the Leviathan gas field are an important factor for Greece , given its strong links with Cyprus .
Cooperation in the world 's longest sub-sea electric power cable , the EuroAsia Interconnector , has strengthened relations between Cyprus and Israel .
India is also the third-largest Asian economic partner of Israel and the two countries have military as well as extensive space technology ties .
India became the top source market for Israel from Asia in 2010 with 41,000 tourist arrivals in that year .
Azerbaijan is one of the few majority Muslim countries to develop bilateral strategic and economic relations with Israel .
Azerbaijan supplies Israel with a substantial amount of its oil needs , and Israel has helped modernize the Armed Forces of Azerbaijan .
In Africa , Ethiopia is Israel 's main and closest ally in the continent due to common political , religious and security interests .
Israel provides expertise to Ethiopia on irrigation projects and thousands of Ethiopian Jews -LRB- Beta Israel -RRB- live in Israel .
Individual international charitable donations are also very low , with only 0.1 % of charitable donations being sent to foreign causes .
In Haiti , immediately following the 2010 earthquake , Israel was the first country to set up a field hospital capable of performing surgical operations .
At the conclusion of its humanitarian mission 11 days later , the Israeli delegation had treated more than 1,110 patients , conducted 319 successful surgeries , delivered 16 births and rescued or assisted in the rescue of four individuals .
Despite radiation concerns , Israel was one of the first countries to send a medical delegation to Japan following the earthquake and tsunami disaster .
Israel dispatched a medical team to the tsunami-stricken city of Kurihara in 2011 .
A medical clinic run by an IDF team of some 50 members featured pediatric , surgical , maternity and gynecological , and otolaryngology wards , together with an optometry department , a laboratory , a pharmacy and an intensive care unit .
The IDF consist of the army , air force and navy .
The IDF also draws upon the resources of the Military Intelligence Directorate -LRB- Aman -RRB- , which works with Mossad and Shabak .
The Israel Defense Forces have been involved in several major wars and border conflicts in its short history , making it one of the most battle-trained armed forces in the world .
Following mandatory service , Israeli men join the reserve forces and usually do up to several weeks of reserve duty every year until their forties .
Most women are exempt from reserve duty .
An alternative for those who receive exemptions on various grounds is Sherut Leumi , or national service , which involves a program of service in hospitals , schools and other social welfare frameworks .
As a result of its conscription program , the IDF maintains approximately 176,500 active troops and an additional 445,000 reservists .
The Arrow missile is one of the world 's few operational anti-ballistic missile systems .
Israel 's Spike missile is one of the most widely exported ATGMs in the world .
Israel 's Iron Dome anti-missile air defense system gained worldwide acclaim after intercepting hundreds of Qassam , 122 mm Grad and Fajr-5 artillery rockets fire by Palestinian militants from the Gaza Strip .
Since the Yom Kippur War , Israel has developed a network of reconnaissance satellites .
Israel has not signed the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and maintains a policy of deliberate ambiguity toward its nuclear capabilities .
By 2006 , that figure had dropped to 7.3 % .
Israel is one of the world 's largest arms exporters , and was ranked fourth in the world for weapons exports in 2007 .
The majority of Israel 's arms exports are unreported for security reasons .
Since 1967 , the United States has been a particularly notable foreign contributor of military aid to Israel : the US is expected to provide the country with $ 3.15 billion per year from 2013 to 2018 .
Israel 's quality university education and the establishment of a highly motivated and educated populace is largely responsible for spurring the country 's high technology boom and rapid economic development .
The country is ranked 3rd in the region and 38th worldwide on the World Bank 's Ease of Doing Business Index as well as in the World Economic Forum 's Global Competitiveness Report .
Despite limited natural resources , intensive development of the agricultural and industrial sectors over the past decades has made Israel largely self-sufficient in food production , apart from grains and beef .
Israel is a global leader in water conservation and geothermal energy , and its development of cutting-edge technologies in software , communications and the life sciences have evoked comparisons with Silicon Valley .
Israel is one of the world 's technological leaders in water technology .
The ongoing shortage of water in the country has spurred innovation in water conservation techniques , and a substantial agricultural modernization , drip irrigation , was invented in Israel .
Israel is also at the technological forefront of desalination and water recycling .
Israel hosts an annual Water Technology Exhibition and Conference -LRB- WaTec -RRB- that attracts thousands of people from across the world .
As of May 29 , 2015 more than 50 percent of the water for Israeli households , agriculture and industry is artificially produced .
As a result of innovations in reverse osmosis technology , Israel is set to become a net exporter of water in the coming years .
Israel has embraced solar energy ; its engineers are on the cutting edge of solar energy technology and its solar companies work on projects around the world .
The high annual incident solar irradiance at its geographic latitude creates ideal conditions for what is an internationally renowned solar research and development industry in the Negev Desert .
Israel had a modern electric car infrastructure involving a countrywide network of recharging stations to facilitate the charging and exchange of car batteries .
It was thought that this would have lowered Israel 's oil dependency and lowered the fuel costs of hundreds of Israel 's motorists that use cars powered only by electric batteries .
The Israeli model was being studied by several countries and being implemented in Denmark and Australia .
Israel is one of only seven countries that both build their own satellites and launch their own launchers .
The Shavit is a space launch vehicle produced by Israel to launch small satellites into low earth orbit .
Shavit rockets are launched from the spaceport at the Palmachim Airbase by the Israeli Space Agency .
Since 1988 Israel Aerospace Industries have indigenously designed and built at least 13 commercial , research and spy satellites .
Some of Israel 's satellites are ranked among the world 's most advanced space systems .
In 2003 , Ilan Ramon became Israel 's first astronaut , serving as payload specialist of STS-107 , the fatal mission of the Space Shuttle Columbia .
The number of motor vehicles per 1,000 persons was 324 , relatively low with respect to developed countries .
Railways stretch across 949 kilometers -LRB- 590 mi -RRB- and are operated solely by government-owned Israel Railways -LRB- All figures are for 2008 -RRB- .
Ben Gurion , Israel 's largest airport , handled over 12.1 million passengers in 2010 .
In addition to these , the smaller Port of Eilat is situated on the Red Sea , and is used mainly for trading with Far East countries .
Israel 's security problems have taken their toll on the industry , but the number of incoming tourists is on the rebound .
Israel has the highest number of museums per capita in the world .
Israel 's substantial Arab minority has also left its imprint on Israeli culture in such spheres as architecture , music , and cuisine .
By law , two copies of all printed matter published in Israel must be deposited in the National Library of Israel at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem .
In 2001 , the law was amended to include audio and video recordings , and other non-print media .
In 2013 , 91 percent of the 7,863 books transferred to the library were in Hebrew .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Leading Israeli poets have been Yehuda Amichai , Nathan Alterman and Rachel Bluwstein .
Internationally famous contemporary Israeli novelists include Amos Oz , Etgar Keret and David Grossman .
Darwish was born and raised in northern Israel , but lived his adult life abroad after joining the Palestine Liberation Organization .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Israeli music contains musical influences from all over the world ; Sephardic music , Hasidic melodies , Belly dancing music , Greek music , jazz , and pop rock are all part of the music scene .
Israel has also produced many musicians of note , some achieving international stardom .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Israel has participated in the Eurovision Song Contest nearly every year since 1973 , winning the competition three times and hosting it twice .
It became a symbol of the Zionist reconstruction and of the ability to experience joy amidst austerity .
It now plays a significant role in modern Israeli folk dancing and is regularly performed at weddings and other celebrations , and in group dances throughout Israel .
to be among the most versatile and original international creators working today .
Famous Israeli companies include the Batsheva Dance Company and the Kibbutz Contemporary Dance Company .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Israel 's national Holocaust museum , Yad Vashem , is the world central archive of Holocaust-related information .
Apart from the major museums in large cities , there are high-quality artspaces in many towns and kibbutzim .
Israeli cuisine includes local dishes as well as dishes brought to the country by Jewish immigrants from the diaspora .
Roughly half of the Israeli-Jewish population attests to keeping kosher at home .
Hotel restaurants are much more likely to serve kosher food .
The non-kosher retail market was traditionally sparse , but grew rapidly and considerably following the influx of immigrants from Eastern Europe and Russia during the 1990s .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Maccabi Haifa , Maccabi Tel Aviv , Hapoel Tel Aviv and Beitar Jerusalem are the largest sports clubs .
Maccabi Tel Aviv , Maccabi Haifa and Hapoel Tel Aviv have competed in the UEFA Champions League and Hapoel Tel Aviv reached the UEFA Cup quarter-finals .
Maccabi Tel Aviv B.C. has won the European championship in basketball six times .
the biggest achievement of Israeli football .
Israel was excluded from the 1978 Asian Games due to security and expense involved if they were to participate .
In 1994 , UEFA agreed to admit Israel and all Israeli sporting organizations now compete in Europe .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
There are many Israeli grandmasters and Israeli chess players have won a number of youth world championships .
Israel stages an annual international championship and hosted the World Team Chess Championship in 2005 .
The Ministry of Education and the World Chess Federation agreed upon a project of teaching chess within Israeli schools , and it has been introduced into the curriculum of some schools .
Owing partly to Soviet immigration , it is home to the largest number of chess grandmasters of any city in the world .
The Israeli chess team won the silver medal at the 2008 Chess Olympiad and the bronze , coming in third among 148 teams , at the 2010 Olympiad .
He only lost the World Chess Championship 2012 to reigning world champion Anand after a speed-chess tie breaker .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
At this time , Greek cultural influence and power was at its peak in Europe , Africa and Asia , experiencing prosperity and progress in the arts , exploration , literature , theatre , architecture , music , mathematics , philosophy , and science .
For example , competitive public games took place , ideas in biology , and popular entertainment in theaters .
It is often considered a period of transition , sometimes even of decadence or degeneration , compared to the enlightenment of the Greek Classical era .
This resulted in the export of Greek culture and language to these new realms through Greco-Macedonian colonization , spanning as far as modern-day Pakistan .
Equally , however , these new kingdoms were influenced by the indigenous cultures , adopting local practices where beneficial , necessary , or convenient .
Hellenistic culture thus represents a fusion of the Ancient Greek world with that of the Near East , Middle East , and Southwest Asia , and a departure from earlier Greek attitudes towards `` barbarian '' cultures .
Those new cities were composed of Greek colonists who came from different parts of the Greek world , and not , as before , from a specific `` mother city '' .
The main cultural centers expanded from mainland Greece to Pergamon , Rhodes , and new Greek colonies such as Seleucia , Antioch , Alexandria and Ai-Khanoum .
Scholars and historians are divided as to what event signals the end of the Hellenistic era .
The major issue with the term Hellenistic lies in its convenience , as the spread of Greek culture was not the generalized phenomenon that the term implies .
While a few fragments exist , there is no surviving historical work which dates to the hundred years following Alexander 's death .
The works of the major Hellenistic historians Hieronymus of Cardia -LRB- who worked under Alexander , Antigonus I and other successors -RRB- , Duris of Samos and Phylarchus which were used by surviving sources are all lost .
Ancient Greece had traditionally been a fractious collection of fiercely independent city-states .
Macedon was located at the periphery of the Greek world , and although its royal family claimed Greek descent , the Macedonians themselves were looked down upon as semi-barbaric by the rest of the Greeks .
However , Macedon had a relatively strong and centralised government , and compared to most Greek states , directly controlled a large area .
However , while this campaign was in its early stages , he was assassinated .
After the infantry stormed the palace of Babylon , a compromise was arranged -- Arrhidaeus -LRB- as Philip III -RRB- should become king , and should rule jointly with Roxana 's child , assuming that it was a boy -LRB- as it was , becoming Alexander IV -RRB- .
Perdiccas himself would become regent -LRB- epimeletes -RRB- of the empire , and Meleager his lieutenant .
The rebels were supported by Lysimachus , the satrap of Thrace and Ptolemy , the satrap of Egypt .
Ptolemy came to terms with Perdiccas 's murderers , making Peithon and Arrhidaeus regents in his place , but soon these came to a new agreement with Antipater at the Treaty of Triparadisus .
Antipater was made regent of the Empire , and the two kings were moved to Macedon .
Antigonus remained in charge of Asia minor , Ptolemy retained Egypt , Lysimachus retained Thrace and Seleucus I controlled Babylon .
Cassander rose in revolt against Polyperchon -LRB- who was joined by Eumenes -RRB- and was supported by Antigonus , Lysimachus and Ptolemy .
The third war of the Diadochi broke out because of the growing power and ambition of Antigonus .
Seleucus was forced to flee to Egypt and Antigonus was soon at war with Ptolemy , Lysimachus , and Cassander .
He then invaded Phoenicia , laid siege to Tyre , stormed Gaza and began building a fleet .
Demetrius continued his campaigns by laying siege to Rhodes and conquering most of Greece in 302 , creating a league against Cassander 's Macedon .
The decisive engagement of the war came when Lysimachus invaded and overran much of western Anatolia , but was soon isolated by Antigonus and Demetrius near Ipsus in Phrygia .
Seleucus ' war elephants proved decisive , Antigonus was killed , and Demetrius fled back to Greece to attempt to preserve the remnants of his rule there by recapturing a rebellious Athens .
He was defeated in 288 BC when Lysimachus of Thrace and Pyrrhus of Epirus invaded Macedon on two fronts , and quickly carved up the kingdom for themselves .
Demetrius fled to central Greece with his mercenaries and began to build support there and in the northern Peloponnese .
He once again laid siege to Athens after they turned on him , but then struck a treaty with the Athenians and Ptolemy , which allowed him to cross over to Asia minor and wage war on Lysimachus ' holdings in Ionia , leaving his son Antigonus Gonatas in Greece .
Seleucus then attempted to conquer Lysimachus ' European territories in Thrace and Macedon , but he was assassinated by Ptolemy Ceraunus -LRB- `` the thunderbolt '' -RRB- , who had taken refuge at the Seleucid court and then had himself acclaimed as king of Macedon .
Ptolemy was killed when Macedon was invaded by Gauls in 279 , his head stuck on a spear and the country fell into anarchy .
Antigonus II Gonatas invaded Thrace in the summer of 277 and defeated a large force of 18,000 Gauls .
He was quickly hailed as king of Macedon and went on to rule for 35 years .
During the Hellenistic period the importance of Greece proper within the Greek-speaking world declined sharply .
Many Greeks migrated to Alexandria , Antioch and the many other new Hellenistic cities founded in Alexander 's wake , as far away as modern Afghanistan and Pakistan .
Independent city states were unable to compete with Hellenistic kingdoms and were usually forced to ally themselves to one of them for defense , giving honors to Hellenistic rulers in return for protection .
Athens was then occupied by Macedonian troops , and run by Macedonian officials .
In states such as the Achaean league , this also involved the admission of other ethnic groups into the federation with equal rights , in this case , non-Achaeans .
One of the few city states who managed to maintain full independence from the control of any Hellenistic kingdom was Rhodes .
It became a center of culture and commerce , its coins were widely circulated and its philosophical schools became one of the best in the mediterranean .
A large number of the Macedonian population had also been resettled abroad by Alexander or had chosen to emigrate to the new eastern Greek cities .
Philip continued to wage war against Pergamon and Rhodes for control of the Aegean -LRB- 204-200 BCE -RRB- and ignored Roman demands for non-intervention in Greece by invading Attica .
Greece was now thoroughly brought into the Roman sphere of influence , though it retained nominal autonomy .
The end of Antigonid Macedon came when Philip V 's son , Perseus , was defeated and captured by the Romans in the Third Macedonian War -LRB- 171 -- 168 BCE -RRB- .
Illyrians on the coast of the Adriatic were under the effects and influence of Hellenisation and some tribes adopted Greek , becoming bilingual due to their proximity to the Greek colonies in Illyria .
Various parts of Thrace were under Macedonian rule under Philip II of Macedon , Alexander the Great , Lysimachus , Ptolemy II , and Philip V but were also often ruled by their own kings .
The Diadochi also used Thracian mercenaries in their armies and they were also used as colonists .
The nobility also adopted Greek fashions in dress , ornament and military equipment , spreading it to the other tribes .
In 4th century Sicily the leading Greek city and hegemon was Syracuse .
This was the first time a European force had invaded the region .
After this war he controlled most of south-east Sicily and had himself proclaimed king , in imitation of the Hellenistic monarchs of the east .
Greeks in pre-Roman Gaul were mostly limited to the Mediterranean coast of Provence .
The coins minted in Massalia have been found in all parts of Ligurian-Celtic Gaul .
Celtic coinage was influenced by Greek designs , and Greek letters can be found on various Celtic coins , especially those of Southern France .
Traders from Massalia ventured inland deep into France on the Rivers Durance and Rhône , and established overland trade routes deep into Gaul , and to Switzerland and Burgundy .
Promotion of immigration from Greece was important in the establishment of this system .
Macedonian and Hellenistic monarchs were expected to lead their armies on the field , along with a group of privileged aristocratic companions or friends -LRB- hetairoi , philoi -RRB- which dined and drank with the king and acted as his advisory council .
Alexandria , a major center of Greek culture and trade , became his capital city .
As Egypt 's first port city , it was the main grain exporter in the Mediterranean .
The Egyptians begrudgingly accepted the Ptolemies as the successors to the pharaohs of independent Egypt , though the kingdom went through several native revolts .
The Ptolemaic ruler cult portrayed the Ptolemies as gods , and temples to the Ptolemies were erected throughout the kingdom .
A whole class of petty officials , tax farmers , clerks and overseers made this possible .
The Egyptian countryside was directly administered by this royal bureaucracy .
Under Ptolemy II , Callimachus , Apollonius of Rhodes , Theocritus and a host of other poets made the city a center of Hellenistic literature .
Ptolemy himself was eager to patronise the library , scientific research and individual scholars who lived on the grounds of the library .
However these Egyptian soldiers revolted , eventually setting up a native breakaway Egyptian state in the Thebaid between 205-186/5 BCE , severely weakening the Ptolemaic state .
From there , he created a new empire which expanded to include much of Alexander 's near eastern territories .
At the height of its power , it included central Anatolia , the Levant , Mesopotamia , Persia , today 's Turkmenistan , Pamir , and parts of Pakistan .
It included a diverse population estimated at fifty to sixty million people .
Under Antiochus I -LRB- c. 324/3 -- 261 BC -RRB- , however , the unwieldy empire was already beginning to shed territories .
The kingdoms of Cappadocia , Bithynia and Pontus were all practically independent by this time as well .
The Greek population of the cities who formed the dominant elite were reinforced by emigration from Greece .
These cities included newly founded colonies such as Antioch , the other cities of the Syrian tetrapolis , Seleucia -LRB- north of Babylon -RRB- and Dura-Europos on the Euphrates .
These cities retained traditional Greek city state institutions such as assemblies , councils and elected magistrates , but this was a facade for they were always controlled by the royal Seleucid officials .
This ` Greco-Macedonian ' population -LRB- which also included the sons of settlers who had married local women -RRB- could make up a phalanx of 35,000 men -LRB- out of a total Seleucid army of 80,000 -RRB- during the reign of Antiochos III .
The rest of the army was made up of native troops .
Antiochus III the great conducted several vigorous campaigns to retake all the lost provinces of the empire since the death of Seleucus I .
He was successful , bringing back most of these provinces into at least nominal vassalage and receiving tribute from their rulers .
He then began expanding his influence into Pergamene territory in Asia and crossed into Europe , fortifying Lysimachia on the hellespont , but his expansion into Anatolia and Greece was abruptly halted after a decisive defeat at the Battle of Magnesia -LRB- 190 BCE -RRB- .
In the Treaty of Apamea which ended the war , Antiochus lost all of his territories in Anatolia west of the Taurus and was forced to pay a large indemnity of 15,000 talents .
His descendant , Attalus I , defeated the invading Galatians and proclaimed himself an independent king .
For his support against the Seleucids in 190 BCE , Eumenes II was rewarded with all the former Seleucid domains in Asia Minor .
It included a reading room and a collection of paintings .
Pergamum was also a center of parchment -LRB- charta pergamena -RRB- production .
The Attalids ruled Pergamon until Attalus III bequeathed the kingdom to the Roman Republic in 133 BC to avoid a likely succession crisis .
The Galatians were well respected as warriors and were widely used as mercenaries in the armies of the successor states .
They continued to attack neighboring kingdoms such as Bithynia and Pergamon , plundering and extracting tribute .
This came to an end when they sided with the renegade Seleucid prince Antiochus Hierax who tried to defeat Attalus , the ruler of Pergamon -LRB- 241 -- 197 BC -RRB- .
Attalus severely defeated the Gauls , forcing them to confine themselves to Galatia .
Galatia was henceforth dominated by Rome through regional rulers from 189 BC onward .
Nicomedes also invited the Celtic Galatians into Anatolia as mercenaries , and they later turned on his son Prusias I , who defeated them in battle .
Their last king , Nicomedes IV , was unable to maintain himself against Mithridates VI of Pontus , and , after being restored to his throne by the Roman Senate , he bequeathed his kingdom by will to the Roman republic -LRB- 74 BCE -RRB- .
This defeat allowed Pontus to invade and conquer the kingdom .
Despite being ruled by a dynasty which was a descendant of the Persian Achaemenid Empire it became hellenized due to the influence of the Greek cities on the Black Sea and its neighboring kingdoms .
Pontic culture was a mix of Greek and Iranian elements , the most hellenized parts of the kingdom were on the coast , populated by Greek colonies such as Trapezus and Sinope , which became the capital of the kingdom .
Epigraphic evidence also shows extensive Hellenistic influence in the interior .
During the reign of Mithridates II , Pontus was allied with the Seleucids through dynastic marriages .
and as the `` great liberator '' .
During the reign of the Artaxiads , Armenia went through a period of hellenization .
Numismatic evidence shows Greek artistic styles and the use of the Greek language .
Cleopatra , the wife of Tigranes the Great , invited Greeks such as the rhetor Amphicrates and the historian Metrodorus of Scepsis to the Armenian court , and - according to Plutarch - when the Roman general Lucullus seized the Armenian capital Tigranocerta , he found a troupe of Greek actors who had arrived to perform plays for Tigranes .
Parthia was a north-eastern Iranian satrapy of the Achaemenid empire which later passed on to Alexander 's empire .
Under the Seleucids , Parthia was governed by various Greek satraps such as Nicanor and Philip -LRB- satrap -RRB- .
Arsaces II sued for peace became a vassal of the Seleucids and it was not until the reign of Phraates I -LRB- 168 -- 165 BCE -RRB- , that the Arsacids would again begin to assert their independence .
During the reign of Mithridates I of Parthia , Arsacid control expanded to include Herat -LRB- in 167 BC -RRB- , Babylonia -LRB- in 144 BC -RRB- , Media -LRB- in 141 BC -RRB- , Persia -LRB- in 139 BC -RRB- , and large parts of Syria -LRB- in the 110s BC -RRB- .
Abundant traces of Hellenism continued under the Parthian empire .
They enjoyed Greek theater and Greek art influenced Parthian art .
Their rulers established ruler cults in the manner of Hellenistic kings and often used Hellenistic royal epithets .
The hellenization of the Nabateans accured relatively late in comparison to the surrounding regions .
Aretas captured Damascus and built the Petra pool complex and gardens in the Hellenistic style .
Though the Nabateans originally worshipped their traditional gods in symbolic form such as stone blocks or pillars , during the Hellenistic period they began to identify their gods with Greek gods and depict them in figurative forms influenced by Greek sculpture .
Nabatean art shows Greek influences and paintings have been found depicting Dionysian scenes .
They also slowly adopted Greek as a language of commerce along with Aramaic and Arabic .
The major literary product of this cultural syncretism is the Septuagint translation of the Hebrew Bible from Biblical Hebrew and Biblical Aramaic to Koiné Greek .
Antiochus IV Epiphanes sacked Jerusalem and looted the Temple in 169 BCE after disturbances in Judea during his abortive invasion of Egypt .
Antiochus then banned key Jewish religious rites and traditions in Judea .
He may have been attempting to Hellenize the region and unify his empire and the Jewish resistance to this eventually led to an escalation of violence .
Modern interpretations see this period as a civil war between Hellenized and orthodox forms of Judaism .
The Hasmonean Dynasty eventually disintegrated in a civil war , which coincided with civil wars in Rome .
In spite of originally being a revolt against Greek overlordship , the Hasmonean kingdom and also the Herodian kingdom which followed gradually became more and more hellenized .
From 37 BCE to 6 CE , the Herodian dynasty , Jewish-Roman client kings , ruled Judea .
Herod the Great considerably enlarged the Temple -LRB- see Herod 's Temple -RRB- , making it one of the largest religious structures in the world .
The style of the enlarged temple and other Herodian architecture shows significant Hellenistic architectural influence .
The Greek kingdom of Bactria began as a breakaway satrapy of the Seleucid empire , which , because of the size of the empire , had significant freedom from central control .
Soon afterwards the Greco-Bactrian kingdom seems to have expanded , possibly taking advantage of the defeat of the Parthian king Arsaces II by Antiochus .
Indian sources also maintain religious contact between Buddhist monks and the Greeks , and some Greco-Bactrians did convert to Buddhism .
The exact justification for the invasion remains unclear , but by about 175 BC , the Greeks ruled over parts of north-western India .
This period also marks the beginning of the obfuscation of Greco-Bactrian history .
It is probable that at this point that the Greco-Bactrian kingdom split into several semi-independent regions for some years , often warring amongst themselves .
However , Greek urban civilisation seems to have continued in Bactria after the fall of the kingdom , having a hellenising effect on the tribes which had displaced Greek-rule .
The Kushan empire which followed continued to use Greek on their coinage and Greeks continued being influential in the empire .
Large numbers of his coins have been found in India , and he seems to have reigned in Gandhara as well as western Punjab .
He also expanded the kingdom further east into Punjab , though these conquests were rather ephemeral .
This inevitably weakened the Greek position , and territory seems to have been lost progressively .
The Indo-Greek kingdom appears to have lingered on in western Punjab until about 10 AD when finally ended by the Indo-Scythians .
Several references in Indian literature praise the knowledge of the Yavanas or the Greeks .
The mlecchas are wedded to the creations of their own fancy . ''
and the creators of flying machines that are generally called vimanas .
Though some of these regions were not ruled by Greeks or even Greek speaking elites , certain Hellenistic influences can be seen in the historical record and material culture of these regions .
Other regions had established contact with Greek colonies before this period , and simply saw a continued process of Hellenization and intermixing .
The Spartocids were a hellenized Thracian family from Panticapaeum .
Scythian pressure on the Bosporan kingdom under Paerisades V led to its eventual vassalage under the Pontic king Mithradates VI for protection , circa 107 BCE .
It later became a Roman client state .
Many Scythian elites purchased Greek products and some Scythian art shows Greek influences .
At least some Scythians seem to have become Hellenized , because we know of conflicts between the elites of the Scythian kingdom over the adoption of Greek ways .
The peoples around Pontic Olbia , known as the Callipidae , were intermixed and Hellenized Greco-Scythians .
It is not known whether Bahrain was part of the Seleucid Empire , although the archaeological site at Qalat Al Bahrain has been proposed as a Seleucid base in the Persian Gulf .
Tylos even became the site of Greek athletic contests .
Carthaginian culture came into contact with the Greeks through Punic colonies in Sicily and through their widespread Mediterranean trade network .
Xanthippus reformed the Carthaginian military along Macedonian army lines .
Widespread Roman interference in the Greek world was probably inevitable given the general manner of the ascendency of the Roman Republic .
This Roman-Greek interaction began as a consequence of the Greek city-states located along the coast of southern Italy .
Forcing the Romans to fight on another front when they were at a nadir of manpower gained Philip the lasting enmity of the Romans ; the only real result from the somewhat insubstantial First Macedonian War -LRB- 215 -- 202 BC -RRB- .
A pretext for war was provided by Philip 's refusal to end his war with Attalid Pergamum , and Rhodes , both Roman allies .
Like most Roman peace treaties of the period , the resultant ` Peace of Flaminius ' was designed utterly to crush the power of the defeated party ; a massive indemnity was levied , Philip 's fleet was surrendered to Rome , and Macedon was effectively returned to its ancient boundaries , losing influence over the city-states of southern Greece , and land in Thrace and Asia Minor .
The result was the end of Macedon as a major power in the Mediterranean .
As a result of the confusion in Greece at the end of the Second Macedonian War , the Seleucid Empire also became entangled with the Romans .
However , this brought Antiochus into conflict with Rhodes and Pergamum , two important Roman allies , and began a ` cold war ' between Rome and Antiochus -LRB- not helped by the presence of Hannibal at the Seleucid court -RRB- .
Meanwhile , in mainland Greece , the Aetolian League , which had sided with Rome against Macedon , now grew to resent the Roman presence in Greece .
In 191 BC , the Romans under Manius Acilius Glabrio routed him at Thermopylae and obliged him to withdraw to Asia .
During the course of this war Roman troops moved into Asia for the first time , where they defeated Antiochus again at the Battle of Magnesia -LRB- 190 BC -RRB- .
A crippling treaty was imposed on Antiochus , with Seleucid possessions in Asia Minor removed and given to Rhodes and Pergamum , the size of the Seleucid navy reduced , and a massive war indemnity invoked .
Thus , in less than twenty years , Rome had destroyed the power of one of the successor states , crippled another , and firmly entrenched its influence over Greece .
This was primarily a result of the over-ambition of the Macedonian kings , and their unintended provocation of Rome ; though Rome was quick to exploit the situation .
In another twenty years , the Macedonian kingdom was no more .
Rome now demanded that the Achaean League , the last stronghold of Greek independence , be dissolved .
The Achaeans refused and declared war on Rome .
Most of the Greek cities rallied to the Achaeans ' side , even slaves were freed to fight for Greek independence .
Roman taxes were imposed , except in Athens and Sparta , and all the cities had to accept rule by Rome 's local allies .
Many Greek cities , including Athens , overthrew their Roman puppet rulers and joined him in the Mithridatic wars .
When he was driven out of Greece by the Roman general Lucius Cornelius Sulla , who laid siege to Athens and razed the city .
Mithridates was finally defeated by Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus -LRB- Pompey the Great -RRB- in 65 BC .
Further ruin was brought to Greece by the Roman civil wars , which were partly fought in Greece .
Finally , in 27 BC , Augustus directly annexed Greece to the new Roman Empire as the province of Achaea .
The struggles with Rome had left Greece depopulated and demoralised .
Nevertheless , Roman rule at least brought an end to warfare , and cities such as Athens , Corinth , Thessaloniki and Patras soon recovered their prosperity .
Famously , the end of Ptolemaic Egypt came as the final act in the republican civil war between the Roman triumvirs Mark Anthony and Augustus Caesar .
He thereby completed both the destruction of the Hellenistic kingdoms and the Roman republic , and ended -LRB- in hindsight -RRB- the Hellenistic era .
In some fields Hellenistic culture thrived , particularly in its preservation of the past .
The states of the Hellenistic period were deeply fixated with the past and its seemingly lost glories .
With the support of royal stipends , Alexandrian scholars collected , translated , copied , classified and critiqued every book they could find .
They were scholar poets , writing not only poetry but treatises on Homer and other archaic and classical Greek literature .
Libraries were also present in Antioch , Pella , and Kos .
Cicero was educated in Athens and Mark Antony in Rhodes .
Antioch was founded as a metropolis and center of Greek learning which retained its status into the era of Christianity .
The spread of Greek culture and language throughout the Near East and Asia owed much to the development of newly founded cities and deliberate colonization policies by the successor states , which in turn was necessary for maintaining their military forces .
Many cities maintained nominal autonomy while under the rule of the local king or satrap , and often had Greek-style institutions .
Greek dedications , statues , architecture and inscriptions have all been found .
However , local cultures were not replaced , and mostly went on as before , but now with a new Greco-Macedonian or otherwise Hellenized elite .
While it may have been a deliberate attempt to spread Greek culture -LRB- or as Arrian says , `` to civilise the natives '' -RRB- , it is more likely that it was a series of pragmatic measures designed to aid in the rule of his enormous empire .
Cities and colonies were centers of administrative control and Macedonian power in a newly conquered region .
He also brought in Persian and other non-Greek peoples into his military and even the elite cavalry units of the companion cavalry .
Again , it is probably better to see these policies as a pragmatic response to the demands of ruling a large empire than to any idealized attempt to bringing Greek culture to the ` barbarians ' .
Throughout the Hellenistic world , these Greco-Macedonian colonists considered themselves by and large superior to the native `` barbarians '' and excluded most non-Greeks from the upper echelons of courtly and government life .
Greek cities and colonies may have exported Greek art and architecture as far as the Indus , but these were mostly enclaves of Greek culture for the transplanted Greek elite .
Some natives did learn Greek and adopt Greek ways , but this was mostly limited to a few local elites who were allowed to retain their posts by the Diadochi and also to a small number of mid-level administrators who acted as intermediaries between the Greek speaking upper class and their subjects .
Despite their initial reluctance , the Successors seem to have later deliberately naturalized themselves to their different regions , presumably in order to help maintain control of the population .
In this way , hybrid ` Hellenistic ' cultures naturally emerged , at least among the upper echelons of society .
The trends of Hellenization were therefore accompanied by Greeks adopting native ways over time , but this was widely varied by place and by social class .
In the Hellenistic period , there was much continuity in Greek religion : the Greek gods continued to be worshiped , and the same rites were practiced as before .
However the socio-political changes brought on by the conquest of the Persian empire and Greek emigration abroad meant that change also came to religious practices .
Greek emigres brought their Greek religion everywhere they went , even as far as India and Afghanistan .
Non-Greeks also had more freedom to travel and trade throughout the Mediterranean and in this period we can see Egyptian gods such as Serapis , and the Syrian gods Atargatis and Hadad , as well as a Jewish synagogue , all coexisting on the island of Delos alongside classical Greek deities .
Greek emigres faced individual religious choices they had not faced on their home cities , where the gods they worshiped were dictated by tradition .
These cults were usually associated with a specific temple in honor of the ruler such as the Ptolemaieia at Alexandria and had their own festivals and theatrical performances .
According to Peter Green , these cults did not produce genuine belief of the divinity of rulers among the Greeks and Macedonians .
The rise of philosophy and the sciences had removed the gods from many of their traditional domains such as their role in the movement of the heavenly bodies and natural disasters .
While there does seem to have been a substantial decline in religiosity , this was mostly reserved for the educated classes .
Magic was practiced widely , and these too , were a continuation from earlier times .
The plots of this new Hellenistic comedy of manners were more domestic and formulaic , stereotypical low born characters such as slaves became more important , the language was colloquial and major motifs included escapism , marriage , romance and luck -LRB- Tyche -RRB- .
Though no Hellenistic tragedy remains intact , they were still widely produced during the period , yet it seems that there was no major breakthrough in style , remaining within the classical model .
The scholars at the libraries in Alexandria and Pergamon focused on the collection , cataloging , and literary criticism of classical Athenian works and ancient Greek myths .
He promoted short poetic forms such as the epigram , epyllion and the iambic and attacked epic as base and common -LRB- `` big book , big evil '' was his doctrine -RRB- .
Callimachus was extremely influential in his time and also for the development of Augustan poetry .
He had been a student of Callimachus and later became chief librarian -LRB- prostates -RRB- of the library of Alexandria , Apollonius and Callimachus spent much of their careers feuding with each other .
Pastoral poetry also thrived during the Hellenistic era , Theocritus was a major poet who popularized the genre .
During the Hellenistic period , many different schools of thought developed .
However Athens had now lost her political freedom and Hellenistic philosophy is a reflection of this new difficult period .
This occupation with the inner life , with personal inner liberty and with the pursuit of eudaimonia is what all Hellenistic philosophical schools have in common .
The Epicureans and the Cynics rejected public offices and civic service , which amounted to a rejection of the polis itself , the defining institution of the Greek world .
Zeno became extremely popular , the Athenians set up a gold statue of him and Antigonus II Gonatas invited him to the Macedonian court .
The philosophical schools of Aristotle -LRB- the Peripatetics of the Lyceum -RRB- and Plato -LRB- Platonism at the Academy -RRB- also remained influential .
Hellenistic philosophy , had a significant influence on the Greek ruling elite .
Examples include Athenian statesman Demetrius of Phaleron , who had studied in the lyceum ; the Spartan king Cleomenes III who was a student of the Stoic Sphairos of Borysthenes and Antigonus II who was also a well known Stoic .
This can also be said of the Roman upper classes , were Stoicism was dominant , as seen in the Meditations of the Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius and the works of Cicero .
Hellenistic culture produced seats of learning throughout the Mediterranean .
Hellenistic scholars frequently employed the principles developed in earlier Greek thought : the application of mathematics and deliberate empirical research , in their scientific investigations .
His calculation was remarkably accurate .
He was also the first to calculate the tilt of the Earth 's axis -LRB- again with remarkable accuracy -RRB- .
Additionally , he may have accurately calculated the distance from the Earth to the Sun and invented the leap day .
It is a 37-gear mechanical computer which computed the motions of the Sun and Moon , including lunar and solar eclipses predicted on the basis of astronomical periods believed to have been learned from the Babylonians .
-LSB- not in citation given -RSB- Similarly complex devices were also developed by other Muslim engineers and astronomers during the Middle Ages .
-LSB- not in citation given -RSB-
Inﬂuenced by Philinus of Cos -LRB- ﬂ .
Armies of the Hellenistic period differed from those of the classical period in being largely made up of professional soldiers and also in their greater specialization and technical proficiency in siege warfare .
Some ethnic groups were known for their martial skill in a particular mode of combat and were highly sought after , including Tarantine cavalry , Cretan archers , Rhodian slingers and Thracian peltasts .
The use of heavily armored cataphracts and also horse archers was adopted by the Seleucids , Greco-Bactrians , Armenians and Pontus .
The use of war elephants also became common .
He kept a core of 500 of them at Apameia .
Hellenistic military equipment was generally characterized by an increase in size .
Hellenistic-era warships grew from the trireme to include more banks of oars and larger numbers of rowers and soldiers as in the Quadrireme and Quinquereme .
New siege engines were developed during this period .
Preserved examples of ball projectiles range from 4.4 kg to 78 kg -LRB- or over 170 lbs -RRB- .
People of all ages and social statuses were depicted in the art of the Hellenistic age .
According to Pliny , `` He painted barbers ' shops , cobblers ' stalls , asses , eatables and similar subjects , earning for himself the name of rhyparographos -LSB- painter of dirt/low things -RSB- .
In these subjects he could give consummate pleasure , selling them for more than other artists received for their large pictures '' -LRB- Natural History , Book XXXV .112 -RRB- .
This may be inextricably linked with the nature of government .
It has been noted by Herodotus that after the establishment of the Athenian democracy :
Peter Green , on the other hand , writes from the point of view of late 20th century liberalism , his focus being on individualism , the breakdown of convention , experiments and a postmodern disillusionment with all institutions and political processes .
Napoleon dominated European and global affairs for more than a decade while leading France against a series of coalitions in the Napoleonic Wars .
He also remains one of the most celebrated and controversial political figures in Western history .
He implemented fundamental liberal policies in France and throughout Western Europe .
The state continued to nominate the bishops and to control church finances .
Intractable differences with the British meant that the French were facing a Third Coalition by 1805 .
In retaliation , Napoleon established the Continental System in 1806 to cut off continental trade with Britain .
The Fourth Coalition took up arms against him the same year because Prussia became worried about growing French influence on the continent .
Napoleon knocked out Prussia at the battles of Jena and Auerstedt , then turned his attention towards the Russians and annihilated them in June 1807 at Friedland , which forced the Russians to accept the Treaties of Tilsit .
The Spanish and the Portuguese revolted with British support .
Fighting also erupted in Central Europe , as the Austrians launched another attack against the French in 1809 .
He maintained his strategic status through a series of alliances and family appointments .
He created a new aristocracy in France while allowing the return of nobles who had been forced into exile by the Revolution .
Tensions over rising Polish nationalism and the economic effects of the Continental System led to renewed confrontation with Russia .
A chaotic military campaign in Central Europe eventually culminated in a large Allied army defeating Napoleon at the Battle of Leipzig in October .
He was exiled to the island of Elba .
The Bourbons were restored to power and the French lost most of the territories that they had conquered since the Revolution .
However , Napoleon escaped from Elba in February 1815 and took control of the government once again .
The Allies responded by forming a Seventh Coalition , which ultimately defeated Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo in June .
The Royal Navy then thwarted his planned escape to the United States in July , so he surrendered to the British after running out of other options .
The British exiled him to the remote island of Saint Helena in the South Atlantic .
His death in 1821 at the age of 51 was received with shock and grief throughout Europe .
In 1840 , a million people witnessed his remains returning to Paris , where they still reside at Les Invalides .
He was their fourth child and third son .
This was a year after the island was transferred to France by the Republic of Genoa .
In his 20s , he adopted the more French-sounding Napoléon Bonaparte .
-LSB- note 2 -RSB-
Napoleon 's noble , moderately affluent background afforded him greater opportunities to study than were available to a typical Corsican of the time .
He is fairly well acquainted with history and geography ... This boy would make an excellent sailor . ''
-LSB- note 3 -RSB-
Thirty thousand Frenchmen were vomited on to our shores , drowning the throne of liberty in waves of blood .
Such was the odious sight which was the first to strike me . ''
He faced a difficult financial situation and reduced career prospects .
He immediately went on the offensive , hoping to defeat the forces of Piedmont before their Austrian allies could intervene .
The French then focused on the Austrians for the remainder of the war , the highlight of which became the protracted struggle for Mantua .
The Austrians launched a series of offensives against the French to break the siege , but Napoleon defeated every relief effort , scoring notable victories at the battles of Castiglione , Bassano , Arcole , and Rivoli .
The next phase of the campaign featured the French invasion of the Habsburg heartlands .
The Treaty of Leoben , followed by the more comprehensive Treaty of Campo Formio , gave France control of most of northern Italy and the Low Countries , and a secret clause promised the Republic of Venice to Austria .
Bonaparte marched on Venice and forced its surrender , ending 1,100 years of independence .
He also authorized the French to loot treasures such as the Horses of Saint Mark .
Bonaparte could win battles by concealment of troop deployments and concentration of his forces on the ` hinge ' of an enemy 's weakened front .
During the campaign , Bonaparte became increasingly influential in French politics .
He founded two newspapers : one for the troops in his army and another for circulation in France .
This left Barras and his Republican allies in control again but dependent on Bonaparte , who proceeded to peace negotiations with Austria .
He met Talleyrand , France 's new Foreign Minister -- who later served in the same capacity for Emperor Napoleon -- and they began to prepare for an invasion of Britain .
This helped the French practice their defensive tactic for the Battle of the Pyramids , fought on 21 July , about 24 km -LRB- 15 mi -RRB- from the pyramids .
General Bonaparte 's forces of 25,000 roughly equalled those of the Mamluks ' Egyptian cavalry .
The victory boosted the morale of the French army .
His army had succeeded in a temporary increase of French power in Egypt , though it faced repeated uprisings .
Bonaparte discovered that many of the defenders were former prisoners of war , ostensibly on parole , so he ordered the garrison and 1,400 prisoners to be executed by bayonet or drowning to save bullets .
Men , women , and children were robbed and murdered for three days .
He failed to reduce the fortress of Acre , so he marched his army back to Egypt in May .
He also brought out 1,000 wounded men .
Back in Egypt on 25 July , Bonaparte defeated an Ottoman amphibious invasion at Abukir .
Despite the failures in Egypt , Napoleon returned to a hero 's welcome .
The constitution preserved the appearance of a republic but in reality established a dictatorship .
Worried by the democratic forces unleashed by the Revolution , but unwilling to ignore them entirely , Napoleon resorted to regular electoral consultations with the French people on his road to imperial power .
Political observers at the time assumed the eligible French voting public numbered about 5 million people , so the regime artificially doubled the participation rate to indicate popular enthusiasm for the Consulate .
In the first few months of the Consulate , with war in Europe still raging and internal instability still plaguing the country , Napoleon 's grip on power remained very tenuous .
-LSB- note 5 -RSB- After a difficult crossing over the Alps , the French army entered the plains of Northern Italy virtually unopposed .
While one French army approached from the north , the Austrians were busy with another stationed in Genoa , which was besieged by a substantial force .
The battle began favorably for the Austrians as their initial attack surprised the French and gradually drove them back .
Melas concluded that he 'd won the battle and retired to his headquarters around 3 pm , leaving his subordinates in charge of pursuing the French .
However , the French lines never broke during their tactical retreat ; Napoleon constantly rode out among the troops urging them to stand and fight .
Late in the afternoon , a full division under Desaix arrived on the field and dramatically reversed the tide of the battle .
A series of artillery barrages and fortunate cavalry charges managed to decimate the Austrian army , which fled chaotically over the Bormida River back to Alessandria , leaving behind 14,000 casualties .
The following day , the Austrian army agreed to abandon Northern Italy once more with the Convention of Alessandria , which granted them safe passage to friendly soil in exchange for their fortresses throughout the region .
The treaty reaffirmed and expanded earlier French gains at Campo Formio .
Britain now remained the only nation that was still at war with France .
Amiens called for the withdrawal of British troops from recently conquered colonial territories as well as for assurances to curtail the expansionary goals of the French Republic .
With Europe at peace and the economy recovering , Napoleon 's popularity soared to its highest levels under the Consulate , both domestically and abroad .
Whereas the plebiscite two years earlier had brought out 1.5 million people to the polls , the new referendum enticed 3.6 million to go and vote -LRB- 72 % of all eligible voters -RRB- .
His broad powers were spelled out in the new constitution : Article 1 .
After 1802 , he was generally referred to as Napoleon rather than Bonaparte .
Napoleon saw his chance to recuperate the formerly wealthy colony when he signed the Treaty of Amiens .
Under the terms of Amiens , however , Napoleon agreed to appease British demands by not abolishing slavery in any colonies where the 1794 decree had never been implemented .
The resulting Law of 20 May never applied to colonies like Guadeloupe or Guyane , even though rogue generals and other officials used the pretext of peace as an opportunity to reinstate slavery in some of these places .
The Law of 20 May officially restored the slave trade to the Caribbean colonies , not slavery itself .
Although the French managed to capture Toussaint Louverture , the expedition failed when high rates of disease crippled the French army .
In May 1803 , the last 8000 French troops left the island and the slaves proclaimed an independent republic that they called Haïti in 1804 .
Seeing the failure of his colonial efforts , Napoleon decided in 1803 to sell the Louisiana Territory to the United States , instantly doubling the size of the U.S. .
The selling price in the Louisiana Purchase was less than three cents per acre , a total of $ 15 million .
The Duke was quickly executed after a secret military trial , even though he had not been involved in the plot .
Enghien 's execution infuriated royal courts throughout Europe , become one of the contributing political factors for the outbreak of the Napoleonic Wars .
Napoleon entered the ceremony wearing the laurel wreath and kept it on his head throughout the proceedings .
For the official coronation , he raised the Charlemagne crown over his own head in a symbolic gesture , but never placed it on top because he was already wearing the golden wreath .
Instead he placed the crown on Josephine 's head , the event commemorated in the officially sanctioned painting by Jacques-Louis David .
He created eighteen Marshals of the Empire from amongst his top generals to secure the allegiance of the army .
They never invaded , but Napoleon 's troops received careful and invaluable training for future military operations .
At the start , this French army had about 200,000 men organized into seven corps , which were large field units that contained 36 to 40 cannons each and were capable of independent action until other corps could come to the rescue .
A single corps properly situated in a strong defensive position could survive at least a day without support , giving the Grande Armée countless strategic and tactical options on every campaign .
On top of these forces , Napoleon created a cavalry reserve of 22,000 organized into two cuirassier divisions , four mounted dragoon divisions , one division of dismounted dragoons , and one of light cavalry , all supported by 24 artillery pieces .
French Admiral Villeneuve then retreated to Cádiz instead of linking up with French naval forces at Brest for an attack on the English Channel .
By August 1805 , Napoleon had realized that the strategic situation had changed fundamentally .
His basic objective was to destroy the isolated Austrian armies in Southern Germany before their Russian allies could arrive .
Napoleon swung his forces to the southeast and the Grande Armée performed an elaborate wheeling movement that outflanked the Austrian positions .
The Ulm Maneuver completely surprised General Mack , who belatedly understood that his army had been cut off .
After some minor engagements that culminated in the Battle of Ulm , Mack finally surrendered after realizing that there was no way to break out of the French encirclement .
The Ulm Campaign is generally regarded as a strategic masterpiece and was influential in the development of the Schlieffen Plan in the late 19th century .
For the French , this spectacular victory on land was soured by the decisive victory that the Royal Navy attained at the Battle of Trafalgar on 21 October .
After Trafalgar , Britain had total domination of the seas for the duration of the Napoleonic Wars .
At this critical juncture , both Tsar Alexander I and Holy Roman Emperor Francis II decided to engage Napoleon in battle , despite reservations from some of their subordinates .
Napoleon sent his army north in pursuit of the Allies , but then ordered his forces to retreat so that he could feign a grave weakness .
Desperate to lure the Allies into battle , Napoleon gave every indication in the days preceding the engagement that the French army was in a pitiful state , even abandoning the dominant Pratzen Heights near the village of Austerlitz .
A forced march from Vienna by Marshal Davout and his III Corps plugged the gap left by Napoleon just in time .
Meanwhile , the heavy Allied deployment against the French right weakened their center on the Pratzen Heights , which was viciously attacked by the IV Corps of Marshal Soult .
With the Allied center demolished , the French swept through both enemy flanks and sent the Allies fleeing chaotically , capturing thousands of prisoners in the process .
The battle is often seen as a tactical masterpiece because of the near-perfect execution of a calibrated but dangerous plan -- of the same stature as Cannae , the celebrated triumph by Hannibal some 2000 years before .
The treaty confirmed the Austrian loss of lands to France in Italy and Bavaria , and lands in Germany to Napoleon 's German allies .
Napoleon went on to say , `` The battle of Austerlitz is the finest of all I have fought . ''
Frank McLynn suggests that Napoleon was so successful at Austerlitz that he lost touch with reality , and what used to be French foreign policy became a `` personal Napoleonic one '' .
Vincent Cronin disagrees , stating that Napoleon was not overly ambitious for himself , `` he embodied the ambitions of thirty million Frenchmen '' .
He also opted for an alliance with France , calling France `` our sincere and natural ally . ''
That decision brought the Ottoman Empire into a losing war against Russia and Britain .
In the end , Napoleon had made no effective alliances in the Middle East .
The brazen reorganization of German territory by the French risked threatening Prussian influence in the region , if not eliminating it outright .
War fever in Berlin rose steadily throughout the summer of 1806 .
The initial military maneuvers began in September 1806 .
In the bataillon-carré system , the various corps of the Grande Armée would march uniformly together in close supporting distance .
If any single corps was attacked , the others could quickly spring into action and arrive to help .
As in previous campaigns , his fundamental objective was to destroy one opponent before reinforcements from another could tip the balance of the war .
With several major commanders dead or incapacitated , the Prussian king proved incapable of effectively commanding the army , which began to quickly disintegrate .
Historian David Chandler wrote of the Prussian forces : `` Never has the morale of any army been more completely shattered . ''
Despite their overwhelming defeat , the Prussians refused to negotiate with the French until the Russians had an opportunity to enter the fight .
After a period of rest and consolidation on both sides , the war restarted in June with an initial struggle at Heilsberg that proved indecisive .
The scale of their defeat convinced the Russians to make peace with the French .
On 19 June , Czar Alexander sent an envoy to seek an armistice with Napoleon .
The latter assured the envoy that the Vistula River represented the natural borders between French and Russian influence in Europe .
On that basis , the two emperors began peace negotiations at the town of Tilsit after meeting on an iconic raft on the River Niemen .
The very first thing Alexander said to Napoleon was probably well-calibrated : `` I hate the English as much as you do . ''
By contrast , Napoleon dictated very harsh peace terms for Prussia , despite the ceaseless exhortations of Queen Louise .
Prussia 's humiliating treatment at Tilsit caused a deep and bitter antagonism which festered as the Napoleonic era progressed .
Moreover , Alexander 's pretensions at friendship with Napoleon led the latter to seriously misjudge the true intentions of his Russian counterpart , who would violate numerous provisions of the treaty in the next few years .
At first , John VI agreed to close his ports to British trade .
Unhappy with this change of policy by the Portuguese government , Napoleon sent an army to invade Portugal .
Throughout the winter of 1808 , French agents became increasingly involved in Spanish internal affairs , attempting to incite discord between members of the Spanish royal family .
On 16 February 1808 , secret French machinations finally materialized when Napoleon announced that he would intervene to mediate between the rival political factions in the country .
Napoleon appointed his brother , Joseph Bonaparte , as the new King of Spain in the summer of 1808 .
The appointment enraged a heavily religious and conservative Spanish population .
Resistance to French aggression soon spread throughout the country .
The shocking French defeat at the Battle of Bailén in July gave hope to Napoleon 's enemies and partly persuaded the French emperor to intervene in person .
Before going to Iberia , Napoleon decided to address several lingering issues with the Russians .
Napoleon then returned to France and prepared for war .
The Grande Armée , under the Emperor 's personal command , rapidly crossed the Ebro River in November 1808 and inflicted a series of crushing defeats against the Spanish forces .
After clearing the last Spanish force guarding the capital at Somosierra , Napoleon entered Madrid on 4 December with 80,000 troops .
He then unleashed his soldiers against Moore and the British forces .
He never returned to Spain after the 1808 campaign .
Several months after Corunna , the British sent another army to the peninsula under the future Duke of Wellington .
The war then settled into a complex and asymmetric strategic deadlock where all sides struggled to gain the upper hand .
The highlight of the conflict became the brutal guerrilla warfare that engulfed much of the Spanish countryside .
Both sides committed the worst atrocities of the Napoleonic Wars during this phase of the conflict .
The French were never able to concentrate all of their forces effectively , prolonging the war until events elsewhere in Europe finally turned the tide in favor of the Allies .
After four years on the sidelines , Austria sought another war with France to avenge its recent defeats .
Austria could not count on Russian support because the latter was at war with Britain , Sweden , and the Ottoman Empire in 1809 .
Charles pressed the left wing of the French army and hurled his men towards the III Corps of Marshal Davout .
He realigned the axis of his army and marched his soldiers towards the town of Eckmühl .
On 13 May , Vienna fell for the second time in four years , although the war continued since most of the Austrian army had survived the initial engagements in Southern Germany .
Charles kept the bulk of his troops several miles away from the river bank in hopes of concentrating them at the point where Napoleon decided to cross .
By the second day , reinforcements had boosted French numbers up to 70,000 .
The battle was characterized by a vicious back-and-forth struggle for the two villages of Aspern and Essling , the focal points of the French bridgehead .
By the end of the fighting , the French had lost Aspern but still controlled Essling .
A sustained Austrian artillery bombardment eventually convinced Napoleon to withdraw his forces back onto Lobau Island .
It was the first defeat Napoleon suffered in a major set-piece battle , and it caused excitement throughout many parts of Europe because it proved that he could be beaten on the battlefield .
Neither side made much progress on 5 July , but the 6th produced a definitive outcome .
Both sides launched major assaults on their flanks .
Austrian attacks against the French left wing looked dangerous initially , but they were all beaten back .
Meanwhile , a steady French attack against the Austrian left wing eventually compromised the entire position for Charles .
Napoleon finished off the battle with a concentrated central thrust that punctured a hole in the Austrian army and forced Charles to retreat .
Austrian losses were very heavy , reaching well over 40,000 casualties .
The French were too exhausted to pursue the Austrians immediately , but Napoleon eventually caught up with Charles at Znaim and the latter signed an armistice on 12 July .
The main strategic result from the campaign became the delayed political settlement between the French and the Austrians .
Emperor Francis wanted to wait and see how the British performed in their theater before entering into negotiations with Napoleon .
Once it became apparent that the British were going nowhere , the Austrians agreed to peace talks .
Although fighting in Iberia continued , the War of the Fifth Coalition would be the last major conflict on the European continent for the next three years .
Empress Joséphine had still not given birth to a child from Napoleon , who became worried about the future of his empire following his death .
His son never actually ruled the empire , but historians still refer to him as Napoleon II .
By 1811 , however , tensions had increased and Alexander was under pressure from the Russian nobility to break off the alliance .
Napoleon refused to manumit the Russian serfs because of concerns this might provoke a reaction in his army 's rear .
The Russians again avoided battle , although in a few cases this was only achieved because Napoleon uncharacteristically hesitated to attack when the opportunity arose .
Napoleon 's own account was : `` The most terrible of all my battles was the one before Moscow .
The French showed themselves to be worthy of victory , but the Russians showed themselves worthy of being invincible . ''
The Russian army withdrew and retreated past Moscow .
After Battle of Berezina Napoleon succeeded to escape but had to abandon much of the remaining artillery and baggage train .
On 5 December , shortly before arriving in Vilnius , Napoleon left the army in a sledge .
That meant that France could retain control of Belgium , Savoy and the Rhineland -LRB- the west bank of the Rhine River -RRB- , while giving up control of all the rest , including all of Spain and the Netherlands , and most of Italy and Germany .
Metternich 's motivation was to maintain France as a balance against Russian threats , while ending the highly destabilizing series of wars .
Napoleon would remain Emperor , however he rejected the term .
The British wanted Napoleon permanently removed ; they prevailed .
Napoleon adamantly refused .
Alexander told the Sénat that the Allies were fighting against Napoleon , not France , and they were prepared to offer honorable peace terms if Napoleon were removed from power .
On 4 April , led by Ney , they confronted Napoleon .
Napoleon asserted the army would follow him , and Ney replied the army would follow its generals .
While the ordinary soldiers and regimental officers wanted to fight on , without any senior officers or marshals any prospective invasion of Paris would have been impossible .
Bowing to the inevitable , on 4 April Napoleon abdicated in favour of his son , with Marie-Louise as regent .
However , the Allies refused to accept this under prodding from Alexander , who feared that Napoleon might find an excuse to retake the throne .
Napoleon was then forced to announce his unconditional abdication only two days later .
Napoleon attempted suicide with a pill he had carried after nearly being captured by the Russians during the retreat from Moscow .
In the first few months on Elba he created a small navy and army , developed the iron mines , and issued decrees on modern agricultural methods .
Napoleon approached the regiment alone , dismounted his horse and , when he was within gunshot range , shouted to the soldiers , `` Here I am .
Kill your Emperor , if you wish . ''
The two then marched together towards Paris with a growing army .
On March 13 , the powers at the Congress of Vienna declared Napoleon an outlaw .
Four days later , Great Britain , Russia , Austria , and Prussia each pledged to put 150,000 men into the field to end his rule .
Arsenic was used as a poison during the era because it was undetectable when administered over a long period .
Arsenic is a strong preservative , and therefore this supported the poisoning hypothesis .
Forshufvud and Weider observed that Napoleon had attempted to quench abnormal thirst by drinking large amounts of orgeat syrup that contained cyanide compounds in the almonds used for flavouring .
Their hypothesis was that the calomel given to Napoleon became an overdose , which killed him and left extensive tissue damage behind .
There have been modern studies that have supported the original autopsy finding .
According to these researchers , Napoleon 's body was already heavily contaminated with arsenic as a boy , and the high arsenic concentration in his hair was not caused by intentional poisoning ; people were constantly exposed to arsenic from glues and dyes throughout their lives .
-LSB- note 8 -RSB- In his memoirs , Bonaparte 's secretary Bourienne wrote about Napoleon 's religious interests in the same vein .
His religious opportunism is epitomized in his famous quote : `` It is by making myself Catholic that I brought peace to Brittany and Vendée .
It is by making myself Italian that I won minds in Italy .
It is by making myself a Moslem that I established myself in Egypt .
If I governed a nation of Jews , I should reestablish the Temple of Solomon . ''
In a private discussion with general Gourgaud during his exile on Saint Helena , Napoleon expressed materialistic views on the origin of man , -LSB- note 9 -RSB- and doubted the divinity of Jesus , stating that it is absurd to believe that Socrates , Plato , Muslims , and the Anglicans should be damned for not being Roman Catholics .
-LSB- note 10 -RSB- He also said to Gourgaud in 1817 `` I like the Mohammedan religion best .
It has fewer incredible things in it than ours . ''
and that `` the Mohammedan religion is the finest of all . ''
However , Napoleon was anointed by a priest before his death .
The hostility of devout Catholics against the state had now largely been resolved .
It did not restore the vast church lands and endowments that had been seized during the revolution and sold off .
He selected the bishops and supervised church finances .
Similar arrangements were made with the Church in territories controlled by Napoleon , especially Italy and Germany .
Now , Napoleon could win favor with the Catholics while also controlling Rome in a political sense .
They can both contain them and use them . ''
Historians agree that Napoleon 's remarkable personality was one key to his influence .
They emphasize the strength of his ambition that took him from an obscure village to command of most of Europe .
He understood military technology , but was not an innovator in that regard .
He could rapidly dictate a series of complex commands to his subordinates , keeping in mind where major units were expected to be at each future point , and like a chess master , `` seeing '' the best plays moves ahead .
Napoleon maintained strict , efficient work habits , prioritizing what needed to be done .
He kept relays of staff and secretaries at work .
Unlike many generals , Napoleon did not examine history to ask what Hannibal or Alexander or anyone else did in a similar situation .
With crisis after crisis at hand , he rarely rose to the occasion .
Some historians have suggested a physical deterioration , but others note that an impaired Napoleon was still a brilliant general .
In terms of impact on events , it was more than Napoleon 's personality that took effect .
He also unnerved the enemy .
The force of his personality neutralized material difficulties as his soldiers fought with the confidence that with Napoleon in charge they would surely win .
A nursery rhyme warned children that Bonaparte ravenously ate naughty people ; the `` bogeyman '' .
Confusion about his height also results from the difference between the French pouce and British inch -- 2.71 cm and 2.54 cm , respectively .
-LSB- note 11 -RSB-
This was in contrast to the gorgeous and complex uniforms with many decorations of his marshals and those around him .
The sale of the Louisiana Territory to the United States doubled the size of the country and was a major event in American history .
Napoleon participated actively in the sessions of the Council of State that revised the drafts .
The development of the code was a fundamental change in the nature of the civil law legal system with its stress on clearly written and accessible law .
Weapons and other kinds of military technology remained largely static through the Revolutionary and Napoleonic eras , but 18th-century operational mobility underwent significant change .
Napoleon 's rule greatly aided adoption of the new standard not only across France but also across the French sphere of influence .
Other units of measure were rounded in a similar manner .
This however laid the foundations for the definitive introduction of the metric system across Europe in the middle of the 19th century .
Napoleon synthesized the best academic elements from the Ancien Régime , The Enlightenment , and the Revolution , with the aim of establishing a stable , well-educated and prosperous society .
Unlike the system during the Ancien Régime , religious topics did not dominate the curriculum , although they were present in addition to teachers from the clergy .
Napoleon simply hoped to use religion to produce social stability .
He gave special attention to the advanced centers , notably the École Polytechnique , that provided both military expertise and state-of-the-art research in science .
Napoleon made some of the first major efforts at establishing a system of secular and public education .
The system featured scholarships and strict discipline , with the result being a French educational system that outperformed its European counterparts , many of which borrowed from the French system .
The comparison is odious .
On the whole Napoleon was inspired by a noble dream , wholly dissimilar from Hitler 's ... Napoleon left great and lasting testimonies to his genius -- in codes of law and national identities which survive to the present day .
Adolf Hitler left nothing but destruction . ''
The propagandistic rhetoric changed in relation to events and to the atmosphere of Napoleon 's reign , focusing first on his role as a general in the army and identification as a soldier , and moving to his role as emperor and a civil leader .
A byproduct of the French occupation was a strong development in German nationalism .
That territory almost doubled the size of the United States , adding the equivalent of 13 states to the Union .
He called her `` Joséphine '' instead , and she went by this name henceforth .
Bonaparte often sent her love letters while on his campaigns .
He formally adopted her son Eugène and cousin Stéphanie and arranged dynastic marriages for them .
Joséphine had her daughter Hortense marry Napoleon 's brother Louis .
It was launched in 2000 and is said to be the largest transparently operated private foundation in the world .
The primary aims of the foundation are , globally , to enhance healthcare and reduce extreme poverty , and in America , to expand educational opportunities and access to information technology .
Other principal officers include Co-Chair William H. Gates , Sr. and Chief Executive Officer Susan Desmond-Hellmann .
Buffett set conditions so that these contributions do not simply increase the foundation 's endowment , but effectively work as a matching contribution , doubling the Foundation 's annual giving : `` Buffett 's gift came with three conditions for the Gates foundation : Bill or Melinda Gates must be alive and active in its administration ; it must continue to qualify as a charity ; and each year it must give away an amount equal to the previous year 's Berkshire gift , plus an additional amount equal to 5 percent of net assets .
Buffett gave the foundation two years to abide by the third requirement . ''
The Gates Foundation received 5 % -LRB- 500,000 -RRB- of the shares in July 2006 and will receive 5 % of the remaining earmarked shares in the July of each following year -LRB- 475,000 in 2007 , 451,250 in 2008 -RRB- .
This move has been widely applauded by those who are working in the area of capacity building and knowledge sharing .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Its terms have been called the most stringent among similar OA policies .
In response to press criticism , the foundation announced in 2007 a review of its investments to assess social responsibility .
It subsequently cancelled the review and stood by its policy of investing for maximum return , while using voting rights to influence company practices .
This program is tasked to monitor progress towards the Millennium Development Goal -LRB- MDG -RRB- relating to drinking water and sanitation .
This program has generated significant interest of the mainstream media .
However , a 2007 investigation by The Los Angeles Times claimed there are three major unintended consequences with the foundation 's allocation of aid .
This `` brain drain '' adds to the existing doctor shortage and pulls away additional trained staff from children and those suffering from other common killers .
It has also donated to the two largest national teachers ' unions .
This would close the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Trust and effectively end the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation .
The university 's law , medical , and professional schools are located on a 25-acre -LRB- 10 ha -RRB- campus in Chicago 's Streeterville neighborhood .
John Evans , for whom Evanston is named , bought 379 acres -LRB- 153 ha -RRB- of land along Lake Michigan in 1853 , and Philo Judson developed plans for what would become the city of Evanston , Illinois .
Another building , University Hall , was built in 1869 of the same Joliet limestone as the Chicago Water Tower , also built in 1869 , one of the few buildings in the heart of Chicago to survive the Great Chicago Fire of 1871 .
Willard Residential College -LRB- 1938 -RRB- is named in her honor .
Northwestern admitted its first women students in 1869 , and the first woman was graduated in 1874 .
As the university increased in wealth and distinction , and enrollments grew , these professional schools were integrated with the undergraduate college in Evanston ; the result was a modern research university combining professional , graduate , and undergraduate programs , which gave equal weight to teaching and research .
J. Roscoe Miller 's tenure as president from 1949 to 1970 was responsible for the expansion of the Evanston campus , with the construction of the lakefill on Lake Michigan , growth of the faculty and new academic programs , as well as polarizing Vietnam-era student protests .
Relations between Evanston and Northwestern were strained throughout much of the post-war era because of episodes of disruptive student activism , disputes over municipal zoning , building codes , and law enforcement , as well as restrictions on the sale of alcohol near campus until 1972 .
Northwestern 's exemption from state and municipal property tax obligations under its original charter has historically been a source of town and gown tension .
As admissions to colleges and universities grew increasingly competitive in the 1990s and 2000s , President Henry S. Bienen 's tenure saw a notable increase in the number and quality of undergraduate applicants , continued expansion of the facilities and faculty , and renewed athletic competitiveness .
Among some of the buildings located on these broad new acres are University Library , Norris University Center -LRB- the student union -RRB- , and Pick-Staiger Concert Hall .
The Evanston Davis Street Metra station serves the Northwestern campus in downtown Evanston and the Evanston Central Street Metra station is near Ryan Field .
Pace Suburban Bus Service and the CTA have several bus routes that run through or near the Evanston campus .
Founded at various times in the university 's history , the professional schools originally were scattered throughout Chicago .
The building would become the first university skyscraper in the United States .
In addition to the Ward Building , Rogers designed Wieboldt Hall to house facilities for the School of Commerce and Levy Mayer Hall to house the School of Law .
The new campus comprising these three new buildings was dedicated during a two-day ceremony in June 1927 .
The Chicago campus continued to expand with the addition of Thorne Hall in 1931 and Abbott Hall in 1939 .
In October 2013 , Northwestern began the demolition of the architecturally significant Prentice Women 's Hospital .
Eric G. Neilson , dean of the medical school , penned an op-ed that equated retaining the building with loss of life .
In Fall 2008 , Northwestern opened a campus in Education City , Doha , Qatar , joining five other American universities : Carnegie Mellon University , Cornell University , Georgetown University , Texas A&M University , and Virginia Commonwealth University .
The university matches 74 million kilowatt hours -LRB- kWh -RRB- of its annual energy use with Green-e Certified Renewable Energy Certificates -LRB- RECs -RRB- .
The Initiative for Sustainability and Energy at Northwestern -LRB- ISEN -RRB- , supporting research , teaching and outreach in these themes , was launched in 2008 .
Silverman Hall on the Evanston campus was awarded Gold LEED Certification in 2010 ; Wieboldt Hall on the Chicago campus was awarded Gold LEED Certification in 2007 , and the Ford Motor Company Engineering Design Center on the Evanston campus was awarded Silver LEED Certification in 2006 .
The plan not only emphasizes the sustainable construction of buildings , but also discusses improving transportation by optimizing pedestrian and bicycle access .
Northwestern has had a comprehensive recycling program in place since 1990 .
The president has a staff of vice presidents , directors , and other assistants for administrative , financial , faculty , and student matters .
Northwestern is a large , residential research university .
Northwestern offers honors , accelerated , and joint degree programs in medicine , science , mathematics , engineering , and journalism .
The comprehensive doctoral graduate program has high coexistence with undergraduate programs .
This included $ 265 million in institutional funds , with the remainder coming from federal and state governments and private organizations and individuals .
Northwestern scholarship programs for undergraduate students support needy students from a variety of income and backgrounds .
The five most commonly awarded undergraduate degrees are in economics , journalism , communication studies , psychology , and political science .
While professional students are affiliated with their respective schools , the School of Professional Studies offers master 's and bachelor 's degree , and certificate programs tailored to the professional studies .
With 2,446 students enrolled in science , engineering , and health fields , the largest graduate programs by enrollment include chemistry , integrated biology , material sciences , electrical and computer engineering , neuroscience , and economics .
The Kellogg School of Management 's MBA , the School of Law 's JD , and the Feinberg School of Medicine 's MD are the three largest professional degree programs by enrollment .
The University of Chicago , Northeastern Illinois University , the School of the Art Institute , DePaul University and Loyola University are also part of the Star Scholars partnership .
The Mary and Leigh Block Museum of Art is a major art museum in Chicago , containing more than 4,000 works in its permanent collection as well as dedicating a third of its space to temporary and traveling exhibitions .
Northwestern supports nearly 1,500 research laboratories across two campuses , predominately in the medical and biological sciences .
INVO has been involved in creating a number of centers , including the Center for Developmental Therapeutics -LRB- CDT -RRB- and the Center for Device Development -LRB- CD2 -RRB- .
It has also helped form over 50 Northwestern startup companies based on Northwestern technologies .
The undergraduates have a number of traditions : Painting The Rock -LRB- originally a fountain donated by the Class of 1902 -RRB- is a way to advertise , for example , campus organizations , events in Greek life , student groups , and university-wide events .
There are traditions long associated with football games .
Whereas formerly the Clock Tower was lighted only for football victories , wins for men 's basketball and women 's lacrosse now merit commemoration as well ; important victories in other sports may also prompt an empurpling .
Children 's theater is represented on campus by Griffin 's Tale and Purple Crayon Players .
Many Northwestern alumni have used these productions as stepping stones to successful television and film careers .
Many students are involved in community service in one form or another .
NCDC 's work is to connect hundreds of student volunteers to some twenty volunteer sites in Evanston and Chicago throughout the year .
Many students have assisted with the Special Olympics and have taken alternative spring break trips to hundreds of service sites across the United States .
Several internationally recognized non-profit organizations have originated at Northwestern including the World Health Imaging , Informatics and Telemedicine Alliance , a spin-off from an engineering student 's honors thesis .
Northwestern has several housing options , including both traditional residence halls and residential colleges which gather together students who have a particular intellectual interest in common .
Although it serves the Northwestern community , the Daily has no business ties to the university , being supported wholly by advertisers .
North by Northwestern is an online undergraduate magazine , having been established in September 2006 by students at the Medill School of Journalism .
Published on weekdays , it consists of updates on news stories and special events inserted throughout the day and on weekends .
North by Northwestern also publishes a quarterly print magazine .
First published in 1885 , the yearbook is an epitome of that year 's events at Northwestern .
Published by Students Publishing Company and edited by Northwestern students , it is distributed in late May .
Founded in 2009 , The Flipside publishes a weekly issue both in print and online .
Helicon is the university 's undergraduate literary magazine .
Started in 1979 , it is published twice a year , a web issue in the Winter , and a print issue with a web complement in the Spring .
The Protest is Northwestern 's quarterly social justice magazine .
The Northwestern division of Student Multicultural Affairs also supports publications such as NUAsian , a magazine and blog about Asian and Asian-American culture and the issues facing Asians and Asian-Americans , Ahora , a magazine about Hispanic and Latino/a culture and campus life , BlackBoard Magazine about African-American life , and Al Bayan published by the Northwestern Muslim-cultural Student Association .
The Law Review recently extended its presence onto the web , and now publishes scholarly pieces weekly on the Colloquy .
Its Bluebook abbreviation is Nw .
J. Tech .
& Intell .
Prop .
The current editor-in-chief is Aisha Lavinier .
The journal 's mission is to publish interdisciplinary legal research , drawing from fields such as history , literature , economics , philosophy , and art .
Founded in 2008 , the journal features articles by professors , law students , practitioners , and undergraduates .
The publication is well known among students for its interviews of prominent campus figures , its `` Freshman Guide '' , its live-tweeting coverage of football games , and its satiric campaign in autumn 2012 to end the Vanderbilt University football team 's clubbing of baby seals .
In the 2010 -- 11 school year , the Wildcats had one national championship , 12 teams in postseason play , 20 All-Americans , two CoSIDA Academic All-American selections , 8 CoSIDA Academic All0District selections , 1 conference Coach of the Year and Player of the Year , 53 All-Conference and a record 201 Academic All-Big Ten athletes .
The name Wildcats was bestowed upon the university in 1924 by Wallace Abbey , a writer for the Chicago Daily Tribune who wrote that even in a loss to the University of Chicago , `` Football players had not come down from Evanston ; wildcats would be a name better suited to -LSB- Coach Glenn -RSB- Thistletwaite 's boys . ''
The name was so popular that university board members made `` wildcats '' the official nickname just months later .
Willie the Wildcat made his debut in 1933 first as a logo , and then in three dimensions in 1947 , when members of the Alpha Delta fraternity dressed as wildcats during a Homecoming Parade .
The Northwestern University Marching Band -LRB- NUMB -RRB- performs at all home football games and leads cheers in the student section and performs the Alma Mater at the end of the game .
In August 2001 , Rashidi Wheeler , a senior safety , collapsed and died during practice from an asthma attack .
Northwestern has roughly 225,000 alumni in all branches of business , government , law , science , education , medicine , media , and the performing arts .
Northwestern alumnus David J. Skorton currently serves as president of Cornell University .
Rahm Emanuel , the mayor of Chicago and former White House Chief of Staff , earned a Masters in Speech and Communication in 1985 .
Alumni who have made their mark on film and television include Ann-Margret , Warren Beatty , Jodie Markell , Paul Lynde , David Schwimmer , Anne Dudek , Zach Braff , Zooey Deschanel , Marg Helgenberger , Julia Louis-Dreyfus , Jerry Orbach , Jennifer Jones , Megan Mullally , John Cameron Mitchell , Dermot Mulroney , Charlton Heston , Richard Kind , Ana Gasteyer , Brad Hall , Shelley Long , William Daniels , Cloris Leachman , Bonnie Bartlett , Paula Prentiss , Richard Benjamin , Laura Innes , Charles Busch , Stephanie March , Tony Roberts , Jeri Ryan , Kimberly Williams-Paisley , McLean Stevenson , Tony Randall , Charlotte Rae , Paul Lynde , Patricia Neal , Nancy Dussault , Robert Reed , Mara Brock Akil , Greg Berlanti , Bill Nuss , Dusty Kay , Dan Shor , Seth Meyers , Frank DeCaro , Zach Gilford , Nicole Sullivan , Stephen Colbert , Sandra Seacat and Garry Marshall .
Directors who were graduated from Northwestern include Gerald Freedman , Stuart Hagmann , Marshall W. Mason , and Mary Zimmerman .
Alumni such as Sheldon Harnick , Stephanie D'Abruzzo , Heather Headley , Kristen Schaal , Lily Rabe , and Walter Kerr have distinguished themselves on Broadway , as has designer Bob Mackie .
Tam Spiva wrote scripts for The Brady Bunch and Gentle Ben .
In New York , Los Angeles , and Chicago , the number of Northwestern alumni involved in theater , film , and television is so large that a perception has formed that there 's such a thing as a `` Northwestern mafia . ''
The bestselling author of the A Song of Ice and Fire series , George R. R. Martin , earned a B.S. and M.S. from Medill .
The variety is also known by other terms such as the more general Min Nan -LRB- traditional Chinese : 閩南語 , 閩南話 ; simplified Chinese : 闽南语 , 闽南话 ; pinyin : Mǐnnányǔ , Mǐnnánhuà ; Pe̍h - ōe-jī : Bân-lâm-gí , Bân-lâm-oē -RRB- or Southern Min , and Fulaohua -LRB- traditional Chinese : 福佬話 ; simplified Chinese : 福佬话 ; pinyin : Fúlǎohuà ; Pe̍h - ōe-jī : Hō-ló-oē -RRB- .
There are many Hokkien speakers among overseas Chinese in Southeast Asia as well as in the United States .
Many of the Hokkien dialects of this region are highly similar to Taiwanese and Amoy .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Northerners began to enter into Fujian region , causing the region to incorporate parts of northern Chinese dialects .
This then gradually evolved into the Quanzhou dialect .
They brought the Middle Chinese phonology commonly spoken in Northern China into Zhangzhou .
This then gradually evolved into the Zhangzhou dialect .
It is at this time when a need for a common language arose .
The Quanzhou and Zhangzhou varieties are similar in many ways -LRB- as can be seen from the common place of Henan Luoyang where they originated -RRB- , but due to differences in accents , communication can be a problem .
Quanzhou businessmen considered their speech to be the prestige accent and considered Zhangzhou 's to be a village dialect .
Over the centuries , dialect leveling occurred and the two speeches mixed to produce the Amoy dialect .
These include the retention of the / t / initial , which is now / tʂ / -LRB- Pinyin ` zh ' -RRB- in Mandarin -LRB- e.g. ` bamboo ' 竹 is tik , but zhú in Mandarin -RRB- , having disappeared before the 6th century in other Chinese varieties .
Tone sandhi is extensive .
Many dialects have an additional phonemic tone -LRB- `` tone 9 '' according to the traditional reckoning -RRB- , used only in special or foreign loan words .
There are minor variations in pronunciation and vocabulary between Quanzhou and Zhangzhou dialects .
The grammar is generally the same .
Additionally , extensive contact with the Japanese language has left a legacy of Japanese loanwords in Taiwanese Hokkien .
Instead , these concepts are expressed through adverbs , aspect markers , and grammatical particles , or are deduced from the context .
Literary readings are more similar to the pronunciations of the Tang standard of Middle Chinese than their colloquial equivalents .
The same may be said of Hokkien as well , since some lexical meaning evolved in step with Mandarin while others are wholly innovative developments .
From mid-19th century onwards , Xiamen slowly developed to become the political and economical center of the Hokkien-speaking region in China .
This caused Amoy dialect to gradually replace the position of dialect variants from Quanzhou and Zhangzhou .
In the 1940s and 1950s , Taiwan also held Amoy Hokkien as its standard and tended to incline itself towards Amoy dialect .
The mother tongue movement in Taiwan even influenced Xiamen -LRB- Amoy -RRB- to the point that in 2010 , Xiamen also began to implement the teaching of Hokkien dialect in its schools .
A number of universities in Taiwan also offer Hokkien degree courses for training Hokkien-fluent talents to work for the Hokkien media industry and education .
Taiwan also has its own Hokkien literary and cultural circles whereby Hokkien poets and writers compose poetry or literature in Hokkien on a regular basis .
Examples include `` beautiful '' -LRB- 美 bí is the literary form -RRB- , whose vernacular morpheme suí is represented by characters like 媠 -LRB- an obsolete character -RRB- , 婎 -LRB- a vernacular reading of this character -RRB- and even 水 -LRB- transliteration of the sound suí -RRB- , or `` tall '' -LRB- 高 ko is the literary form -RRB- , whose morpheme kôan is 懸 .
Common grammatical particles are not exempt ; the negation particle m̄ -LRB- not -RRB- is variously represented by 毋 , 呣 or 唔 , among others .
In addition , some characters have multiple and unrelated pronunciations , adapted to represent Hokkien words .
For example , the Hokkien word bah -LRB- `` meat '' -RRB- has been reduced to the character 肉 , which has etymologically unrelated colloquial and literary readings -LRB- he̍k and jio̍k , respectively -RRB- .
Another case is the word ` to eat , ' chia̍h , which is often transcribed in Taiwanese newspapers and media as 呷 -LRB- a Mandarin transliteration , xiā , to approximate the Hokkien term -RRB- , even though its recommended character in dictionaries is 食 .
The use of a mixed script of Han characters and Latin letters is also seen , though remains uncommon .
Other Latin-based alphabets also exist .
Xiamen University has also developed an alphabet based on Pinyin , which has been published in a dictionary called the Minnan Fangyan-Putonghua Cidian -LRB- 閩南方言普通話詞典 -RRB- and a language teaching book , which is used to teach the language to foreigners and Chinese non-speakers .
It is known as Pumindian .
Prior to June 2004 , the vowel akin to but more open than o , written with a dot above right , was not encoded .
The usual workaround was to use the -LRB- stand-alone ; spacing -RRB- character Interpunct -LRB- U +00 B7 , · -RRB- or less commonly the combining character dot above -LRB- U +0307 -RRB- .
As these are far from ideal , since 1997 proposals have been submitted to the ISO/IEC working group in charge of ISO/IEC 10646 -- namely , ISO/IEC JTC1/SC2/WG2 -- to encode a new combining character dot above right .
This is now officially assigned to U +0358 -LRB- see documents N1593 , N2507 , N2628 , N2699 , and N2713 -RRB- .
Font support is expected to follow .
By 2014 , is also regarded as the fifth most gay-friendly major city in the world , first in Latin America .
After this conflict , the governor of Montevideo Francisco Javier de Elío opposed the new viceroy Santiago de Liniers , and created a government Junta when the Peninsular War started in Spain , in defiance of Liniers .
In 1811 , the forces deployed by the Junta Grande of Buenos Aires and the gaucho forces led by Artigas started a siege of Montevideo , which had refused to obey the directives of the new authorities of the May Revolution .
The siege was lifted at the end of that year , when the military situation started deteriorating in the Upper Peru region .
In 1829 , the demolition of the city 's fortifications began and plans were made for an extension beyond the Ciudad Vieja , referred to as the `` Ciudad Nueva '' -LRB- `` new city '' -RRB- .
Urban expansion , however , moved very slowly because of the events that followed .
In 1838 , Oribe was forced to resign the presidency ; he established a rebel army and began a long civil war , the Guerra Grande , which lasted until 1851 .
Oribe , with the support of the then conservative Governor of Buenos Aires Province Juan Manuel de Rosas , besieged the Colorados in Montevideo , where the latter were supported by the French Legion , the Italian Legion , the Basque Legion and battalions from Brazil .
The fighting , however , resumed in 1855 , when the Blancos came to power , which they maintained until 1865 .
Thereafter , the Colorado Party regained power , which they retained until past the middle of the 20th century .
After the end of hostilities , a period of growth and expansion started for the city .
By Decree , on December 1861 the areas of Aguada and Cordón were incorporated to the growing Ciudad Nueva -LRB- New City -RRB- .
The statue of Peace , La Paz , was erected on a column in Plaza Cagancha and the building of the Postal Service as well as the bridge of Paso Molino were inaugurated in 1867 .
In the same year , the Mercado del Puerto was inaugurated .
During the same year and the next , the neighbourhoods Colón , Nuevo París and La Comercial were founded .
The famous to our days Sunday market of Tristán Narvaja Street was established in Cordón in 1870 .
Public water supply was established in 1871 .
It was renamed to Artigas Boulevard -LRB- its current name -RRB- in 1885 .
By Decree , on 8 January 1881 , the area Los Pocitos was incorporated to the Novísima Ciudad -LRB- Most New City -RRB- .
The new building of the School of Arts and Trades , as well as Zabala Square in Ciudad Vieja were inaugurated in 1890 , followed by the Italian Hospital in 1891 .
In the same year , the village of Peñarol was founded .
Other neighbourhoods that were founded were Belgrano and Belvedere in 1892 , Jacinto Vera in 1895 and Trouville in 1897 .
In that decade the city expanded quickly : new neighbourhoods were created and many separate settlements were annexed to the city , among which were the Villa del Cerro , Pocitos , the Prado and Villa Colón .
To avoid risking the crew in what he thought would be a losing battle , Captain Hans Langsdorff scuttled the ship on 17 December .
Langsdorff committed suicide two days later .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The eagle figurehead of the Graf Spee was salvaged on 10 February 2006 ; to protect the feelings of those still sensitive to Nazi Germany , the swastika on the figurehead was covered as it was pulled from the water .
To the city 's north and east is Canelones Department , with the stream of Carrasco forming the eastern natural border .
The coastline forming the city 's southern border is interspersed with rocky protrusions and sandy beaches .
Various streams criss-cross the town and empty into the Bay of Montevideo .
The coastline and rivers are heavily polluted and of high salinity .
Its highest elevations are two hills : the Cerro de Montevideo and the Cerro de la Victoria , with the highest point , the peak of Cerro de Montevideo , crowned by a fortress , the Fortaleza del Cerro at a height of 134 metres -LRB- 440 ft -RRB- .
Closest cities by road are Las Piedras to the north and the so-called Ciudad de la Costa -LRB- a conglomeration of coastal towns -RRB- to the east , both in the range of 20 to 25 kilometres -LRB- 16 mi -RRB- from the city center .
The 1952 Constitution again decided to abolish the municipalities ; it came into effect in February 1955 .
Municipalities were replaced by departmental councils , which consisted of a collegiate executive board with 7 members from Montevideo and 5 from the interior region .
However , municipalities were revived under the 1967 Constitution and have operated continuously since that time .
This division , according to the Municipality of Montevideo , `` aims to advance political and administrative decentralization in the department of Montevideo , with the aim of deepening the democratic participation of citizens in governance . ''
Of much greater importance is the division of the city into 62 barrios : neighbourhoods or wards .
Others grew up around certain industrial sites , including the salt-curing works of Villa del Cerro and the tanneries in Nuevo París .
Each barrio has its own identity , geographic location and socio-cultural activities .
This area contains most important buildings of the colonial era and early decades of independence .
In the course of the 20th century the city continued to receive large numbers of European immigrants , especially Spanish and Italian , followed by French , Germans or Dutch , English or Irish , Polish , Greek , Hungarians , Russians , Croats , Lebanese , Armenians , and Jews of various origins .
The last wave of immigrants occurred between 1945 and 1955 .
The population had declined since the previous census carried out in 1996 , with an average annual growth rate of − 1.5 per thousand .
Continual decline has been documented since the census period of 1975 -- 1985 , which showed a rate of − 5.6 per thousand .
The decrease is due in large part to lowered fertility , partly offset by mortality , and to a smaller degree in migration .
The birth rate declined by 19 % from 1996 -LRB- 17 per thousand -RRB- to 2004 -LRB- 13.8 per thousand -RRB- .
Similarly , the total fertility rate -LRB- TFR -RRB- declined from 2.24 in 1996 to 1.79 in 2004 .
However , mortality continued to fall with life expectancy at birth for both sexes increasing by 1.73 years .
Most of the largest and wealthiest businesses in Uruguay have their headquarters in the city .
These companies operate under public law , using a legal entity defined in the Uruguayan Constitution called Ente Autonomo -LRB- `` autonomous entity '' -RRB- .
The government also owns part of other companies operating under private law , such as those owned wholly or partially by the CND -LRB- National Development Corporation -RRB- .
Almost 20 private banks , most of them branches of international banks , operate in the country -LRB- Banco Santander , ABN AMRO , Citibank , Lloyds TSB , among others -RRB- .
There are also a myriad of brokers and financial-services bureaus , among them Ficus Capital , Galfin Sociedad de Bolsa , Europa Sociedad de Bolsa , Darío Cukier , GBU , Hordeñana & Asociados Sociedad de Bolsa , etc. .
Apart from being a shopping street , the avenue is noted for its Art Deco buildings , three important public squares , the Gaucho Museum , the Palacio Municipal and many other sights .
The avenue leads to the Obelisk of Montevideo ; beyond that is Parque Batlle , which along with the Parque Prado is another important tourist destination .
Along the coast , the Fortaleza del Cerro , the Rambla -LRB- the coastal avenue -RRB- , 13 kilometres -LRB- 8.1 mi -RRB- of sandy beaches , and Punta Gorda attract many tourists , as do the Barrio Sur and Palermo barrios .
Montevideo has over 50 hotels , mostly located within the downtown area or along the beachfront of the Rambla de Montevideo .
Many of the hotels are in the modern , western style , such as the Sheraton Montevideo , the Radisson Montevideo Victoria Plaza Hotel located on the central Plaza Independencia , and the Plaza Fuerte Hotel on the waterfront .
The city has become the principal centre of business and real estate , including many expensive buildings and modern towers for residences and offices , surrounded by extensive green spaces .
In 1994 , with building of three more shopping complexes such as the Shopping Tres Cruces , Portones Shopping , and Punta Carretas Shopping , the business map of the city changed dramatically .
The creation of shopping complexes brought a major change in the habits of the people of Montevideo .
Global firms such as McDonald 's and Burger King etc. are firmly established in Montevideo .
The Along with the Telecommunications Tower , the Palacio Salvo dominates the skyline of the Bay of Montevideo .
The building façades in the Old Town reflect the city 's extensive European immigration , displaying the influence of old European architecture .
Notable government buildings include the Legislative Palace , the City Hall , Estévez Palace and the Executive Tower .
The most notable sports stadium is the Estadio Centenario within Parque Batlle .
Parque Batlle , Parque Rodó and Parque Prado are Montevideo 's three great parks .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The complex is composed of three towers , two three-story buildings called World Trade Center Plaza and World Trade Center Avenue and a large central square called Towers Square .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- It has 22 floors and 17,100 square metres of space .
That same year the avenue and the auditorium were raised .
It is located between the avenues Luis Alberto de Herrera and 26 de Marzo and has 19 floors and 27,000 square metres -LRB- 290,000 sq ft -RRB- of space .
The 6,300-square-metre -LRB- 68,000 sq ft -RRB- -LSB- citation needed -RSB- World Trade Center Plaza is designed to be a centre of gastronomy opposite Towers Square and Bonavita St. Among the establishments on the plaza are Burger King , Walrus , Bamboo , Asia de Cuba , Gardenia Mvd , and La Claraboya Cafe .
This square connects the different buildings and towers which comprise the WTC Complex and it is the main access to the complex .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The plaza is also the site of the offices of the President of Uruguay -LRB- both the Estévez Palace and the Executive Tower -RRB- .
The Artigas Mausoleum is located at the centre of the plaza .
Statues include that of José Gervasio Artigas , hero of Uruguay 's independence movement ; an honour guard keeps vigil at the Mausoleum .
Palanti , an Italian immigrant living in Buenos Aires , used a similar design for his Palacio Barolo in Buenos Aires , Argentina .
It is built on the former site of the Confitería La Giralda , renowned for being where Gerardo Matos Rodríguez wrote his tango `` La Cumparsita '' -LRB- 1917 . -RRB-
Palacio Salvo was originally intended to function as a hotel but is now a mixture of offices and private residences .
During the first decades of Uruguayan independence this square was the main hub of city life .
The cathedral is the burial place of Fructuoso Rivera , Juan Antonio Lavalleja and Venancio Flores .
On its south side , Palacio Taranco , once residence of the Ortiz Taranco brothers , is now the Museum of Decorative Arts .
A few blocks northwest of Plaza Zabala is the Mercado del Puerto , another major tourist destination .
Along with Parque Prado and Parque Rodó it is one of three large parks that dominate Montevideo .
The park and surrounding area constitute one of the 62 neighbourhoods -LRB- barrios -RRB- of the city .
The barrio of Parque Batlle is one of seven coastal barrios , the others being Buceo , Carrasco , Malvin , Pocitos , Punta Carretas , and Punta Gorda .
It has a high population density and most of its households are of medium-high - or high-income .
On their grounds , they started a private collection of animals that became a zoological garden and was passed to the city in 1919 ; in 1955 the Planetarium of Montevideo was built within its premises .
French landscape architect , Carlos Thays , began the plantings in 1911 .
In 1918 , the park was named Parque de los Aliados , following the victory of the Allies of World War I. On 5 May 1930 , after significant expansion , it was again renamed as Parque Batlle y Ordóñez , in memory of the prominent politician and president , who had died in 1929 .
The park was designated a National Historic Monument Park in 1975 .
As of 2010 -LSB- update -RSB- , the park covers an area of 60 hectares -LRB- 150 acres -RRB- and is considered the `` lung '' of the Montevideo city due to the large variety of trees planted here .
Apart from the main park area which is delimited by Sarmiento Avenue to the south , Parque Rodó includes an amusement park ; the Estadio Luis Franzini , belonging to Defensor Sporting ; the front lawn of the Faculty of Engineering and a strip west of the Club de Golf de Punta Carretas that includes the Canteras -LRB- `` quarry '' -RRB- del Parque Rodó , the Teatro de Verano -LRB- `` summer theatre '' -RRB- and the Lago -LRB- `` lake '' -RRB- del Parque Rodó .
An area to its west is used as an open-air exhibition of photography .
West of the park , across the coastal avenue Rambla Presidente Wilson , stretches Ramirez Beach .
Directly west of the main park are , and belonging to Parque Rodó barrio , is the former Parque Hotel , now called Edifício Mercosur , seat of the parliament of the members countries of the Mercosur .
During the guerilla war the Tupamaros frequently attacked buildings in this area , including the old hotel .
These fortifications were planned within the River Plate estuary at Colonia del Sacramento .
However , this plan came to fruition only in November 1723 , when Captain Manuel Henriques de Noronha reached the shores of Montevideo with soldiers , guns and colonists on his warship Nossa Senhora de Oliveara .
They built a small square fortification .
However , under siege from forces from Buenos Aires , the Portuguese withdrew from Montevideo Bay in January 1724 , after signing an agreement with the Spaniards .
An observation post at this location was first built by the Spanish in the late 18th century .
It has been involved in many historical developments and has been repeatedly taken over by various sides .
In 1907 , the old beacon was replaced with a stronger electric one .
It has been a National Monument since 1931 and has housed a military museum since 1916 .
Today it is one of the tourist attractions of Montevideo .
As an integral part of Montevidean identity , the Rambla has been included by Uruguay in the Indicative List of World Heritage sites , though it has not received this status .
Previously , the entire Rambla was called Rambla Naciones Unidas -LRB- `` United Nations '' -RRB- , but in recent times different names have been given to specific parts of it .
It is the burial place of many of the most famous Uruguayans , such as Eduardo Acevedo , Delmira Agustini , Luis Batlle Berres , José Batlle y Ordóñez , Juan Manuel Blanes , François Ducasse , father of Comte de Lautréamont -LRB- Isidore Ducasse -RRB- , Luis Alberto de Herrera , Benito Nardone , José Enrique Rodó , and Juan Zorrilla de San Martín .
The other large cemeteries are the Cementerio del Buceo , Cementerio del Cerro , and Cementerio Paso Molino .
Many noblemen and eminent persons are buried there .
A section of the cemetery , known as British Cemetery Montevideo Soldiers and Sailors , contains the graves of quite a number of sailors of different nationalities , although the majority are of British descent .
One United States Marine , Henry de Costa , is buried here .
Montevideo has a very rich architectural heritage and an impressive number of writers , artists , and musicians .
The city is also the centre of the cinema of Uruguay , which includes commercial , documentary and experimental films .
The theatre of Uruguay is admired inside and outside Uruguayan borders .
There are several notable theatrical companies and thousands of professional actors and amateurs .
Montevideo playwrights produce dozens of works each year ; of major note are Mauricio Rosencof , Ana Magnabosco and Ricardo Prieto .
In 1816 its stock was 5,000 volumes .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The current building of the National Library of Uruguay -LRB- Biblioteca Pública de Uruguay -RRB- was designed by Luis Crespi in the Neoclassical style and occupies an area of 4,000 square metres -LRB- 43,000 sq ft -RRB- .
Construction began in 1926 and it was finally inaugurated in 1964 .
Its current collection amounts to roughly 900,000 volumes .
Many notable songs originated in Montevideo including `` El Tango supremo '' , La Cumparsita '' , La Milonga '' , `` La Puñalada '' and `` Desde el Alma '' , composed by notable Montevideo musicians such as Gerardo Matos Rodríguez , Pintín Castellanos and Rosita Melo .
Tango is deeply ingrained in the cultural life of the city and is the theme for many of the bars and restaurants in the city .
The city is also home to the Montevideo Jazz Festival and has the Bancaria Jazz Club bar catering for jazz enthusiasts .
This resulted in the military junta coming down heavily on artists by closing the Fine Art Institute and carting away all the presses and other studio equipment .
Consequently , the learning of fine arts was only in private studios run by people who had been let out of jail , in works of printing and on paper and also painting and sculpture .
It resumed much later .
In 1958 , the Municipal Historic Museum and Archive was inaugurated here .
It features three permanent city museum exhibitions , as well as temporary art exhibitions , cultural events , seminars , symposiums and forums .
It passed to the city from the heirs of the Tarancos in 1943 , along with its precious collection of Uruguayan furniture and draperies and was deemed by the city as an ideal place for a museum ; in 1972 it became the Museum of Decorative Arts of Montevideo and in 1975 it became a National Heritage Site .
The Decorative Arts Museum has an important collection of European paintings and decorative arts , ancient Greek and Roman art and Islamic ceramics of the 10th -- 18th century from the area of present-day Iran .
The palace is often used as a meeting place by the Uruguayan government .
It exhibits artifacts related to the history of Uruguay .
In a process begun in 1998 , the National Museum of Natural History -LRB- 1837 -RRB- and the National Museum of Anthropology -LRB- 1981 -RRB- , merged in 2001 , becoming the National Museum of Natural History and Anthropology .
In July 2009 , the two institutions again became independent .
She also set up the García Torres Foundation , a private non-profit organization that organizes the paintings , drawings , original writings , archives , objects and furniture designed by the painter as well as the photographs , magazines and publications related to him .
There are several other important art museums in Montevideo .
In back of the museum is a beautiful Japanese Garden with a pond where there are over a hundred carp .
The Museo Municipal Precolombino y Colonial , in the Ciudad Vieja , has preserved collections of the archaeological finds from excavations carried out by Uruguayan archaeologist Antonio Taddei .
These antiquaries are exhibits of pre-Columbian art of Latin America , painting and sculpture from the 17th and 18th century mostly from Mexico , Peru and Brazil .
The Museo de Arte Contempo has small but impressive exhibits of modern Uruguayan painting and sculpture .
There are also other types of museums in the city .
The Museo del Automóvil , belonging to the Automobile Club of Uruguay , has a rich collection of vintage cars which includes a 1910 Hupmobile .
The Castillo Pittamiglio , with an unusual façade , highlights the eccentric legacy of Humberto Pittamiglio , local alchemist and architect .
It is generally circular , with a small cut in the centre for cooking , and is made from wheat flour , yeast , water and sugar or salt .
Beef is very important in Uruguayan cuisine and an essential part of many dishes .
Montevideo has a variety of restaurants , from traditional Uruguayan cuisine to Japanese cuisine such as sushi .
Arcadia is set in a classic Italian-inspired dining room and serves lavish dishes such as terrine of pheasant marinated in cognac , grilled lamb glazed with mint and garlic , and duck confit on thin strudel pastry with red cabbage .
El Fogon is more popular with the late-night diners of the city .
Its interior is brightly lit and the walls covered with big mirrors .
Officially a barbecue and seafood restaurant , it serves grilled meat dishes , as well as salmon , shrimp and calamari .
Also of note is the Cru .
Numerous restaurants are located along the Rambla of Montevideo .
As the capital of Uruguay , Montevideo is home to a number of festivals and carnivals including a Gaucho festival when people ride through the streets on horseback in traditional gaucho gear .
Officially , the public holiday lasts for two days on Carnival Monday and Shrove Tuesday preceding Ash Wednesday , but due to the prominence of the festival , most shops and businesses close for the entire week .
During carnival there are many open-air stage performances and competitions and the streets and houses are vibrantly decorated .
Due to the scale of the festival , preparation begins as early as December with an election of the `` zonal beauty queens '' to appear in the carnival .
The vicariate was promoted to the Diocese of Montevideo on 13 July 1878 .
Pope Leo XIII elevated it to the rank of a metropolitan archdiocese on 14 April 1897 .
The new archdiocese became the Metropolitan of the suffragan sees of Canelones , Florida , Maldonado -- Punta del Este , Melo , Mercedes , Minas , Salto , San José de Mayo , Tacuarembó .
The church was originally part of the Order of Friars Minor Capuchin , but is presently in the parish of the Ecclesiastic Curia .
Its location is at the corner of Solano García and José Ellauri .
It has a nave and aisles .
The roof has many vaults .
During the construction of the Punta Carretas Shopping complex , major cracks developed in the structure of the church as a result of differential foundation settlement .
The university houses 14 faculties -LRB- departments -RRB- and various institutes and schools .
Many eminent Uruguayans have graduated from this university , including Carlos Vaz Ferreira , José Luis Massera , Gabriel Paternain , Mario Wschebor , Roman Fresnedo Siri , Carlos Ott and Eladio Dieste
It called for the creation of nine academic departments ; the President of the Republic would pass a decree formally creating the departments once the majority of them were in operation .
That decree had few practical effects , given the institutional instability of the Oriental Republic of the Uruguay at that time .
The largest private university in Uruguay , is also located in Montevideo .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- It is a member of World ORT , an international educational network founded in 1880 by the Jewish community in Saint Petersburg , Russia .
Its current rector as of 2010 -LSB- update -RSB- is Dr. Jorge A. Grünberg .
Its alumni include presidents , senators , ambassadors and Nobel Prize winners , along with musicians , scientists , and others .
Its long list of distinguished former pupils includes economists , engineers , architects , lawyers , politicians and even F1 champions .
The school has also played an important part in the development of rugby union in Uruguay , with the creation of Old Christians Club , the school 's alumni club .
The School is governed by the Board of Governors , elected by the British Schools Society in Uruguay , whose honorary president is the British Ambassador to Uruguay .
Prominent alumni include former government ministers Pedro Bordaberry Herrán and Gabriel Gurméndez Armand-Ugon .
It is knowned for being one of the best schools in the country , joining students from the wealthiest parts of Montevideo , such us , Punta Carretas , Pocitos , Malvin and Carrasco .
St. Brendan 's School is a bilingual , non-denominational school that promotes a pedagogical constructivist approach focused on the child as a whole .
In this approach , understanding is built from the connections children make between their own prior knowledge and the learning experiences , thus developing critical thinking skills .
It is also the only school in the country implementing the three International Baccalaureate Programmes .
These are :
In this World Cup , Uruguay won the title game against Argentina by 4 goals to 2 .
It is listed by FIFA as one of the football world 's classic stadiums , along with Maracanã , Wembley Stadium , San Siro , Estadio Azteca , and Santiago Bernabéu Stadium .
A museum located within the football stadium has exhibits of memorabilia from Uruguay 's 1930 and 1950 World Cup championships .
Museum tickets give access to the stadium , stands , locker rooms and playing field .
A bus service network covers the entire city .
This terminal , along with the Baltazar Brum Bus Terminal -LRB- or Rio Branco Terminal -RRB- by the Port of Montevideo , handles the long distance and intercity bus routes connecting to destinations within Uruguay .
These lines operate to major suburban areas of Canelones , San José and Florida .
Within the Montevideo city limits , local trains stop at Lorenzo Carnelli , Yatai -LRB- Step Mill -RRB- , Sayago , Columbus -LRB- line to San Jose and Florida -RRB- , Peñarol and Manga -LRB- line Empalme Olmos -RRB- stations .
A new station , 500 metres -LRB- 1,600 ft -RRB- north of the old one and part of the Tower of Communications modern complex , has taken over the rail traffic .
It gives natural protection to ships , although two jetties now further protect the harbour entrance from waves .
This natural port is competitive with the other great port of Río de la Plata , Buenos Aires .
These six decades saw the construction of the port 's first wooden pier , several warehouses in La Aguada , the north and south Rambla , a river port , a new pier , the dredged river basin and the La Teja refinery .
Since the second half of the 20th century , physical changes have ceased , and since that time the area has degraded due to national economic stagnation .
The present building stems from the 1825 plans of José Toribio -LRB- son of Tomás Toribio -RRB- and later Bernardo Poncini -LRB- wing on the Guaraní street , 1859 -RRB- , Eduardo Canstatt -LRB- corner of Guaraní and 25 de Mayo -RRB- and Julián Masquelez -LRB- 1889 -RRB- .
The hospital has a chapel built in Greek style by Miguel Estévez in 1798 .
Today the hospital is very deteriorated , with broken walls and floors , lack of medicines , beds , and rooms for the personnel .
It has an emergency service , outpatient , clinic and inpatient rooms and employs approximately 610 staff , psychologists , psychiatrists , social workers , administrators , guards , among others .
The average patient age is 30 years ; more than half of the patients arrive by court order ; 42 % suffer from schizophrenia , 18 % from depression and mania , and there are also a high percentage of drug addicted patients .
This may have originally been as a result of people hatching and rearing young birds from eggs collected from the wild , but later involved keeping the birds permanently in captivity .
Although some birds are still kept in small flocks in extensive systems , most birds available in the market today are reared in intensive commercial enterprises .
All poultry meat should be properly handled and sufficiently cooked in order to reduce the risk of food poisoning .
`` Poultry '' is a term used for any kind of domesticated bird , captive-raised for its utility , and traditionally the word has been used to refer to wildfowl -LRB- Galliformes -RRB- and waterfowl -LRB- Anseriformes -RRB- .
`` Poultry '' can be defined as domestic fowls , including chickens , turkeys , geese and ducks , raised for the production of meat or eggs and the word is also used for the flesh of these birds used as food .
Both words are also used for the flesh of these birds .
Poultry can be distinguished from `` game '' , defined as wild birds or mammals hunted for food or sport , a word also used to describe the flesh of these when eaten .
Chickens are medium-sized , chunky birds with an upright stance and characterised by fleshy red combs and wattles on their heads .
Domestication is believed to have taken place between 7,000 and 10,000 years ago , and what are thought to be fossilized chicken bones have been found in northeastern China dated to around 5,400 BC .
Archaeologists believe domestication was originally for the purpose of cockfighting , the male bird being a doughty fighter .
By 4,000 years ago , chickens seem to have reached the Indus Valley and 250 years later , they arrived in Egypt .
They were still used for fighting and were regarded as symbols of fertility .
The Romans used them in divination , and the Egyptians made a breakthrough when they learned the difficult technique of artificial incubation .
Since then , the keeping of chickens has spread around the world for the production of food with the domestic fowl being a valuable source of both eggs and meat .
In about 1800 , chickens began to be kept on a larger scale , and modern high-output poultry farms were present in the United Kingdom from around 1920 and became established in the United States soon after the Second World War .
In meat breeds , these birds are sometimes castrated -LRB- often chemically -RRB- to prevent aggression .
The resulting bird , called a capon , has more tender and flavorful meat , as well .
The name derives from the town of Bantam in Java where European sailors bought the local small chickens for their shipboard supplies .
Cockfighting has been banned in many countries during the last century on the grounds of cruelty to animals .
They feed in shallow water by dabbling , with their heads underwater and their tails upended .
They keep their plumage waterproof by preening , a process that spreads the secretions of the preen gland over their feathers .
Ducks are farmed mainly for their meat , eggs , and down .
In the Western world , ducks are not as popular as chickens , because the latter produce larger quantities of white , lean meat and are easier to keep intensively , making the price of chicken meat lower than that of duck meat .
While popular in haute cuisine , duck appears less frequently in the mass-market food industry .
However , things are different in the East .
The two hybridise with each other and the large knob at the base of the beak , a noticeable feature of the Chinese goose , is present to a varying extent in these hybrids .
The hybrids are fertile and have resulted in several of the modern breeds .
They forage on grass and weeds , supplementing this with small invertebrates , and one of the attractions of rearing geese is their ability to grow and thrive on a grass-based system .
They are very gregarious and have good memories and can be allowed to roam widely in the knowledge that they will return home by dusk .
The Chinese goose is more aggressive and noisy than other geese and can be used as a guard animal to warn of intruders .
The birds are killed either around 10 or about 24 weeks .
Between these ages , problems with dressing the carcase occur because of the presence of developing pin feathers .
More than 1,000 years later , they became an important food source .
The first Europeans to encounter the bird misidentified it as a guineafowl , a bird known as a `` turkey fowl '' at that time because it had been introduced into Europe via Turkey .
These are often large buildings , purpose-built to provide ventilation and low light intensities -LRB- this reduces the birds ' activity and thereby increases the rate of weight gain -RRB- .
Many different breeds have been developed , but the majority of commercial birds are white , as this improves the appearance of the dressed carcass , the pin feathers being less visible .
However , they are increasingly becoming part of the everyday diet in many parts of the world .
The quail is a small to medium-sized , cryptically coloured bird .
Being a largely ground-dwelling , gregarious bird , domestication of the quail was not difficult , although many of its wild instincts are retained in captivity .
It was known to the Egyptians long before the arrival of chickens and was depicted in hieroglyphs from 2575 BC .
It migrated across Egypt in vast flocks and the birds could sometimes be picked up off the ground by hand .
After the war , the few surviving domesticated quail were used to rebuild the industry , and all current commercial and laboratory lines are considered to have originated from this population .
These quail are closely related to the common quail , and many young hybrid birds are released into the wild each year to replenish dwindling wild populations .
Guinea fowl are hardy , sociable birds that subsist mainly on insects , but also consume grasses and seeds .
Their flesh and eggs can be eaten in the same way as chickens , young birds being ready for the table at the age of about four months .
Special utility breeds with desirable characteristics are used .
Two eggs are laid and incubated for about 17 days .
Squabs grow rapidly , but are slow to fledge and are ready to leave the nest at 26 to 30 days weighing about 500 g -LRB- 18 oz -RRB- .
However , rising world populations and urbanization have led to the bulk of production being in larger , more intensive specialist units .
These are often situated close to where the feed is grown or near to where the meat is needed , and result in cheap , safe food being made available for urban communities .
Profitability of production depends very much on the price of feed , which has been rising .
In free-range husbandry , the birds can roam freely outdoors for at least part of the day .
Poultry can also be kept in a barn system , with no access to the open air , but with the ability to move around freely inside the building .
In these , several birds share a small cage which restricts their ability to move around and behave in a normal manner .
Battery cages for hens have been illegal in the EU since January 1 , 2012 .
Chickens raised intensively for their meat are known as `` broilers '' .
Processing the birds is done automatically with conveyor-belt efficiency .
They are hung by their feet , stunned , killed , bled , scalded , plucked , have their heads and feet removed , eviscerated , washed , chilled , drained , weighed , and packed , all within the course of little over two hours .
Both intensive and free-range farming have animal welfare concerns .
Diseases can also be common and spread rapidly through the flock .
Global broiler meat production rose to 84.6 million tonnes in 2013 .
The largest producers were the United States -LRB- 20 % -RRB- , China -LRB- 16.6 % -RRB- , Brazil -LRB- 15.1 % -RRB- and the European Union -LRB- 11.3 % -RRB- .
This model faces the increasing costs of implementing additional food safety requirements , welfare issues and environmental regulations .
In contrast , the United States model turns the product into a commodity .
In Japan , the wing is frequently separated , and these parts are referred to as 手羽元 -LRB- teba-moto `` wing base '' -RRB- and 手羽先 -LRB- teba-saki `` wing tip '' -RRB- .
Dark meat , which avian myologists refer to as `` red muscle '' , is used for sustained activity -- chiefly walking , in the case of a chicken .
Thus , the chicken 's leg and thigh meat are dark , while its breast meat -LRB- which makes up the primary flight muscles -RRB- is white .
Also , some risk is present for consumers of poultry meat and eggs to bacterial infections such as Salmonella and Campylobacter .
Poultry products may become contaminated by these bacteria during handling , processing , marketing , or storage , resulting in food-borne illness if the product is improperly cooked or handled .
Cell-based culture will also be useful in a pandemic when it may be difficult to acquire a sufficiently large quantity of suitable sterile , fertile eggs .
However , for boneless , skinless chicken breast , the amount is much lower .
Relegated only once , in 1913 , they continue the longest streak in the top division .
They became Tottenham Hotspur 's nearest club , commencing the North London derby .
Arsenal earned $ 435.5 m in 2014 -- 15 , with the Emirates Stadium generating the highest revenue in world football .
Based on social media activity from 2014 -- 15 , Arsenal 's fanbase is the fifth largest in the world .
The club became the first southern member of the Football League in 1893 , starting out in the Second Division , and won promotion to the First Division in 1904 .
The club 's relative geographic isolation resulted in lower attendances than those of other clubs , which led to the club becoming mired in financial problems and effectively bankrupt by 1910 , when they were taken over by businessmen Henry Norris and William Hall .
Some books have reported that this election to division 1 was achieved by dubious means .
Having already won the league twice with Huddersfield Town in 1923 -- 24 and 1924 -- 25 -LRB- see Seasons in English football -RRB- , Chapman brought Arsenal their first period of major success .
The club 's only success during this time was a last-minute 3 -- 2 victory over Manchester United in the 1979 FA Cup Final , widely regarded as a classic .
His replacement , Bruce Rioch , lasted for only one season , leaving the club after a dispute with the board of directors .
The feat came within a run of 49 league matches unbeaten from 7 May 2003 to 24 October 2004 , a national record .
Arsenal finished in either first or second place in the league in eight of Wenger 's first eleven seasons at the club , although on no occasion were they able to retain the title .
The club had not gained a major trophy since the 2005 FA Cup until 17 May 2014 , when Arsenal beat Hull City in the 2014 FA Cup Final , coming back from a 2 -- 0 deficit to win the match 3 -- 2 .
This qualified them for the 2014 FA Community Shield where they would play Premier League champions Manchester City .
They recorded a resounding 3 -- 0 win in the game , winning their second trophy in three months .
These can sometimes be mistaken for chimneys , but the presence of a carved lion 's head and a cascabel on each are clear indicators that they are cannon .
Because of the numerous revisions of the crest , Arsenal were unable to copyright it .
The cannon once again faces east and the club 's name is written in a sans-serif typeface above the cannon .
Green was replaced by dark blue .
The crest was all white , surrounded by 15 oak leaves to the right and 15 laurel leaves to the left .
The 15 laurel leaves represent the design detail on the six pence pieces paid by the founding fathers to establish the club .
The laurel leaves also represent strength .
As they put together the first team in the area , no kit could be found , so Beardsley and Bates wrote home for help and received a set of kit and a ball .
One story reports that Chapman noticed a supporter in the stands wearing a red sleeveless sweater over a white shirt ; another was that he was inspired by a similar outfit worn by the cartoonist Tom Webster , with whom Chapman played golf .
The first was 1966 -- 67 , when Arsenal wore all-red shirts ; this proved unpopular and the white sleeves returned the following season .
In the 2008 -- 09 season , Arsenal replaced the traditional all-white sleeves with red sleeves with a broad white stripe .
Arsenal 's home colours have been the inspiration for at least three other clubs .
For many years Arsenal 's away colours were white shirts and either black or white shorts .
Arsenal reached the FA Cup final again the following year wearing the red and white home strip and were beaten by Leeds United .
Expansion of Highbury was restricted because the East Stand had been designated as a Grade II listed building and the other three stands were close to residential properties .
These limitations prevented the club from maximising matchday revenue during the 1990s and first decade of the 21st century , putting them in danger of being left behind in the football boom of that time .
The project was initially delayed by red tape and rising costs , and construction was completed in July 2006 , in time for the start of the 2006 -- 07 season .
The stadium will be officially known as Emirates Stadium until at least 2028 , and the airline will be the club 's shirt sponsor until the end of the 2018 -- 19 season .
From the start of the 2010 -- 11 season on , the stands of the stadium have been officially known as North Bank , East Stand , West Stand and Clock end .
Arsenal have the seventh highest average attendance of European football clubs only behind Borussia Dortmund , FC Barcelona , Manchester United , Real Madrid , Bayern Munich , and Schalke .
The club 's supporters also publish fanzines such as The Gooner , Gunflash and the satirical Up The Arse !
.
Other rivalries within London include those with Chelsea , Fulham and West Ham United .
Kroenke first launched a bid for the club in April 2007 , and faced competition for shares from Red and White Securities , which acquired its first shares off David Dein in August 2007 .
Red & White Securities was co-owned by Russian billionaire Alisher Usmanov and Iranian London-based financier Farhad Moshiri , though Usmanov bought Moshiri 's stake in 2016 .
Kroenke came close to the 30 % takeover threshold in November 2009 , when he increased his holding to 18,594 shares -LRB- 29.9 % -RRB- .
Most football clubs are n't listed on an exchange , which makes direct comparisons of their values difficult .
Consultants Brand Finance valued the club 's brand and intangible assets at $ 703m in 2015 , and consider Arsenal an AAA global brand .
The footballing core of the business showed a revenue of # 329.3 m .
The Deloitte Football Money League is a publication that homogenizes and compares clubs ' annual revenue .
Arsenal have appeared in a number of media `` firsts '' .
As one of the most successful teams in the country , Arsenal have often featured when football is depicted in the arts in Britain .
The film centres on a friendly match between Arsenal and an amateur side , one of whose players is poisoned while playing .
The book was twice adapted for the cinema -- the 1997 British film focuses on Arsenal 's 1988 -- 89 title win , and a 2005 American version features a fan of baseball 's Boston Red Sox .
The club is one of only six clubs to have won the FA Cup twice in succession , in 2002 and 2003 , and 2014 and 2015 .
Arsenal have achieved three League and FA Cup `` Doubles '' -LRB- in 1971 , 1998 and 2002 -RRB- , a feat only previously achieved by Manchester United -LRB- in 1994 , 1996 and 1999 -RRB- .
They were the first side in English football to complete the FA Cup and League Cup double , in 1993 .
-LSB- n 4 -RSB-
-LSB- n 10 -RSB-
The Dutch language has been known under a variety of names .
In Middle Dutch , which was a collection of dialects , dietsc was used in Flanders and Brabant , while diets or duutsc was in use in the Northern Netherlands .
Until roughly the 16th century , speakers of all the varieties of the West Germanic languages from the mouth of the Rhine to the Alps had been accustomed to refer to their native speech as Dietsch , -LRB- Neder -RRB- duyts or some other cognate of theudisk .
This let inevitably to confusion since similar terms referred to different languages .
Owing to Dutch commercial and colonial rivalry in the 16th and 17th centuries , the English term came to refer exclusively to the Dutch .
In Dutch itself , Diets went out of common use - although Platdiets is still used for the transitional Limburgish-Ripuarian dialects in the north-east of Belgium .
See also : Netherlands -LRB- toponymy -RRB- .
One of the few moments linguists can detect somewhat of a revolution is when the Dutch standard language emerged and quickly established itself .
The development of the Dutch language is illustrated by the following sentence in Old , Middle and Modern Dutch :
The language itself is poorly attested .
Old Low Franconian or Old Dutch is regarded as the primary stage in the development of a separate Dutch language .
The latter would as a consequence evolve with Allemanic into Old High German .
The language however , did experienced developments on its own , like final-obstruent devoicing in a very early stage .
From this Frankish document written around 510 the oldest sentence has been identified as Dutch : Maltho thi afrio lito -LRB- I say to you , I free you , serf -RRB- used to free a serf .
-LSB- ... -RSB- I forsake the devil -RRB- .
But they were all mutually intelligible .
They particularly influenced the urban dialects of the province of Holland .
It used elements from various , even Dutch Low Saxon , dialects but was predominantly based on the urban dialects of Holland of post 16th century .
The state , law , and increasingly education used French , yet more than half the Belgian population were speaking a Dutch dialect .
In the course of the nineteenth century the Flemish movement stood up for the rights of Dutch , mostly called Flemish .
But in competing with the French language the variation in dialects was a serious disadvantage .
Since standardisation is a lengthy process , Dutch-speaking Belgium associated itself with the standard language that had already developed in the Netherlands over the centuries .
This treaty lays down the principle that the two countries must gear their language policy to each other , among other things , for a common system of spelling .
Dutch stands out in combining a small degree of Ingvaeonic characteristics -LRB- occurring consistently in English and Frisian and reduced in intensity from ` west to east ' over the continental West Germanic plane -RRB- with mostly Istvaeonic characteristics , of which some of them are also incorporated in German .
The cumulation of these changes resulted over time in separate , but related standard languages with various degrees of similarities and differences between them .
For a comparison between the West Germanic languages , see the sections Morphology , Grammar and Vocabulary .
This group , though not being Low Franconian and being close to the neighbouring Low German , is regarded as Dutch , because of a number of reasons .
From the 17th century onward , it was gradually integrated into the Dutch language area .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Dutch dialects and regional languages are not spoken as often as they used to be .
The different dialects show many sound shifts in different vowels -LRB- even shifting between diphthongs and monophthongs -RRB- , and in some cases consonants also shift pronunciation .
As a result , when West Flemish try to talk Standard Dutch , they 're often unable to pronounce the g-sound , and pronounce it similar to the h-sound .
Next to sound shifts , there are ample examples of suffix differences .
Often simple suffix shifts -LRB- like switching between - the , - ske , - ke , - je , ... -RRB- , sometimes the suffixes even depend on quite specific grammar rules for a certain dialect .
Again taking West Flemish as an example .
Some Flemish dialects are so distinct that they might be considered as separate language variants , although the strong significance of language in Belgian politics would prevent the government from classifying them as such .
-LRB- West -RRB- Frisian evolved from the same West Germanic branch as Old English and is less akin to Dutch .
Though Belgium as a whole is multilingual , the two regions into which the country is divided -LRB- Flanders , francophone Wallonia , bilingual Brussels and small ` facility ' zones -RRB- are largely monolingual .
The Netherlands and Belgium produce the vast majority of music , films , books and other media written or spoken in Dutch .
As a foreign language , Dutch is mainly taught in primary and secondary schools in areas adjacent to the Netherlands and Flanders .
Each year , some 1,500 to 2,000 students take Dutch courses there .
In total , several thousand Indonesians study Dutch as a foreign language .
Owing to centuries of Dutch rule in Indonesia , many old documents are written in Dutch .
Unlike other European nations , the Dutch chose not to follow a policy of language expansion amongst the indigenous peoples of their colonies .
Yet the Indonesian language inherited many words from Dutch : words for everyday life as well as scientific and technological terms .
These account for some of the differences in vocabulary between Indonesian and Malay .
A further twenty-four percent of the population speaks Dutch as a second language .
Elsewhere in the world , the number of people learning Dutch is relatively small .
Unlike other Germanic languages , Dutch does n't have phonological aspiration of consonants .
Like most Germanic languages , the Dutch consonant system did not undergo the High German consonant shift and has a syllable structure that allows fairly complex consonant clusters .
One feature or the other may be considered redundant , and some phonemic analyses prefer to treat it as an opposition of tenseness .
However , even if not considered part of the phonemic opposition , the long/tense vowels are still realised as phonetically longer than their short counterparts .
This is the most common diphthong along with / ɛi œy / .
Now , however , in his opinion , the newly affluent and independent women can afford to let that natural development take place in their speech .
Also in this case , German retains this feature .
Though the genitive is widely avoided in speech .
`` Ca n't you find your pen ? ''
-LRB- `` Why can you your pen not find ? '' -RRB-
`` Why ca n't you find your pen ? '' ''
-LRB- `` You can your pen not find ? '' -RRB-
`` You ca n't find your pen ? '' ''
-LRB- `` Can you your pen not find because it far too dark is ? '' -RRB-
`` Can you not find your pen because it 's too dark ? '' ''
Most notable however , are the diminutive forms of adjectives and adverbs .
Some nouns have two different diminutives , each with a different meaning : bloem -LRB- flower -RRB- → bloempje -LRB- lit .
also `` small flower '' , meaning bouquet -RRB- .
From English , Dutch has taken over words since the middle of the 19th century , as a consequence of the gaining power of Britain and the United States .
The share of English loanwords is about 1.5 % , but this number is still on the increase .
Dutch is written using the Latin script .
The diaeresis -LRB- Dutch : trema -RRB- is used to mark vowels that are pronounced separately when involving a pre - or suffix .
Whereas a hyphen is used when this problem occurs in compound words .
For example ; `` beïnvloed '' -LRB- influenced -RRB- , but zee-eend -LRB- sea duck -RRB- .
Its most common use is to differentiate between the indefinite article ` een ' -LRB- a , an -RRB- and the numeral ' één ' -LRB- one -RRB- .
The state rooms , used for official and state entertaining , are open to the public each year for most of August and September , and on selected days in winter and spring .
-LRB- This is at the northwest corner of today 's palace . -RRB-
He did not , however , obtain the freehold interest in the mulberry garden .
Some furnishings were transferred from Carlton House , and others had been bought in France after the French Revolution .
The external façade was designed keeping in mind the French neo-classical influence preferred by George IV .
While the state rooms were a riot of gilt and colour , the necessities of the new palace were somewhat less luxurious .
Ventilation was so bad that the interior smelled , and when a decision was taken to install gas lamps , there was a serious worry about the build-up of gas on the lower floors .
It was also said that staff were lax and lazy and the palace was dirty .
However , the builders were to return within the decade .
In 1864 , a note was found pinned to the fence of Buckingham Palace , saying : `` These commanding premises to be let or sold , in consequence of the late occupant 's declining business . ''
The floor area is smaller than the Royal Palace of Madrid , the Papal Palace in Rome , the Louvre in Paris , the Hofburg Palace in Vienna , or the Forbidden City .
The principal rooms are contained on the piano nobile behind the west-facing garden façade at the rear of the palace .
Flanking the Music Room are the Blue and the White Drawing Rooms .
The Gallery is hung with numerous works including some by Rembrandt , van Dyck , Rubens and Vermeer ; other rooms leading from the Picture Gallery are the Throne Room and the Green Drawing Room .
The Green Drawing Room serves as a huge anteroom to the Throne Room , and is part of the ceremonial route to the throne from the Guard Room at the top of the Grand Staircase .
These very formal rooms are used only for ceremonial and official entertaining , but are open to the public every summer .
The Yellow Drawing Room has wallpaper supplied in 1817 for the Brighton Saloon , and a chimney piece which is a European vision of how the Chinese chimney piece may appear .
Running the length of the piano nobile of the east wing is the great gallery , modestly known as the Principal Corridor , which runs the length of the eastern side of the quadrangle .
The Chinese Luncheon Room and Yellow Drawing Room are situated at each end of this gallery , with the Centre Room obviously placed in the centre .
When paying a state visit to Britain , foreign heads of state are usually entertained by the Queen at Buckingham Palace .
A second corridor in the suite has Gothic influenced cross over vaulting .
The Belgian Rooms themselves were decorated in their present style and named after Prince Albert 's uncle Léopold I , first King of the Belgians .
In 1936 , the suite briefly became the private apartments of the palace when they were occupied by King Edward VIII .
It is not the monarch 's personal property , unlike Sandringham House and Balmoral Castle .
Unlike the palace and the castle , the purpose-built gallery is open continually and displays a changing selection of items from the collection .
The money raised in entry fees was originally put towards the rebuilding of Windsor Castle after the 1992 fire devastated many of its state rooms .
The dress code governing formal court uniform and dress has progressively relaxed .
Most men invited to Buckingham Palace in the daytime choose to wear service uniform or lounge suits ; a minority wear morning coats , and in the evening , depending on the formality of the occasion , black tie or white tie .
They entered , curtsied , and performed a choreographed backwards walk and a further curtsy , while manoeuvring a dress train of prescribed length .
-LRB- The ceremony , known as an evening court , corresponded to the `` court drawing rooms '' of Victoria 's reign . -RRB-
At 36.6 m -LRB- 120 ft -RRB- long , 18 m -LRB- 59 ft -RRB- wide and 13.5 m -LRB- 44 ft -RRB- high , it is the largest room in the palace .
A military band plays in the musicians ' gallery as award recipients approach the Queen and receive their honours , watched by their families and friends .
On this grand occasion , all the state rooms are in use , as the royal family proceed through them , beginning at the great north doors of the Picture Gallery .
As Nash had envisaged , all the large , double-mirrored doors stand open , reflecting the numerous crystal chandeliers and sconces , creating a deliberate optical illusion of space and light .
It was last used for the Golden Jubilee of Elizabeth II .
He arranged a series of command performances featuring jazz musicians such as the Original Dixieland Jazz Band -LRB- 1919 -RRB- -- the first jazz performance for a head of state , Sidney Bechet , and Louis Armstrong -LRB- 1932 -RRB- , which earned the palace a nomination in 2009 for a -LRB- Kind of -RRB- Blue Plaque by the Brecon Jazz Festival as one of the venues making the greatest contribution to jazz music in the United Kingdom .
Queen Mary also had many new fixtures and fittings installed , such as the pair of marble Empire-style chimneypieces by Benjamin Vulliamy , dating from 1810 , which the Queen had installed in the ground floor Bow Room , the huge low room at the centre of the garden façade .
This room , 69 feet -LRB- 21 metres -RRB- long , previously known as the South Drawing Room , has a ceiling designed specially by Nash , coffered with huge gilt console brackets .
The King imposed rationing at the palace , much to the dismay of his guests and household .
The workers continued to imbibe and the King was left unhappy at his enforced abstinence .
War-time coverage of such incidents was severely restricted , however .
It was at this time the Queen famously declared : `` I 'm glad we have been bombed .
Now I can look the East End in the face '' .
Holmes bailed out .
Both aircraft crashed .
It had already been damaged , two of its crew had been killed and the remainder bailed out .
Its pilot , Feldwebel Robert Zehbe , landed , only to die later of wounds suffered during the attack .
During the Dornier 's descent , it somehow unloaded its bombs , one of which hit the Palace .
It then crashed into the forecourt of London Victoria station .
The bomber 's engine was later exhibited at the Imperial War Museum in London .
The hot filament is protected from oxidation with a glass or quartz bulb that is filled with inert gas or evacuated .
In a halogen lamp , filament evaporation is prevented by a chemical process that redeposits metal vapor onto the filament , extending its life .
Some applications of the incandescent bulb deliberately use the heat generated by the filament .
Such applications include incubators , brooding boxes for poultry , heat lights for reptile tanks , infrared heating for industrial heating and drying processes , lava lamps , and the Easy-Bake Oven toy .
This received a British Patent in 1880 .
It was also shown to 700 who attended a meeting of the Literary and Philosophical Society of Newcastle upon Tyne on 3 February 1879 .
These lamps used a carbon rod from an arc lamp rather than a slender filament .
Thus they had low resistance and required very large conductors to supply the necessary current , so they were not commercially practical , although they did furnish a demonstration of the possibilities of incandescent lighting with relatively high vacuum , a carbon conductor , and platinum lead-in wires .
Besides requiring too much current for a central station electric system to be practical , they had a very short lifetime .
Swan turned his attention to producing a better carbon filament and the means of attaching its ends .
From this year he began installing light bulbs in homes and landmarks in England .
His house was the first in the world to be lit by a lightbulb and also the first house in the world to be lit by hydroelectric power .
In 1878 the home of Lord Armstrong at Cragside was also among the first houses to be lit by electricity .
In the early 1880s he had started his company .
Edison filed his first patent application for `` Improvement In Electric Lights '' on 14 October 1878 .
Edison continued to improve this design and by 4 November 1879 , filed for a US patent for an electric lamp using `` a carbon filament or strip coiled and connected ... to platina contact wires . ''
Weeks later the United States Electric Lighting Company was organized .
Latimer patented other improvements such as a better way of attaching filaments to their wire supports .
This allows for greater temperatures and therefore greater efficacy with less reduction in filament life .
Visible light is measured in lumens , a unit which is defined in part by the differing sensitivity of the human eye to different wavelengths of light .
Not all wavelengths of visible electromagnetic energy are equally effective at stimulating the human eye ; the luminous efficacy of radiant energy -LRB- LER -RRB- is a measure of how well the distribution of energy matches the perception of the eye .
The units of luminous efficacy are `` lumens per watt '' -LRB- lpw -RRB- .
Even at this high temperature , a lot of the radiation is either infrared or ultraviolet , and the theoretical luminous efficacy -LRB- LER -RRB- is 95 lumens per watt . ''
No known material can be used as a filament at this ideal temperature , which is hotter than the sun 's surface .
White-balancing such lights is therefore more complicated , requiring additional adjustments to reduce for example green-magenta color casts , and even when properly white-balanced , the color reproduction will not be perfect .
These devices produce light by luminescence .
These lamps produce discrete spectral lines and do not have the broad `` tail '' of invisible infrared emissions .
The initial cost of an incandescent bulb is small compared to the cost of the energy it uses over its lifetime .
Regardless , over the course of a year a more efficient lighting system saves energy in nearly all climates .
Measures to ban light bulbs have been implemented in the European Union , the United States , Russia , Brazil , Argentina , Canada and Australia , among others .
Some people have concerns about the health effects of fluorescent lamps .
They are regarded as the best solution in terms of cost effectiveness and robustness .
Most light bulbs have either clear or coated glass .
Manufacturers may add pigments to the kaolin to adjust the characteristics of the final light emitted from the bulb .
Kaolin diffused bulbs are used extensively in interior lighting because of their comparatively gentle light .
Other kinds of colored bulbs are also made , including the various colors used for `` party bulbs '' , Christmas tree lights and other decorative lighting .
Neodymium-containing glass is sometimes used to provide a more natural-appearing light .
Many arrangements of electrical contacts are used .
Some tubular lamps have an electrical contact at either end .
Thus the glass bulbs are created .
The bulb is then inserted into the lamp base , and the whole assembly tested .
This made the lamp sensitive to fluctuations in the power supply , since a small increase of voltage would cause the filament to heat up , reducing its resistance and causing it to draw even more power and heat even further .
In the `` flashing '' process , carbon filaments were heated by current passing through them while in an evacuated vessel containing hydrocarbon vapor -LRB- usually gasoline -RRB- .
A metallized or `` graphitized '' filament was first heated in a high-temperature oven before flashing and lamp assembly .
Since tantalum metal has a lower resistivity than carbon , the tantalum lamp filament was quite long and required multiple internal supports .
The metal filament had the property of gradually shortening in use ; the filaments were installed with large loops that tightened in use .
This made lamps in use for several hundred hours quite fragile .
Metal filaments had the property of breaking and re-welding , though this would usually decrease resistance and shorten the life of the filament .
Filaments made from sintered tungsten powder were quite fragile .
The process required pressing tungsten powder into bars , then several steps of sintering , swaging , and then wire drawing .
To improve the efficiency of the lamp , the filament usually consists of multiple coils of coiled fine wire , also known as a ` coiled coil ' .
The advantage of the coiled coil is that evaporation of the tungsten filament is at the rate of a tungsten cylinder having a diameter equal to that of the coiled coil .
One of the problems of the standard electric light bulb is filament notching due to evaporation of the filament .
These hot spots evaporate faster than the rest of the filament , which increases the resistance at that point -- this creates a positive feedback that ends in the familiar tiny gap in an otherwise healthy-looking filament .
Long-life general service lamps have lower efficiency but are used where the cost of changing the lamp is high compared to the value of energy used .
Study of the problem of bulb blackening led to the discovery of the Edison effect , thermionic emission and invention of the vacuum tube .
A very small amount of water vapor inside a light bulb can significantly affect lamp darkening .
Water vapor dissociates into hydrogen and oxygen at the hot filament .
Hydrogen from water vapor reduces the oxide , reforming water vapor and continuing this water cycle .
Fiber-optic lamps for optical microscopy is one typical application .
The electrode then became incandescent , with the arc contributing little to the light produced .
These arc lamps ran on relatively low voltages and incorporated tungsten filaments to start ionization within the envelope .
They provided the intense concentrated light of an arc lamp but were easier to operate .
Incandescent light bulbs are usually marketed according to the electrical power consumed .
Since incandescent lamps are resistive loads , simple phase-control TRIAC dimmers can be used to control brightness .
Incandescent light bulbs come in a range of shapes and sizes .
Many of these shapes have a designation consisting of one or more letters followed by one or more numbers , e.g. A55 or PAR38 .
For example , 63 mm reflectors are designated R63 , but in the US , they are known as R20 -LRB- 2.5 in -RRB- .
However , in both regions , a PAR38 reflector is known as PAR38 .
Very small lamps may have the filament support wires extended through the base of the lamp , and can be directly soldered to a printed circuit board for connections .
Some reflector-type lamps include screw terminals for connection of wires .
Most lamps have metal bases that fit in a socket to support the lamp and conduct current to the filament wires .
In the late 19th century , manufacturers introduced a multitude of incompatible lamp bases .
This standard was soon adopted across the US , and the Mazda name was used by many manufacturers under license through 1945 .
Today most incandescent lamps for general lighting service use an Edison screw in candelabra , intermediate , or standard or mogul sizes , or double contact bayonet base .
Long-life bulbs take advantage of this trade-off .
Since the value of the electric power they consume is much more than the value of the lamp , general service lamps emphasize efficiency over long operating life .
The objective is to minimize the cost of light , not the cost of lamps .
The relationships above are valid for only a few percent change of voltage around rated conditions , but they do indicate that a lamp operated at much lower than rated voltage could last for hundreds of times longer than at rated conditions , albeit with greatly reduced light output .
In flood lamps used for photographic lighting , the tradeoff is made in the other direction .
The upper temperature limit for the filament is the melting point of the metal .
Such a lamp may achieve up to 22 lumens per watt , compared with 17.5 for a 750-hour general service lamp .
Lamps designed for different voltages have different luminous efficacy .
Other louse-based estimates put the introduction of clothing at around 42,000 -- 72,000 BP .
Shelter usually reduces the functional need for clothing .
For example , coats , hats , gloves , and other superficial layers are normally removed when entering a warm home , particularly if one is residing or sleeping there .
Materials have ranged from leather and furs , to woven materials , to elaborate and exotic natural and synthetic fabrics .
Not all body coverings are regarded as clothing .
Clothes also reduce risk during activities such as work or sport .
Examples include : space suits , air conditioned clothing , armor , diving suits , swimsuits , bee-keeper gear , motorcycle leathers , high-visibility clothing , and other pieces of protective clothing .
In Western societies , skirts , dresses and high-heeled shoes are usually seen as women 's clothing , while neckties are usually seen as men 's clothing .
In some societies , clothing may be used to indicate rank or status .
History provides many examples of elaborate sumptuary laws that regulated what people could wear .
In societies without such laws , which includes most modern societies , social status is instead signaled by the purchase of rare or luxury items that are limited by cost to those with wealth or status .
However , a second group of researchers using similar genetic methods estimate that clothing originated around 540,000 years ago -LRB- Reed et al. 2004 .
PLoS Biology 2 -LRB- 11 -RRB- : e340 -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
One approach simply involves draping the cloth .
This process began hundreds of years earlier , during the periods of European colonialism .
Fast fashion clothing has also become a global phenomenon .
These garments are less expensive , mass-produced Western clothing .
Specialized garments include wet suits -LRB- for swimming , diving or surfing -RRB- , salopettes -LRB- for skiing -RRB- and leotards -LRB- for gymnastics -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Most modern formal and semi-formal clothing is in this category -LRB- for example , dress shirts and suits -RRB- .
Mass-manufactured clothing is less expensive than the labor required to repair it .
Many people buy a new piece of clothing rather than spend time mending .
The Cubs are also one of two active major league teams based in Chicago ; the other is the Chicago White Sox , who are a member of the American League -LRB- AL -RRB- Central division .
They appeared in their first World Series the same year , falling to their crosstown rivals , the Chicago White Sox , four games to two .
The Cubs have not won the World Series in 107 years , the longest championship drought of any major North American professional sports team , and are often referred to as the `` Lovable Losers '' because of this distinction .
They are also known as `` The North Siders '' because Wrigley Field , their home park since 1916 , is located in Chicago 's North Side Lake View community at 1060 West Addison Street .
The Cubs have a major rivalry with the St. Louis Cardinals .
Spalding won forty-seven games and Barnes led the league in hitting at .429 as Chicago won the first ever National League pennant , which at the time was the game 's top prize .
In 1885 and ' 86 , after winning N.L. pennants , the White Stockings met the short-lived American Association champion in that era 's version of a World Series .
Both seasons resulted in match ups with the St. Louis Brown Stockings , with the clubs tying in 1885 and with St. Louis winning in 1886 .
This was the genesis of what would eventually become one of the greatest rivalries in sports .
After a disappointing record of 59-73 and a 9th-place finish in 1897 , Anson was released by the Cubs as both a player and manager .
Due to Anson 's absence from the club after 22 years , local newspaper reporters started to refer to the Cubs as the `` Orphans '' .
The poem first appeared in the July 18 , 1910 edition of the New York Evening Mail .
Mordecai `` Three-Finger '' Brown , Jack Taylor , Ed Reulbach , Jack Pfiester , and Orval Overall were several key pitchers for the Cubs during this time period .
With Chance acting as player-manager from 1905 to 1912 , the Cubs won four pennants and two World Series titles over a five-year span .
Although they fell to the `` Hitless Wonders '' White Sox in the 1906 World Series , the Cubs recorded a record 116 victories and the best winning percentage -LRB- .763 -RRB- in Major League history .
With mostly the same roster , Chicago won back-to-back World Series championships in 1907 and 1908 , becoming the first Major League club to play three times in the Fall Classic and the first to win it twice .
The Cubs responded by winning a pennant in the war-shortened season of 1918 , where they played a part in another team 's curse : the Boston Red Sox defeated Grover Cleveland Alexander 's Cubs four games to two in the 1918 World Series , Boston 's last Series championship until 2004 .
Unfortunately , their success did not extend to the Fall Classic , as they fell to their AL rivals each time .
The '32 series against the Yankees featured Babe Ruth 's `` called shot '' at Wrigley Field in Game 3 .
That 1930 club , which boasted six eventual Hall of Famers -LRB- Wilson , Gabby Hartnett , Rogers Hornsby , George `` High Pockets '' Kelly , Kiki Cuyler and manager Joe McCarthy -RRB- established the current team batting average record of .309 .
The '38 club saw Dizzy Dean lead the team 's pitching staff and provided a historic moment when they won a crucial late-season game at Wrigley Field over the Pittsburgh Pirates with a walk-off home run by Gabby Hartnett , which became known in baseball lore as `` The Homer in the Gloamin ' '' .
The Cubs enjoyed one more pennant at the close of World War II , finishing 98 -- 56 .
Upon his ejection , Mr. Sianis uttered , `` The Cubs , they ai n't gon na win no more . ''
The Cubs lost Game 4 , lost the Series , and have not been back since .
It has also been said by many that Sianis put a `` curse '' on the Cubs , apparently preventing the team from playing in the World Series .
After losing the 1945 World Series to the Detroit Tigers , the Cubs finished with winning seasons the next two years , but those teams did not enter post-season play .
In the following two decades after Sianis ' ill will , the Cubs played mostly forgettable baseball , finishing among the worst teams in the National League on an almost annual basis .
Although shortstop Ernie Banks would become one of the star players in the league during the next decade , finding help for him proved a difficult task , as quality players such as Hank Sauer were few and far between .
This , combined with poor ownership decisions such as the College of Coaches , and the ill-fated trade of future Hall of Famer Lou Brock to the Cardinals for pitcher Ernie Broglio -LRB- who won only 7 games over the next three seasons -RRB- , hampered on-field performance .
After the game of September 2 , the Cubs record was 84-52 with the Mets in second place at 77-55 .
But then a losing streak began just as a Mets winning streak was beginning .
The Cubs lost the final game of a series at Cincinnati , then came home to play the resurgent Pittsburgh Pirates -LRB- who would finish in third place -RRB- .
After losing the first two games by scores of 9-2 and 13-4 , the Cubs led going into the ninth inning .
A win would be a positive springboard since the Cubs were to play a crucial series with the Mets the very next day .
But Willie Stargell drilled a 2-out , 2-strike pitch from the Cubs ' ace reliever , Phil Regan , onto Sheffield Avenue to tie the score in the top of the ninth .
The Cubs would lose 7-5 in extra innings .
Burdened by a four-game losing streak , the Cubs traveled to Shea Stadium for a short two-game set .
The Mets won both games , and the Cubs left New York with a record of 84-58 just 1⁄2 game in front .
Disaster followed in Philadelphia , as a 99 loss Phillies team nonetheless defeated the Cubs twice , to extend Chicago 's losing streak to eight games .
Selma 's throwing error opened the gates to a Phillies rally .
After that second Philly loss , the Cubs were 84-60 and the Mets had pulled ahead at 85-57 .
The Mets would not look back .
The Cubs ' eight-game losing streak finally ended the next day in St. Louis , but the Mets were in the midst of a ten-game winning streak , and the Cubs , wilting from team fatigue , generally deteriorated in all phases of the game .
The Mets -LRB- who had lost a record 120 games 7 years earlier -RRB- , would go on to win the World Series .
The Cubs , despite a respectable 92-70 record , would be remembered for having lost a remarkable 17 1/2 games in the standings to the Mets in the last quarter of the season .
Following the '69 season , the club posted winning records for the next few seasons , but no playoff action .
The Cubs hit a high-water mark on June 28 at 47 -- 22 , boasting an 8 1⁄2 game NL East lead , as they were led by Bobby Murcer -LRB- 27 Hr/89 RBI -RRB- , and Rick Reuschel -LRB- 20 -- 10 -RRB- .
However , the Philadelphia Phillies cut the lead to two by the All-star break , as the Cubs sat 19 games over .500 , but they swooned late in the season , going 20 -- 40 after July 31 .
The Cubs finished in 4th place at 81 -- 81 , while Philadelphia surged , finishing with 101 wins .
The following two seasons also saw the Cubs get off to a fast start , as the team rallied to over 10 games above .500 well into both seasons , only to again wear down and play poorly later on , and ultimately settling back to mediocrity .
This trait became known as the `` June Swoon . ''
One of his early GM moves brought in a young Phillies minor-league 3rd baseman named Ryne Sandberg , along with Larry Bowa for Iván DeJesús .
The 1983 Cubs had finished 71 -- 91 under Lee Elia , who was fired before the season ended by Green .
Green continued the culture of change and overhauled the Cubs roster , front-office and coaching staff prior to 1984 .
Jim Frey was hired to manage the 1984 Cubs , with Don Zimmer coaching 3rd base and Billy Connors serving as pitching coach .
Pinch hitter Richie Hebner -LRB- .333 BA in 1984 -RRB- was signed as a free-agent .
Reliever Tim Stoddard -LRB- 10 -- 6 3.82 , 7 saves -RRB- was acquired the same day for a minor leaguer ; veteran pitcher Ferguson Jenkins was released .
Joe Carter -LRB- who was with the Triple-A Iowa Cubs at the time -RRB- and center fielder Mel Hall were sent to Cleveland for Sutcliffe and back-up catcher Ron Hassey -LRB- .333 with Cubs in 1984 -RRB- .
Sutcliffe -LRB- 5 -- 5 with the Indians -RRB- immediately joined Sanderson -LRB- 8 -- 5 3.14 -RRB- , Eckersley -LRB- 10 -- 8 3.03 -RRB- , Steve Trout -LRB- 13 -- 7 3.41 -RRB- and Dick Ruthven -LRB- 6 -- 10 5.04 -RRB- in the starting rotation .
Sutcliffe proceeded to go 16 -- 1 for Cubs and capture the Cy Young Award .
With his shots in the 9th and 10th innings Wrigley Field erupted and Sandberg set the stage for a comeback win that cemented the Cubs as the team to beat in the East .
No one would catch them , except the Padres in the playoffs .
Then the last three games were played at the home of the team , with home field advantage .
A common and unfounded myth is that since Wrigley Field did not have lights at that time the National League decided to give the home field advantage to the winner of the NL West .
In fact , home field advantage had rotated between the winners of the East and West since 1969 when the league expanded .
In even numbered years , the NL West had home field advantage .
In odd numbered years , the NL East had home field advantage .
Since the NL East winners had had home field advantage in 1983 , the NL West winners were entitled to it .
Rather than hold any games in the cross town rival Sox Park , the Cubs made arrangements with the August A. Busch , owner of the St. Louis Cardinals , to use Busch Stadium in St. Louis as the Cubs `` home field '' for the World Series .
This was approved by Major League Baseball and would have enabled the Cubs to host games 1 and 2 , along with games 6 and 7 if necessary .
At the time home field advantage was rotated between each league .
Odd numbered years the AL had home field advantage .
Even numbered years the NL had home field advantage .
In the 1982 World Series the St. Louis Cardinals of the NL had home field advantage .
The Padres were the winners of the Western Division with Steve Garvey , Tony Gwynn , Eric Show , Goose Gossage and Alan Wiggins .
With wins of 13 -- 0 and 4 -- 2 , the Cubs needed to win only one game of the next three in San Diego to make it to the World Series .
After being beaten in Game 3 7 -- 1 , the Cubs lost Game 4 when Smith , with the game tied 5 -- 5 , allowed a game-winning home run to Garvey in the bottom of the ninth inning .
In Game 5 the Cubs took a 3 -- 0 lead into the 6th inning , and a 3 -- 2 lead into the seventh with Sutcliffe -LRB- who won the Cy Young Award that year -RRB- still on the mound .
Then , Leon Durham had a sharp grounder go under his glove .
This critical error helped the Padres win the game 6 -- 3 , with a 4-run 7th inning and keep Chicago out of the 1984 World Series against the Detroit Tigers .
The loss ended a spectacular season for the Cubs , one that brought alive a slumbering franchise and made the Cubs relevant for a whole new generation of Cubs fans .
The Cubs won the NL East once again that season winning 93 games .
After splitting the first two games at home , the Cubs headed to the Bay Area , where despite holding a lead at some point in each of the next three games , bullpen meltdowns and managerial blunders ultimately led to three straight losses .
The Cubs could n't overcome the efforts of Will Clark , whose home run off Maddux , just after a managerial visit to the mound , led Maddux to think Clark knew what pitch was coming .
Afterward , Maddux would speak into his glove during any mound conversation , beginning what is a norm today .
Mark Grace was 11 -- 17 in the series with 8 RBI .
Eventually , the Giants lost to the `` Bash Brothers '' and the Oakland A 's in the famous `` Earthquake Series . ''
Kevin Tapani led the club with a career high 19 wins , Rod Beck anchored a strong bullpen and Mark Grace turned in one of his best seasons .
The Cubs were swamped by media attention in 1998 , and the team 's two biggest headliners were Sosa and rookie flamethrower Kerry Wood .
Wood 's signature performance was one-hitting the Houston Astros , a game in which he tied the major league record of 20 strikeouts in nine innings .
His torrid strikeout numbers earned Wood the nickname `` Kid K , '' and ultimately earned him the 1998 NL Rookie of the Year award .
Sosa caught fire in June , hitting a major league record 20 home runs in the month , and his home run race with Cardinals slugger Mark McGwire transformed the pair into international superstars in a matter of weeks .
McGwire finished the season with a new major league record of 70 home runs , but Sosa 's .308 average and 66 homers earned him the National League MVP Award .
After a down-to-the-wire Wild Card chase with the San Francisco Giants , Chicago and San Francisco ended the regular season tied , and thus squared off in a one-game playoff at Wrigley Field in which third baseman Gary Gaetti hit the eventual game winning homer .
The win propelled the Cubs into the postseason once again with a 90 -- 73 regular season tally .
Unfortunately , the bats went cold in October , as manager Jim Riggleman 's club batted .183 and scored only four runs en route to being swept by Atlanta .
On a positive note , the home run chase between Sosa , McGwire and Ken Griffey , Jr. helped professional baseball to bring in a new crop of fans as well as bringing back some fans who had been disillusioned by the 1994 strike .
The Cubs retained many players who experienced career years in ' 98 , and after a fast start in 1999 , they collapsed again -LRB- starting with being swept at the hands of the cross-town White Sox in mid-June -RRB- and finished in the bottom of the division for the next two seasons .
One of the biggest stories of the season transpired as the club made a midseason deal for Fred McGriff , which was drawn out for nearly a month as McGriff debated waiving his no-trade clause , as the Cubs led the wild card race by 2.5 games in early September .
The team was unable to make another serious charge , and finished at 88 -- 74 , five games behind both Houston and St. Louis , who tied for first .
Sosa had perhaps his finest season and Jon Lieber led the staff with a 20 win season .
The Cubs had high expectations in 2002 , but the squad played poorly .
Most notably , they traded with the Pittsburgh Pirates for outfielder Kenny Lofton and third baseman Aramis Ramírez , and rode dominant pitching , led by Kerry Wood and Mark Prior , as the Cubs led the division down the stretch .
After losing an extra-inning game in Game 1 , the Cubs rallied and took a 3 games to 1 lead over the Wild Card Florida Marlins in the NLCS .
A Chicago Cubs fan by the name of Steve Bartman , of Northbrook , Illinois , reached for the ball and deflected it away from the glove of Moisés Alou for the second out of the 8th inning .
Alou reacted angrily toward the stands , and after the game stated that he would have caught the ball .
Alou at one point recanted , saying he would not have been able to make the play , but later said this was just an attempt to make Bartman feel better and believing the whole incident should be forgotten .
Interference was not called on the play , as the ball was ruled to be on the spectator side of the wall .
Castillo was eventually walked by Prior .
Two batters later , and to the chagrin of the packed stadium , Cubs shortstop Alex Gonzalez misplayed an inning ending double play , loading the bases and leading to eight Florida runs and a Marlin victory .
Despite sending Kerry Wood to the mound and holding a lead twice , the Cubs ultimately dropped Game 7 , and failed to reach the World Series .
They led the Wild Card by 1.5 games over San Francisco and Houston on September 25 , and both of those teams lost that day , giving the Cubs a chance at increasing the lead to a commanding 2.5 games with only eight games remaining in the season , but reliever LaTroy Hawkins blew a save to the Mets , and the Cubs lost the game in extra innings , a defeat that seemingly deflated the team , as they proceeded to drop 6 of their last 8 games as the Astros won the Wild Card .
Already a controversial figure in the clubhouse after his corked-bat incident , Sammy 's actions alienated much of his once strong fan base as well as the few teammates still on good terms with him , -LRB- many teammates grew tired of Sosa playing loud salsa music in the locker room -RRB- and possibly tarnished his place in Cubs ' lore for years to come .
The disappointing season also saw fans start to become frustrated with the constant injuries to ace pitchers Mark Prior and Kerry Wood .
Things were no better in 2005 , despite a career year from first baseman Derrek Lee and the emergence of closer Ryan Dempster .
The club struggled and suffered more key injuries , only managing to win 79 games after being picked by many to be a serious contender for the N.L. pennant .
In 2006 , bottom fell out as the Cubs finished 66 -- 96 , last in the NL Central .
After a rough start , which included a brawl between Michael Barrett and Carlos Zambrano , the Cubs overcame the Milwaukee Brewers , who had led the division for most of the season , with winning streaks in June and July , coupled with a pair of dramatic , late-inning wins against the Reds , and ultimately clinched the NL Central with a record of 85 -- 77 .
The Cubs traded Barrett to the Padres , and later acquired Jason Kendall from Oakland .
Kendall was highly successful with his management of the pitching rotation and helped at the plate as well .
By September , Geovany Soto became the full-time starter behind the plate , replacing the veteran Kendall .
They met Arizona in the NLDS , but controversy followed as Piniella , in a move that has since come under scrutiny , pulled Carlos Zambrano after the sixth inning of a pitcher 's duel with D-Backs ace Brandon Webb , to '' ... save Zambrano for -LRB- a potential -RRB- Game 4 . ''
The Cubs , however , were unable to come through , losing the first game and eventually stranding over 30 baserunners in a 3-game Arizona sweep .
The Cubs successfully defended their National League Central title in 2008 , going to the postseason in consecutive years for the first time since 1906 -- 08 .
The team recorded their 10,000 th win in April , while establishing an early division lead .
The Cubs took control of the division by sweeping a four-game series in Milwaukee .
The club ended the season with a 97 -- 64 record and met Los Angeles in the NLDS .
The heavily favored Cubs took an early lead in Game 1 , but James Loney 's grand slam off Ryan Dempster changed the series ' momentum .
Chicago committed numerous critical errors and were outscored 20 -- 6 in a Dodger sweep , which provided yet another sudden ending .
Apparently handcuffed by the Tribune 's bankruptcy and the sale of the club to the Ricketts family , the Cubs ' quest for a NL Central 3-peat started with notice that there would be less invested into contracts than in previous years .
Third baseman Aramis Ramírez injured his throwing shoulder in an early May game against the Milwaukee Brewers , sidelining him until early July and forcing journeyman players like Mike Fontenot and Aaron Miles into more prominent roles .
Additionally , key players like Derrek Lee -LRB- who still managed to hit .306 with 35 HR and 111 RBI that season -RRB- , Alfonso Soriano and Geovany Soto also nursed nagging injuries .
The Cubs posted a winning record -LRB- 83 -- 78 -RRB- for the third consecutive season , the first time the club had done so since 1972 , and a new era of ownership under the Ricketts ' family was approved by MLB owners in early October .
However , the club played poorly in the early season , finding themselves 10 games under .500 at the end of June .
In addition , long-time ace Carlos Zambrano was pulled from a game against the White Sox on June 25 after a tirade and shoving match with Derrek Lee , and was suspended indefinitely by Jim Hendry , who called the conduct `` unacceptable . ''
Mike Quade took over as the interim manager for the final 37 games of the year .
Despite being well out of playoff contention the Cubs went 24 -- 13 under Quade , the best record in baseball during that 37 game stretch , earning Quade to have the interim tag removed on October 19 .
Epstein , a proponent of sabremetrics and one of the architects of two world series titles in Boston brought along Jed Hoyer to fill the role of GM and hired Dale Sveum as manager .
Although the team had a dismal 2012 season , losing 101 games -LRB- the worst record since 1966 -RRB- it was largely expected .
The youth movement ushered in by Epstein and Hoyer began as longtime fan favorite Kerry Wood retired in May , followed by Ryan Dempster and Geovany Soto being traded to Texas at the All-Star break for a group of minor league prospects headlined by Christian Villanueva .
The development of Castro , Anthony Rizzo , Darwin Barney , Brett Jackson and pitcher Jeff Samardzija as well as the replenishing of the minor-league system with prospects such as Javier Baez , Albert Almora , and Jorge Soler became the primary focus of the season , a philosophy which the new management said would carry over at least through the 2013 season .
The 2013 season resulted in much as the same the year before .
The mid season fire sale led to another last place finish in the NL Central , finishing with a record of 66-96 .
Although there was a five-game improvement in the record from the year before , Anthony Rizzo and Starlin Castro seemed to take steps backward in their development .
The regression of several young players was thought to be the main focus point , as the front office said Dale would not be judged based on wins and losses .
In two seasons as skipper , Sveum finished with a record of 127-197 .
Many other trades and acquisitions occurred during the off season .
The opening day lineup for the Cubs contained five new players including rookie right fielder Jorge Soler .
Rookies Kris Bryant and Addison Russell were in the starting lineup by mid-April , and rookie Kyle Schwarber was added in mid-June .
On October 7 , in the 2015 National League Wild Card Game , Jake Arrieta pitched a complete game shutout and the Cubs defeated the Pittsburgh Pirates 4 -- 0 .
As fans swarmed the field , Cub infielder Johnny Evers retrieved the ball and touched second .
Since there were two outs , a forceout was called at second base , ending the inning and the game .
Because of the tie the Giants and Cubs ended up tied for first place .
The Giants lost the ensuing one-game playoff and the Cubs went on to the World Series .
-LRB- In 1999 , a long-lost extra RBI mistakenly credited to Charlie Grimm had been found by Cooperstown researcher Cliff Kachline and verified by historian Jerome Holtzman , increasing the record number to 191 . -RRB-
As of 2014 the record still stands , with no serious threats coming since Gehrig -LRB- 184 -RRB- and Hank Greenberg -LRB- 183 -RRB- in the same era .
In addition to the RBI record , Wilson 56 home-runs stood as the National League record until 1998 , when Sammy Sosa and Mark McGwire hit 66 and 70 , respectively .
When he came up to bat in the next half-inning , he got a standing ovation from the crowd and the stadium titantron flashed the message , `` RICK MONDAY ... YOU MADE A GREAT PLAY ... '' Monday later said , `` If you 're going to burn the flag , do n't do it around me .
I 've been to too many veterans ' hospitals and seen too many broken bodies of guys who tried to protect it . ''
Sosa had 13 home runs entering the month , representing less than half of Mark McGwire 's total .
Sosa had his first of four multi-home run games that month on June 1 , and went on to break Rudy York 's record with 20 home runs in the month , a record that still stands .
By the end of his historic month , the outfielder 's 33 home runs tied him with Ken Griffey , Jr. and left him only four behind McGwire 's 37 .
The Cubs reached the milestone with an overall National League record of 10,000-9 ,465 .
Chicago was only the second club in Major League Baseball history to attain this milestone , the first having been the San Francisco Giants in mid-season 2005 .
The Cubs , however , hold the mark for victories for a team in a single city .
The Chicago club 's 77 -- 77 record in the National Association -LRB- 1871 , 1874 -- 1875 -RRB- is not included in MLB record keeping .
Post-season series are also not included in the totals .
To honor the milestone , the Cubs flew an extra white flag displaying `` 10,000 '' in blue , along with the customary `` W '' flag .
This is the franchise record and tied for the Major League record for the most strikeouts in one game by one pitcher -LRB- the only other pitcher to strike out 20 batters in a nine-inning game was Roger Clemens , who achieved it twice -RRB- .
The game is often considered the most dominant pitching performance of all time .
Interestingly , Wood 's first pitch struck home plate umpire Jerry Meals in the facemask .
Wood then struck out the first five batters he faced .
Wood hit one batter , Craig Biggio , and allowed one hit , a scratch single by Ricky Gutiérrez off third baseman Kevin Orie 's glove .
The play was nearly scored an error , which would have given Wood a no-hitter .
In fact , the Cubs ' last World Series title occurred before those other three leagues even existed , and even the Cubs ' last World Series appearance predates the founding of the NBA .
The much publicized drought was concurrent to championship droughts by the Boston Red Sox and the Chicago White Sox , who both had over 80 years between championships .
The team was one win away from breaking what is often called the `` Curse of the Billy Goat '' in 1984 and 2003 -LRB- Steve Bartman incident -RRB- , but was unable get the victory that would send it to the World Series .
The shot was estimated at well over 500 feet -LRB- 150 m -RRB- , but the Cubs fell to Milwaukee 12 -- 8 .
No batted ball has ever hit the center field scoreboard , although the original `` Slammin ' Sammy '' , golfer Sam Snead , hit it with a golf ball in an exhibition in the 1950s .
In 2001 , a Sammy Sosa shot landed across Waveland and bounced a block down Kenmore Avenue .
Dave Kingman hit a shot in 1979 that hit the third porch roof on the east side of Kenmore , estimated at 555 feet -LRB- 169 m -RRB- , and is regarded as the longest home run in Wrigley Field history .
On May 26 , 2015 , the Cubs rookie third baseman , Kris Bryant , hit a homerun that traveled an estimated 477 feet -LRB- 145 m -RRB- off the park 's new videoboard in left field .
Later the same year , he hit a homer that traveled 495 feet -LRB- 151 m -RRB- that also ricocheted off of the videoboard On October 13 , 2015 , Kyle Schwarber 's 438-foot home run landed on the equally new right field videoboard .
Ryne Sandberg managed the Chiefs from 2006 to 2010 .
In the period between those associations with the Chiefs the club had affiliations with the Dayton Dragons and Lansing Lugnuts .
The Lugnuts were often affectionately referred to by Chip Caray as `` Steve Stone 's favorite team . ''
The 2007 developmental contract with the Tennessee Smokies was preceded by Double A affiliations with the Orlando Cubs and West Tenn Diamond Jaxx .
Two days later , on the 18th , the Cubs signed a 4-year player development contract with the South Bend Silver Hawks of the Midwest League , ending their brief relationship with the Kane County Cougars and shortly thereafter renaming the Silver Hawks the South Bend Cubs .
The concept was for the players to have training and fitness before the start of the regular season .
After the White Stockings had a successful season in 1886 , winning the National League Pennant , other teams began bringing their players to `` spring training '' .
The Chicago Cubs , St. Louis Browns , New York Yankees , St. Louis Cardinals , Cleveland Spiders , Detroit Tigers , Pittsburgh Pirates , Cincinnati Reds , New York Highlanders , Brooklyn Dodgers and Boston Red Sox were among the early squads to arrive .
Whittington Park -LRB- 1894 -RRB- and later Majestic Park -LRB- 1909 -RRB- and Fogel Field -LRB- 1912 -RRB- were all built in Hot Springs specifically to host Major League teams .
The Cubs annually sell out most of their games both at home and on the road .
`` HoHoKam '' is literally translated from Native American as `` those who vanished . ''
The North Siders have called Mesa their spring home for most seasons since 1952 .
-LRB- The ballpark is long gone , but a clubhouse built by Wrigley to house the Cubs exists as the Catalina County Club . -RRB-
The Cubs ' 30-year association with Catalina is chronicled in the book , The Cubs on Catalina , by Jim Vitti ... which was named International ` Book of the Year ' by The Sporting News .
He covered the games with a level of enthusiasm that often seemed unjustified by the team 's poor performance on the field for many of those years .
always followed a home run .
That expression is spelled out in large letters vertically on both foul pole screens at Wrigley Field .
`` Whoo-boy ! ''
and `` Wheeee ! ''
and `` Oh , brother ! ''
were among his other pet expressions .
Caray also had the benefit of being in the booth during the NL East title run in 1984 , which was widely seen due to WGN 's status as a cable-TV superstation .
His trademark call of `` Holy Cow ! ''
and his enthusiastic singing of `` Take me out to the ballgame '' during the 7th inning stretch -LRB- as he had done with the White Sox -RRB- made Caray a fan favorite both locally and nationally .
Stone disclosed in his book `` Where 's Harry '' that most of this `` arguing '' was staged , and usually a ploy developed by Harry himself to add flavor to the broadcast .
Tribune , owners of the Chicago Tribune , Los Angeles Times , WGN Television , WGN Radio and many other media outlets , controlled the club until December 2007 , when Sam Zell completed his purchase of the entire Tribune organization and announced his intention to sell the baseball team .
After a nearly two-year process which involved potential buyers such as Mark Cuban and a group led by Hank Aaron , a family trust of TD Ameritrade founder Joe Ricketts won the bidding process as the 2009 season came to a close .
Ultimately , the sale was unanimously approved by MLB owners and the Ricketts family took control on October 27 , 2009 .
The poem is presented as a single , rueful stanza from the point of view of a New York Giants fan seeing the talented Chicago Cubs infield of shortstop Joe Tinker , second baseman Johnny Evers , and first baseman Frank Chance complete a double play .
The trio began playing together with the Cubs in 1902 , and formed a double play combination that lasted through April 1912 .
The Cubs won the pennant four times between 1906 and 1910 , often defeating the Giants en route to the World Series .
The bear cub itself was used in the clubs since the early 1900s and was the inspiration of the Chicago Staleys changing their team 's name to the Chicago Bears , due to the Cubs allowing the football team to play at Wrigley Field in the 1930s .
There is no record of whether or not he was just a fan in a costume or employed by the club .
They pose for pictures with fans for tips .
The most notable of these was `` Billy Cub '' who worked outside of the stadium until for over 6 years until July 2013 , when the club asked him to stop .
-LRB- e.g. , `` Cubs , woo !
Cubs , woo !
Big-Z , woo !
Zambrano , woo !
Cubs , woo ! '' -RRB-
He is not employed by the team , although the club has on two separate occasions allowed him into the broadcast booth and allow him some degree of freedom once he purchases or is given a ticket by fans to get into the games .
He is largely allowed to roam the park and interact with fans by Wrigley Field security .
There is a dense collection of sports bars and restaurants in the area , most with baseball inspired themes , including Sluggers , Murphy 's Bleachers and The Cubby Bear .
One building on Sheffield Avenue has a sign atop its roof which says `` Eamus Catuli ! ''
which is Latin for `` Let 's Go Cubs ! ''
and another chronicles the time since the last Division title , pennant , and World Series championship .
The 02 denotes two years since the 2008 NL Central title , 65 years since the 1945 pennant and 102 years since the 1908 World Series championship .
On game days , many residents rent out their yards and driveways to people looking for parking spots .
The uniqueness of the neighborhood itself has ingrained itself into the culture of the Chicago Cubs as well as the Wrigleyville neighborhood , and has led to being used for concerts and other sporting events , such as the 2010 NHL Winter Classic between the Chicago Blackhawks and Detroit Red Wings , as well as a 2010 NCAA men 's football game between the Northwestern Wildcats and Illinois Fighting Illini .
In previously years mostly all efforts to conduct any large-scale renovations to the field had been opposed by the city , former mayor Richard M. Daley -LRB- a staunch White Sox fan -RRB- , and especially the rooftop owners .
Initially , the group was called `` bums '' because it referred to a group of fans who were at most games , and since those games were all day games , it was assumed they did not work .
Many of those fans were , and are still , students at Chicago area colleges , such as DePaul University , Loyola , Northwestern University , and Illinois-Chicago .
A Broadway play , starring Joe Mantegna , Dennis Farina , Dennis Franz , and James Belushi ran for years and was based on a group of Cub fans who frequented the club 's games .
The group was started in 1967 by dedicated fans Ron Grousl , Tom Nall and `` mad bugler '' Mike Murphy , who was a sports radio host during mid days on Chicago-based WSCR AM 670 `` The Score '' .
Murphy alleges that Grousl started the Wrigley tradition of throwing back opposing teams ' home run balls .
Bleachers at Wrigley are general admission , except during the playoffs .
The bleachers have been referred to as the `` World 's Largest Beer Garden . ''
A popular T-shirt -LRB- sold inside the park and licensed by the club -RRB- which says `` Wrigley Bleachers '' on the front and the phrase `` Shut Up and Drink Your Beer '' on the reverse fuels this stereotype .
Verban was picked as the epitome of a Cub player , explains columnist George Will , because `` He exemplified mediocrity under pressure , he was competent but obscure and typifying of the work ethics . ''
Verban initially believed he was being ridiculed , but his ill feeling disappeared several years later when he was flown to Washington to meet President Ronald Reagan , also a society member , at the White House .
Hillary Clinton , Jim Belushi , Joe Mantegna , Rahm Emanuel , Dick Cheney and many others have been included among its membership .
Holy Mackerel !
The song received a good deal of local airplay that summer , associating it very strongly with that bittersweet season .
It was played much less frequently thereafter , although it remained an unofficial Cubs theme song for some years after .
The album was produced in celebration of the 100th anniversary of the Cubs ' 1908 World Series victory and contains sounds and songs of the Cubs and Wrigley Field .
Initially , in 1949 , the states of the Federal Republic were Baden , Bavaria -LRB- in German : Bayern -RRB- , Bremen , Hamburg , Hesse -LRB- Hessen -RRB- , Lower Saxony -LRB- Niedersachsen -RRB- , North Rhine Westphalia -LRB- Nordrhein-Westfalen -RRB- , Rhineland-Palatinate -LRB- Rheinland-Pfalz -RRB- , Schleswig-Holstein , Württemberg-Baden , and Württemberg-Hohenzollern .
Today , it is very common to use the term Bundesland -LRB- Federal Land -RRB- .
However , this term is not used officially , neither by the constitution of 1919 nor by the Basic Law -LRB- Constitution -RRB- of 1949 .
Too many Länder also make coordination among them and with the federation more complicated ... '' .
Federalism has a long tradition in German history .
The Confederation was dissolved after the Austro-Prussian War and replaced by a North German Federation under Prussian hegemony ; this war left Prussia dominant in Germany , and German nationalism would compel the remaining independent states to ally with Prussia in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870 -- 71 , and then to accede to the crowning of King Wilhelm of Prussia as German Emperor .
The new German Empire included 25 states -LRB- three of them , Hanseatic cities -RRB- and the imperial territory of Alsace-Lorraine .
After the territorial losses of the Treaty of Versailles , the remaining states continued as republics of a new German federation .
These states were gradually de facto abolished and reduced to provinces under the Nazi regime via the Gleichschaltung process , as the states administratively were largely superseded by the Nazi Gau system .
The states with hyphenated names , such as Rhineland-Palatinate , North Rhine-Westphalia , and Saxony-Anhalt , owed their existence to the occupation powers and were created out of mergers of former Prussian provinces and smaller states .
However , it was in many ways de facto integrated with West Germany under a special status .
His proposal was turned down due to opposition of the states and concerns of the government .
Article 18 of the constitution enabled a new delimitation of the German territory but set high hurdles : Three fifth of the votes handed in , and at least the majority of the population are necessary to decide on the alteration of territory .
Any later plans to break up the dominating Prussia into smaller states failed because political circumstances were not favorable to state reforms .
As the premiers did not come to an agreement on this question , the Parliamentary Council was supposed to address this issue .
Its provisions are reflected in Article 29 .
Moreover , in territories or parts of territories whose affiliation with a Land had changed after 8 May 1945 without a referendum , people were allowed to petition for a revision of the current status within a year after the promulgation of the Basic Law -LRB- paragraph 2 -RRB- .
The proposal should not take effect if within any of the affected territories a majority rejected the change .
In this case , the bill had to be introduced again and after passing had to be confirmed by referendum in the Federal Republic as a whole -LRB- paragraph 4 -RRB- .
At the same time , the Court reaffirmed the requirement for a territorial revision as a binding order to the relevant constitutional bodies .
After two years of work , the experts delivered their report in 1973 .
It provided an alternative proposal for both northern Germany and central and southwestern Germany .
In the north , either a single new state consisting of Schleswig-Holstein , Hamburg , Bremen and Lower Saxony should be created -LRB- solution A -RRB- or two new states , one in the northeast consisting of Schleswig-Holstein , Hamburg and the northern part of Lower Saxony -LRB- from Cuxhaven to Lüchow-Dannenberg -RRB- and one in the northwest consisting of Bremen and the rest of Lower Saxony -LRB- solution B -RRB- .
The Senate was abolished following a referendum in 1998 .
The states of Berlin , Bremen , and Hamburg are governed slightly differently from the other states .
The equivalent of the Minister-President is the Senatspräsident -LRB- President of the Senate -RRB- in Bremen , the Erster Bürgermeister -LRB- First Mayor -RRB- in Hamburg , and the Regierender Bürgermeister -LRB- Governing Mayor -RRB- in Berlin .
The parliaments in the remaining 13 states are referred to as Landtag -LRB- State Parliament -RRB- .
Nowadays , this is mostly just the right to be called a city or town .
However , in former times there were many other privileges , including the right to impose local taxes or to allow industry only within city limits .
The municipalities have two major policy responsibilities .
First , they administer programs authorized by the federal or state government .
Such programs typically relate to youth , schools , public health , and social assistance .
China , along with assistance from Soviet Union , came to aid of North Korea .
The war arose from the division of Korea at the end of World War II and from the global tensions of the Cold War that developed immediately afterwards .
Korea was ruled by Japan from 1910 until the closing days of World War II .
By 1948 , two separate governments had been set up .
Both governments claimed to be the legitimate government of Korea , and neither side accepted the border as permanent .
The conflict escalated into open warfare when North Korean forces -- supported by the Soviet Union and China -- invaded South Korea on 25 June 1950 .
On 27 June , the Security Council adopted S/RES/83 : Complaint of aggression upon the Republic of Korea and decided the formation and dispatch of the UN Forces in Korea .
In September 1950 , an amphibious UN counter-offensive was launched at Inchon , and cut off many of the North Korean attackers .
At this point , in October 1950 , Chinese forces crossed the Yalu and entered the war .
Chinese intervention triggered a retreat of UN forces which continued until mid-1951 .
The war in the air , however , was never a stalemate .
North Korea was subject to a massive bombing campaign .
During World War II , Japan used Korea 's food , livestock , and metals for their war effort .
At the end of the war , other world powers did not recognize Japanese rule in Korea and Taiwan .
He noted that he was `` faced with the scarcity of US forces immediately available , and time and space factors , which would make it difficult to reach very far north , before Soviet troops could enter the area '' .
As Rusk 's comments indicate , the Americans doubted whether the Soviet government would agree to this .
Disenfranchised , they headed for the hills , to prepare for guerrilla war against the US-sponsored ROK Government .
North Korea also provided the Chinese Communists in Manchuria with a safe refuge for non-combatants and communications with the rest of China .
As a token of gratitude , between 50,000 and 70,000 Korean veterans that served in the PLA were sent back along with their weapons , and they later played a significant role in the initial invasion of South Korea .
By spring 1950 , Stalin believed the strategic situation had changed .
In April 1950 , Stalin gave Kim permission to invade the South under the condition that Mao would agree to send reinforcements if they became needed .
Kim met with Mao in May 1950 .
At that time , the Chinese were in the process of demobilizing half of the PLA 's 5.6 million soldiers .
However , Mao sent more ethnic Korean PLA veterans to Korea and promised to move an army closer to the Korean border .
The North Koreans would then launch a `` counterattack '' that would capture Seoul and encircle and destroy the South Korean army .
The final stage would involve destroying South Korean government remnants , capturing the rest of South Korea , including the ports .
Stalin agreed to this change of plan .
The bridge was detonated while 4,000 refugees were crossing the bridge , and hundreds were killed .
Destroying the bridge also trapped many South Korean military units north of the Han River .
In spite of such desperate measures , Seoul fell that same day .
One facet of the changing attitude toward Korea and whether to get involved was Japan .
Especially after the fall of China to the Communists , U.S. East Asian experts saw Japan as the critical counterweight to the Soviet Union and China in the region .
The Truman administration was fretful that a war in Korea was a diversionary assault that would escalate to a general war in Europe once the United States committed in Korea .
At the same time , '' -LSB- t -RSB- here was no suggestion from anyone that the United Nations or the United States could back away from -LSB- the conflict -RSB- '' .
Yugoslavia -- a possible Soviet target because of the Tito-Stalin Split -- was vital to the defense of Italy and Greece , and the country was first on the list of the National Security Council 's post-North Korea invasion list of `` chief danger spots '' .
On 27 June President Truman ordered U.S. air and sea forces to help the South Korean regime .
Their forces included 274 T-34-85 tanks , 200 artillery pieces , 110 attack bombers , some 150 Yak fighter planes , 78 Yak trainers , and 35 reconnaissance aircraft .
Several U.S. industries were mobilized to supply materials , labor , capital , production facilities , and other services necessary to support the military objectives of the Korean War .
In fact , because of the extensive defense cuts and the emphasis placed on building a nuclear bomber force , none of the services were in a position to make a robust response with conventional military strength .
Lacking sufficient anti-tank weapons , artillery or armor , they were driven back down the Korean peninsula to Pusan .
The United States denied ROC 's request for combat , lest it provoke a communist Chinese retaliation .
On 5 July 1950 , Task Force Smith attacked the North Koreans at Osan but without weapons capable of destroying the North Koreans ' tanks .
They were unsuccessful ; the result was 180 dead , wounded , or taken prisoner .
In the resulting Battle of Pusan Perimeter -LRB- August -- September 1950 -RRB- , the U.S. Army withstood KPA attacks meant to capture the city at the Naktong Bulge , P'ohang - dong , and Taegu .
The United States Air Force -LRB- USAF -RRB- interrupted KPA logistics with 40 daily ground support sorties that destroyed 32 bridges , halting most daytime road and rail traffic .
Consequently , the over-extended KPA could not be supplied throughout the south .
By late August , the Pusan Perimeter had some 500 medium tanks battle-ready .
When authorized , he activated a combined U.S. Army and Marine Corps , and ROK Army force .
By 15 September , the amphibious assault force faced few KPA defenders at Incheon : military intelligence , psychological warfare , guerrilla reconnaissance , and protracted bombardment facilitated a relatively light battle .
However , the bombardment destroyed most of the city of Incheon .
After the Incheon landing , the 1st Cavalry Division began its northward advance from the Pusan Perimeter .
American air raids caused heavy damage to the KPA , destroying most of its tanks and much of its artillery .
By 1 October 1950 , the UN Command repelled the KPA northwards past the 38th parallel ; the ROK Army crossed after them , into North Korea .
The X Corps landed at Wonsan -LRB- in southeastern North Korea -RRB- and Riwon -LRB- in northeastern North Korea -RRB- , already captured by ROK forces .
The Eighth U.S. Army and the ROK Army drove up western Korea and captured Pyongyang city , the North Korean capital , on 19 October 1950 .
The 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team -LRB- `` Rakkasans '' -RRB- made their first of two combat jumps during the Korean War on 20 October 1950 at Sunchon and Sukchon .
As they neared the Sino-Korean border , the UN forces in the west were divided from those in the east by 50 -- 100 miles of mountainous terrain .
There was considerable resistance among many leaders , including senior military leaders , to confronting the U.S. in Korea .
After Peng made the case that if U.S. troops conquered Korea and reached the Yalu they might cross it and invade China the Politburo agreed to intervene in Korea .
Later , the Chinese claimed that US bombers had violated PRC national airspace on three separate occasions and attacked Chinese targets before China intervened .
There they conferred with the top Soviet leadership which included Joseph Stalin as well as Vyacheslav Molotov , Lavrentiy Beria and Georgi Malenkov .
Soviet shipments of matériel , when they did arrive , were limited to small quantities of trucks , grenades , machine guns , and the like .
Meanwhile , daylight advance parties scouted for the next bivouac site .
Another division night-marched a circuitous mountain route , averaging 18 miles -LRB- 29 km -RRB- daily for 18 days .
Meanwhile , on 10 October 1950 , the 89th Tank Battalion was attached to the 1st Cavalry Division , increasing the armor available for the Northern Offensive .
This meeting was much publicized because of the General 's discourteous refusal to meet the President on the continental United States .
He believed the PRC had some 300,000 soldiers in Manchuria , and some 100,000 -- 125,000 soldiers at the Yalu River .
Twelve days after Chinese troops entered the war , Stalin allowed the Soviet Air Force to provide air cover , and supported more aid to China .
It is unclear why the Chinese did not press the attack and follow up their victory .
On 25 November at the Korean western front , the PVA 13th Army Group attacked and overran the ROK II Corps at the Battle of the Ch ` ongch ` on River , and then decimated the US 2nd Infantry Division on the UN forces ' right flank .
Retreating from the north faster than they had counter-invaded , the Eighth Army crossed the 38th parallel border in mid December .
In northeast Korea by 11 December , the U.S. X Corps managed to cripple the PVA 9th Army Group while establishing a defensive perimeter at the port city of Hungnam .
During the Hungnam evacuation , about 193 shiploads of UN Command forces and matériel -LRB- approximately 105,000 soldiers , 98,000 civilians , 17,500 vehicles , and 350,000 tons of supplies -RRB- were evacuated to Pusan .
After that , the leading part of the war became the Chinese army .
UN forces retreated to Suwon in the west , Wonju in the center , and the territory north of Samcheok in the east , where the battlefront stabilized and held .
During the operation , the division and police conducted the Geochang massacre and Sancheong-Hamyang massacre .
But the offensive was soon blunted by the IX Corps positions at Chipyong-ni in the center .
The battle is sometimes known as the Gettysburg of the Korean War .
The battle saw 5,600 Korean , American and French troops defeat a numerically superior Chinese force .
United Nations forces had previously retreated in the face of large Communist forces instead of getting cut off , but this time they stood and fought at odds of roughly 15 to 1 .
On 7 March 1951 , the Eighth Army attacked with Operation Ripper , expelling the PVA and the KPA from Seoul on 14 March 1951 .
On 1 March 1951 Mao sent a cable to Stalin , in which he emphasized the difficulties faced by Chinese forces and the urgent need for air cover , especially over supply lines .
In late April Peng Dehuai sent his deputy , Hong Xuezhi , to brief Zhou Enlai in Beijing .
There were several reasons for the dismissal .
He believed that whether or not to use nuclear weapons should be his own decision , not the President 's .
MacArthur threatened to destroy China unless it surrendered .
MacArthur was the subject of congressional hearings in May and June 1951 , which determined that he had defied the orders of the President and thus had violated the U.S. Constitution .
A popular criticism of MacArthur was that he never spent a night in Korea , and directed the war from the safety of Tokyo .
UN forces advanced to `` Line Kansas '' , north of the 38th parallel .
The 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team 's -LRB- `` Rakkasans '' -RRB- second of two combat jumps was on Easter Sunday , 1951 , at Munsan-ni , South Korea , codenamed Operation Tomahawk .
The offensive 's first thrust fell upon I Corps , which fiercely resisted in the Battle of the Imjin River -LRB- 22 -- 25 April 1951 -RRB- and the Battle of Kapyong -LRB- 22 -- 25 April 1951 -RRB- , blunting the impetus of the offensive , which was halted at the `` No-name Line '' north of Seoul .
On 15 May 1951 , the Chinese commenced the second impulse of the Spring Offensive and attacked the ROK Army and the U.S. X Corps in the east at the Soyang River .
After initial success , they were halted by 20 May .
For the remainder of the Korean War the UN Command and the PVA fought , but exchanged little territory ; the stalemate held .
All of these factors generally led to a rate of Chinese casualties that was far greater than the casualties suffered by UN troops .
At the meeting it was decided to accelerate the construction of railways and airfields in the area , to increase the number of trucks available to the army , and to improve air defense by any means possible .
Peng was convinced that the war would be protracted , and that neither side would be able to achieve victory in the near future .
After the government representatives emphasized their inability to meet the demands of the war , Peng , in an angry outburst , shouted : `` You have this and that problem ... You should go to the front and see with your own eyes what food and clothing the soldiers have !
Not to speak of the casualties !
For what are they giving their lives ?
We have no aircraft .
We have only a few guns .
Transports are not protected .
More and more soldiers are dying of starvation .
Ca n't you overcome some of your difficulties ? ''
The atmosphere became so tense that Zhou was forced to adjourn the conference .
The Armistice also called upon the governments of South Korea , North Korea , China and the United States to participate in continued peace talks .
Defense Prisoner of War/Missing Personnel Office -LRB- DPMO -RRB- records indicate that the PRC and the DPRK transmitted 1,394 names , of which 858 were correct .
From 4,167 containers of returned remains , forensic examination identified 4,219 individuals .
Of these , 2,944 were identified as American , and all but 416 were identified by name .
On 30 March 2013 , North Korea stated that it had entered a `` state of war '' with South Korea and declared that `` The long-standing situation of the Korean peninsula being neither at peace nor at war is finally over '' .
These drove against a ROK Army with few anti-tank weapons adequate to deal with the Soviet T-34s .
Additional Soviet armor was added as the offensive progressed .
The North Korean tanks had a good deal of early successes against South Korean infantry , elements of the 24th Infantry Division , and those United States built M24 Chaffee light tanks that they encountered .
USS Juneau later sank several ammunition ships that had been present .
Three other supply ships were sunk by PC-703 two days later in the Yellow Sea .
The gun ships were used in shore bombardment , while the aircraft carriers provided air support to the ground forces .
During the war , five U.S. Navy ships were lost to mines : two minesweepers , two minesweeper escorts , and one ocean tug .
The Chinese intervention in late October 1950 bolstered the Korean People 's Air Force -LRB- KPAF -RRB- of North Korea with the MiG-15 , one of the world 's most advanced jet fighters .
The fast , heavily armed MiG outflew first-generation UN jets such as the F-80 -LRB- United States Air Force -RRB- and Gloster Meteors -LRB- Royal Australian Air Force -RRB- , posing a real threat to B-29 Superfortress bombers even under fighter escort .
These arrived in December 1950 .
It had a very high service ceiling -- 50,000 feet -LRB- 15,000 m -RRB- and carried very heavy weaponry : one 37 mm cannon and two 23 mm cannons .
They were fast enough to dive past the fighter escort of P-80 Shooting Stars and F9F Panthers and could reach and destroy the U.S. heavy bombers .
The MiGs were countered by the F-86 Sabres .
They had a ceiling of 42,000 feet -LRB- 13,000 m -RRB- and were armed with six .50 caliber -LRB- 12.7 mm -RRB- machine guns , which were range adjusted by radar gunsights .
If coming in at higher altitude the advantage of engaging or not went to the MiG .
Once in a level flight dogfight , both swept-wing designs attained comparable maximum speeds of around 660 mph -LRB- 1,100 km/h -RRB- .
The MiG climbed faster , but the Sabre turned and dived better .
Their father had owned an antique company in Houndsditch , London , which expanded in 1833 to import and sell sea-shells , after which the company `` Shell '' took its name .
Shell was vertically integrated and is active in every area of the oil and gas industry , including exploration and production , refining , distribution and marketing , petrochemicals , power generation and trading .
The Dutch company , Koninklijke Nederlandsche Petroleum Maatschappij , was in charge at The Hague of production and manufacture .
The unification was completed on 20 July 2005 and the original owners delisted their companies from the respective exchanges .
On 20 July 2005 , the Shell Transport & Trading Company plc was delisted from the LSE , where as , Royal Dutch Petroleum Company from NYSE on 18 November 2005 .
The shares of the company were issued at a 60/40 advantage for the shareholders of Royal Dutch in line with the original ownership of the Shell Group .
The transaction included East Resources ' tight gas fields .
This has led to mass protests from the Niger-Delta inhabitants and Amnesty International against Shell and Friends of the Earth Netherlands .
In January 2013 , a Dutch court rejected four out of five allegations brought against the firm over oil pollution in the Niger Delta but found a subsidiary guilty of one case of pollution , ordering compensation to be paid to a Nigerian farmer .
The downstream business , which in some countries also included oil refining , generally included a retail petrol station network , lubricants manufacture and marketing , industrial fuel and lubricants sales and a host of other product/market sectors such as LPG and bitumen .
Today , virtually all of Shell 's operations in various businesses are much more directly managed from London and The Hague .
The autonomy of `` operating companies '' has been largely removed , as more `` global businesses '' have been created .
Shell denied rumours of the sellout .
Shell continues however upstream activities/extracting crude oil in the oil-rich Niger Delta as well as downstream/commercial activities in South Africa .
Shell branded gas stations will be rebranded within maximum of five years from the acquisition and the number of gas stations is likely to be reduced .
Until then the stations will operate under Shell brand licence .
A statement from Shell read : `` Royal Dutch Shell acknowledges the outcome of Woodside Petroleum Limited 's shareholders ' negative vote on the selective buy-back proposal .
Shell is reviewing its options in relation to its remaining 13.6 percent holding . ''
The lawsuits were brought against Royal Dutch Shell and Brian Anderson , the head of its Nigerian operation .
Theft , meanwhile , emphasizes the potential commercial harm of infringement to copyright holders .
The practice of labelling the infringement of exclusive rights in creative works as `` piracy '' predates statutory copyright law .
Those who violated the charter were labelled pirates as early as 1603 .
The term `` piracy '' has been used to refer to the unauthorized copying , distribution and selling of works in copyright .
Copyright holders frequently refer to copyright infringement as theft .
For instance , the United States Supreme Court held in Dowling v. United States -LRB- 1985 -RRB- that bootleg phonorecords did not constitute stolen property .
For example , in 2013 , the US Army settled a lawsuit with Texas-based company Apptricity , which makes software that allows the army to track their soldiers in real time .
17 U.S.C. § 506 .
To establish criminal liability , the prosecutor must first show the basic elements of copyright infringement : ownership of a valid copyright , and the violation of one or more of the copyright holder 's exclusive rights .
United States v. LaMacchia 871 F.Supp .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Online intermediaries hosting content that infringes copyright are not liable , so long as they do not know about it and take actions once the infringing content is brought to their attention .
These intermediaries may include the author , publishers and marketers of peer-to-peer networking software , and the websites that allow users to download such software .
Armenia -LRB- 93 % -RRB- ; 2 .
Bangladesh -LRB- 92 % -RRB- ; 3 .
Azerbaijan -LRB- 92 % -RRB- ; 4 .
Moldova -LRB- 92 % -RRB- ; and 5 .
Zimbabwe -LRB- 91 % -RRB- .
According to the study 's results , the five countries with the lowest piracy rates were : 1 .
Luxembourg -LRB- 21 % -RRB- ; 3 .
New Zealand -LRB- 22 % -RRB- ; 4 .
Japan -LRB- 23 % -RRB- ; and 5 .
Austria -LRB- 25 % -RRB- .
According to the study , musicians and those involved in the recording industry are not the only ones who experience losses attributed to music piracy .
In addition with software infringement rates of 68 percent comparing to 24 percent of mature markets , emerging markets thus possess the majority of the global increase in the commercial value of counterfeit software .
Greece is strategically located at the crossroads of Europe , Asia , and Africa .
The Aegean Sea lies to the east of the mainland , the Ionian Sea to the west , and the Mediterranean Sea to the south .
Greece has one of the longest histories of any country , and is considered the cradle of Western civilization , and as such , is the birthplace of democracy , Western philosophy , the Olympic Games , Western literature , historiography , political science , major scientific and mathematical principles , and Western drama , including both tragedy and comedy .
Greece 's rich historical legacy is reflected in large part by its 17 UNESCO World Heritage Sites , among the most in Europe and the world .
It is also a member of numerous other international institutions , including the Council of Europe , NATO , -LSB- a -RSB- OECD , OIF , OSCE and the WTO .
The names for the nation of Greece and the Greek people differ from the names used in other languages , locations and cultures .
However , the name Hellas is sometimes used in English as well .
These civilizations possessed writing , the Minoans writing in an undeciphered script known as Linear A , and the Mycenaeans in Linear B , an early form of Greek .
These states and their colonies reached great levels of prosperity that resulted in an unprecedented cultural boom , that of classical Greece , expressed in architecture , drama , science , mathematics and philosophy .
A second invasion by the Persians followed in 480 BC .
Following decisive Greek victories in 480 and 479 BC at Salamis , Plataea , and Mycale , the Persians were forced to withdraw for a second time , marking their eventual withdrawal from all of their European territories .
Similarly , most Roman emperors maintained an admiration for things Greek in nature .
Hadrian was also particularly fond of the Greeks ; before he became emperor he served as an eponymous archon of Athens .
Greek-speaking communities of the Hellenized East were instrumental in the spread of early Christianity in the 2nd and 3rd centuries , and Christianity 's early leaders and writers -LRB- notably St Paul -RRB- were mostly Greek-speaking , though generally not from Greece itself .
In Athens and rural areas , paganism is attested well into the sixth century AD and even later .
Some remote areas such as the southeastern Peloponnese remained pagan until well into the 10th century AD .
Outside of these areas , a limited amount of Slavic settlement is generally thought to have occurred , although on a much smaller scale than previously thought .
-LSB- page needed -RSB-
Although the Ottoman state did not force non-Muslims to convert to Islam , Christians faced several types of discrimination intended to highlight their inferior status in the Ottoman Empire .
In the 19th century , many `` crypto-Christians '' returned to their old religious allegiance .
-LSB- page needed -RSB-
-LSB- page needed -RSB- These uprisings were put down by the Ottomans with great bloodshed .
Corfu withstood three major sieges in 1537 , 1571 and 1716 all of which resulted in the repulsion of the Ottomans .
These merchants came to dominate trade within the Ottoman Empire , establishing communities throughout the Mediterranean , the Balkans , and Western Europe .
Though the Ottoman conquest had cut Greece off from significant European intellectual movements such as the Reformation and the Enlightenment , these ideas together with the ideals of the French Revolution and romantic nationalism began to penetrate the Greek world via the mercantile diaspora .
-LSB- page needed -RSB-
The Filiki Eteria planned to launch revolution in the Peloponnese , the Danubian Principalities and Constantinople .
The Peloponnesian revolt was quickly followed by revolts in Crete , Macedonia and Central Greece , which would soon be suppressed .
This had the effect of galvanizing public opinion in western Europe in favor of the Greek rebels .
-LSB- page needed -RSB-
After a week-long standoff , a battle began which resulted in the destruction of the Ottoman -- Egyptian fleet .
A French expeditionary force was dispatched to supervise the evacuation of the Egyptian army from the Peloponnese , while the Greeks proceeded to the captured part of Central Greece by 1828 .
Many of the educated elite saw this as a peasant dialect and were determined to restore the glories of Ancient Greek .
All Greeks were united , however , in their determination to liberate the Greek-speaking provinces of the Ottoman Empire , regardless of the dialect they spoke .
At the end of the Balkan Wars , the extent of Greece 's territory and population had increased .
The resultant Greek exodus from Asia Minor was made permanent , and expanded , in an official Population exchange between Greece and Turkey .
Because the term `` Greeks '' in the exchange was based on religion Cappadocian Greeks , Pontian Greeks , and non Greek followers of Greek Orthodoxy were all subject to the exchange as well .
Many of these refugees could n't even speak the language , and were from alien environments , such as the case of the non Greeks and Cappadocians .
The refugees also made a dramatic post war population boost , as the amount of refugees was more than a quarter of Greece 's prior population .
Although a dictatorship , Greece remained on good terms with Britain and was not allied with the Axis .
Greece was eventually occupied by the Nazis who proceeded to administer Athens and Thessaloniki , while other regions of the country were given to Nazi Germany 's partners , Fascist Italy and Bulgaria .
The occupation brought about terrible hardships for the Greek civilian population .
The German occupiers committed numerous atrocities , mass executions , and wholesale slaughter of civilians and destruction of towns and villages in reprisals .
In total , the Germans executed some 21,000 Greeks , the Bulgarians 40,000 and the Italians 9,000 .
Widespread investments in industrial enterprises and heavy infrastructure , as well as funds from the European Union and growing revenues from tourism , shipping and a fast-growing service sector raised the country 's standard of living to unprecedented levels .
The country lies approximately between latitudes 34 ° and 42 ° N , and longitudes 19 ° and 30 ° E , with the extreme points being :
Eighty percent of Greece consists of mountains or hills , making the country one of the most mountainous in Europe .
Western Greece contains a number of lakes and wetlands and is dominated by the Pindus mountain range .
Pindus is characterized by its high , steep peaks , often dissected by numerous canyons and a variety of other karstic landscapes .
Another notable formation are the Meteora rock pillars , atop which have been built medieval Greek Orthodox monasteries .
This climate occurs at all coastal locations , including Athens , the Cyclades , the Dodecanese , Crete , the Peloponnese , the Ionian Islands and parts of the Central Continental Greece region .
The current Constitution was drawn up and adopted by the Fifth Revisionary Parliament of the Hellenes and entered into force in 1975 after the fall of the military junta of 1967 -- 1974 .
It has been revised three times since , in 1986 , 2001 and 2008 .
Women 's suffrage was guaranteed with an amendment to the 1952 Constitution .
According to the Constitution , executive power is exercised by the President of the Republic and the Government .
The President is also obliged to dissolve the Parliament earlier , if the opposition manages to pass a motion of no confidence .
However , as the military has sought to become a completely professional force , the government has promised to reduce mandatory military service or abolish it completely .
The 54 old prefectures and prefecture-level administrations have been largely retained as sub-units of the regions .
Seven decentralized administrations group one to three regions for administrative purposes on a regional basis .
Greece is a developed country with high standards of living -LSB- citation needed -RSB- and high Human Development Index .
Greek banks open a new branch somewhere in the Balkans on an almost weekly basis .
In 1979 the accession of the country in the European Communities and the single market was signed , and the process was completed in 1982 .
Greece is also a member of the International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organization , and is ranked 24th on the KOF Globalization Index for 2013 .
However , today 's fleet roster is smaller than an all-time high of 5,000 ships in the late 1970s .
Additionally , the total number of ships flying a Greek flag -LRB- includes non-Greek fleets -RRB- is 1,517 , or 5.3 % of the world 's dwt -LRB- ranked 5th -RRB- .
Railway connections play a somewhat lesser role in Greece than in many other European countries , but they too have also been expanded , with new suburban/commuter rail connections , serviced by Proastiakos around Athens , towards its airport , Kiato and Chalkida ; around Thessaloniki , towards the cities of Larissa and Edessa ; and around Patras .
International railway lines connect Greek cities with the rest of Europe , the Balkans and Turkey .
Internet cafés that provide net access , office applications and multiplayer gaming are also a common sight in the country , while mobile internet on 3G and 4G - LTE cellphone networks and Wi-Fi connections can be found almost everywhere .
Greece 's technology parks with incubator facilities include the Science and Technology Park of Crete -LRB- Heraklion -RRB- , the Thessaloniki Technology Park , the Lavrio Technology Park and the Patras Science Park , the Science and Technology Park of Epirus -LRB- Ioannina -RRB- .
Cooperation between ESA and the Hellenic National Space Committee began in the early 1990s .
As member of the ESA , Greece participates in the agency 's telecommunication and technology activities , and the Global Monitoring for Environment and Security Initiative .
Following the 1919 -- 1922 Greco-Turkish War and the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne , Greece and Turkey agreed to a population transfer based on cultural and religious identity .
However , many refugees who settled in former Ottoman Muslim villages in Central Macedonia and were defined as Christian Orthodox Caucasus Greeks arrived from the former Russian Transcaucasus province of Kars Oblast after it had been retroceded to Turkey but in the few years before the official population exchange .
Old Calendarists account for 500,000 followers .
Assemblies of God , International Church of the Foursquare Gospel and other Pentecostal churches of the Greek Synod of Apostolic Church have 12,000 members .
There are not official statistics about Free Apostolic Church of Pentecost , but the Orthodox Church estimates the followers as 20,000 .
In recent years there has been a small-scale revival of the ancient Greek religion , with estimates of 2,000 people active practitioners , and 100,000 `` sympathisers '' .
Indigenous Greek dialects include the archaic Greek spoken by the Sarakatsani , traditionally transhument mountain shepherds of Greek Macedonia and other parts of Northern Greece .
Further minority languages have traditionally been spoken by regional population groups in various parts of the country .
Today they are only maintained by the older generations and are on the verge of extinction .
Members of these groups ethnically identify as Greeks and are today all at least bilingual in Greek .
Their dialects can be linguistically classified as forms of either Macedonian Slavic or Bulgarian .
Of the non-citizen residents , 48,560 were EU or European Free Trade Association nationals and 17,426 were Cypriots with privileged status .
Some of the immigrants from Albania are from the Greek minority in Albania centred on the region of Northern Epirus .
Illegal immigrants entering Greece mostly do so from the border with Turkey at the Evros River and the islands of the eastern Aegean across from Turkey -LRB- mainly Lesbos , Chios , Kos , and Samos -RRB- .
The University of Constantinople was Christian Europe 's first secular institution of higher learning since no theological subjects were taught , and considering the original meaning of the world university as a corporation of students , the world 's first university as well .
As they can accept both Gymnasio -LRB- lower secondary school -RRB- and Lykeio -LRB- upper secondary school -RRB- graduates , these institutes are not classified as offering a particular level of education .
-LSB- disputed -- discuss -RSB- Greece 's healthcare expenditures as a percentage of GDP were 9.6 % in 2007 according to a 2011 OECD report , just above the OECD average of 9.5 % .
The country has the largest number of doctors-to-population ratio of any OECD country .
They introduced such important literary forms as epic and lyric poetry , history , tragedy , and comedy .
In their pursuit of order and proportion , the Greeks created an ideal of beauty that strongly influenced Western art .
During the late 19th and early 20th century , the Athenian theatre scene was dominated by revues , musical comedies , operettas and nocturnes and notable playwrights included Spyridon Samaras , Dionysios Lavrangas , Theophrastos Sakellaridis and others .
In the classical period many of the genres of western literature became more prominent .
Lyrical poetry , odes , pastorals , elegies , epigrams ; dramatic presentations of comedy and tragedy ; historiography , rhetorical treatises , philosophical dialectics , and philosophical treatises all arose in this period .
In 1944 Katina Paxinou was honoured with the Best Supporting Actress Academy Award for For Whom the Bell Tolls .
Directors and actors of this era were recognized as important historical figures in Greece and some gained international acclaim : Irene Papas , Melina Mercouri , Mihalis Kakogiannis , Alekos Sakellarios , Nikos Tsiforos , Iakovos Kambanelis , Katina Paxinou , Nikos Koundouros , Ellie Lambeti , and others .
Finos Film also contributed to this period with movies such as Λατέρνα , Φτώχεια και Φιλότιμο , Madalena , Η Θεία από το Σικάγο , Το ξύλο βγήκε από τον Παράδεισο and many more .
Greek cuisine incorporates fresh ingredients into a variety of local dishes such as moussaka , stifado , Greek salad , fasolada , spanakopita and souvlaki .
Throughout Greece people often enjoy eating from small dishes such as meze with various dips such as tzatziki , grilled octopus and small fish , feta cheese , dolmades -LRB- rice , currants and pine kernels wrapped in vine leaves -RRB- , various pulses , olives and cheese .
Greek cuisine differs widely from different parts of the mainland and from island to island .
Other common herbs and spices include basil , thyme and fennel seed .
Music played an important role in the education system during ancient times .
Later influences from the Roman Empire , Middle East , and the Byzantine Empire also had effect on Greek music .
As a result , and despite certain attempts by certain Greek chanters -LRB- such as Manouel Gazis , Ioannis Plousiadinos or the Cypriot Ieronimos o Tragoudistis -RRB- , Byzantine music was deprived of elements of which in the West encouraged an unimpeded development of art .
However , this method which kept music away from polyphony , along with centuries of continuous culture , enabled monophonic music to develop to the greatest heights of perfection .
The klephtic cycle came into being between the late Byzantine period and the start of the Greek War of Independence .
There is a unity between the Greek people 's struggles for freedom , their joys and sorrow and attitudes towards love and death .
For the first part of the next century , several Greek composers continued to borrow elements from the Heptanesean style .
Prominent representatives of this genre include Nikolaos Mantzaros , Spyridon Xyndas , Spyridon Samaras and Pavlos Carrer .
The song received 230 points with 10 sets of 12 points from Belgium , Bulgaria , Hungary , the United Kingdom , Turkey , Albania , Cyprus , Serbia & Montenegro , Sweden and Germany and also became a smash hit in different countries and especially in Greece .
The nation has competed at every Summer Olympic Games , one of only four countries to have done so .
Their best ever performance was in the 1896 Summer Olympics , when Greece finished second in the medal table with 10 gold medals .
The Greek national basketball team has a decades-long tradition of excellence in the sport , being considered among the world 's top basketball powers .
The most successful Greek teams are Olympiacos , Panathinaikos , Aris Thessaloniki , AEK Athens and P.A.O.K. Greek basketball teams are the most successful in European basketball the last 25 years , having won as many as 9 Euroleagues since the establishment of the modern era Euroleague Final Four format in 1988 , while no other nation has won more than 4 Euroleague championships in this period .
Besides the 9 Euroleagues , Greek basketball teams -LRB- Panathinaikos , Olympiacos , Aris Thessaloniki , AEK Athens , P.A.O.K , Maroussi -RRB- have won 3 Triple Crowns , 5 Saporta Cups , 2 Korać Cups and 1 FIBA Europe Champions Cup .
After the 2005 European Championship triumph of the Greek national basketball team , Greece became the reigning European Champion in both football and basketball .
The domestic top water polo leagues , Greek Men 's Water Polo League and Greek Women 's Water Polo League are considered amongst the top national leagues in European water polo , as its clubs have made significant success in European competitions .
In men 's European competitions , Olympiacos has won the Champions League , the European Super Cup and the Triple Crown in 2002 becoming the first club in Water polo history to win every title in which it has competed within a single year -LRB- National championship , National cup , Champions League and European Super Cup -RRB- , while NC Vouliagmeni has won the LEN Cup Winners ' Cup in 1997 .
In women 's European competitions , Greek water polo teams -LRB- NC Vouliagmeni , Glyfada NSC , Olympiacos , Ethnikos Piraeus -RRB- are amongst the most successful in European water polο , having won as many as 4 LEN Champions Cups , 3 LEN Trophies and 2 European Supercups .
The Greek league , the A1 Ethniki , is considered one of the top volleyball leagues in Europe and the Greek clubs have made significant success in European competitions .
Iraklis have also seen significant success in European competitions , having been three times runners-up of the CEV Champions League .
The other Greek gods that made up the Twelve Olympians were Demeter , Ares , Poseidon , Athena , Dionysus , Apollo , Artemis , Aphrodite , Hephaestus and Hermes .
Apart from these twelve gods , Greeks also had a variety of other mystical beliefs , such as nymphs and other magical creatures .
There are , however , more public holidays celebrated in Greece than are announced by the Ministry of Labour each year as either obligatory or optional .
His empire split into several kingdoms upon his death , the most famous of which were the Seleucid Empire , Ptolemaic Egypt , the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom and the Indo-Greek Kingdom .
Many Greeks migrated to Alexandria , Antioch , Seleucia and the many other new Hellenistic cities in Asia and Africa .
Although the political unity of Alexander 's empire could not be maintained , it resulted in the Hellenistic civilization and spread the Greek language and Greek culture in the territories conquered by Alexander .
Greek science , technology and mathematics are generally considered to have reached their peak during the Hellenistic period .
The basic body type is a four-legged land-borne animal , but some mammals are adapted for life at sea , in the air , in trees , or on two legs .
The largest group of mammals , the placentals , have a placenta , which enables feeding the fetus during gestation .
In 2008 the IUCN completed a five-year , 1,700-scientist Global Mammal Assessment for its IUCN Red List , which counted 5,488 accepted species .
Most mammals , including the six most species-rich orders , belong to the placental group .
The line following the stem group Sphenacodontia split-off several diverse groups of non-mammalian synapsids -- sometimes referred to as mammal-like reptiles -- before giving rise to the proto-mammals -LRB- Therapsida -RRB- in the early Mesozoic era .
If Mammalia is considered as the crown group , its origin can be roughly dated as the first known appearance of animals more closely related to some extant mammals than to others .
In any case , the temporal range of the group extends to the present day .
Though field work gradually made Simpson 's classification outdated , it remained the closest thing to an official classification of mammals .
Their 1997 book , Classification of Mammals above the Species Level , is the most comprehensive work to date on the systematics , relationships , and occurrences of all mammal taxa , living and extinct , down through the rank of genus , though recent molecular genetic data challenge several of the higher level groupings .
Most of these findings have been independently validated by retrotransposon presence/absence data .
The relationships between these three lineages is contentious , and all three possible different hypotheses have been proposed with respect to which group is basal with respect to other placentals .
These hypotheses are Atlantogenata -LRB- basal Boreoeutheria -RRB- , Epitheria -LRB- basal Xenarthra -RRB- , and Exafroplacentalia -LRB- basal Afrotheria -RRB- .
They differ from basal eupelycosaurs in several features of the skull and jaws , including : larger temporal fenestrae and incisors which are equal in size .
Those stages were characterized by :
In particular :
But paleontologists object that no placental fossils have been found from before the end of the Cretaceous .
In particular , scientists have recently identified an early Paleocene animal named Protungulatum donnae as one of the first placental mammals .
Popular sources , nevertheless , continue to attribute whiskers to Thrinaxodon .
When endothermy first appeared in the evolution of mammals is uncertain .
Breathing is largely driven by the muscular diaphragm , which divides the thorax from the abdominal cavity , forming a dome with its convexity towards the thorax .
Contraction of the diaphragm flattens the dome , increasing the volume of the cavity in which the lung is enclosed .
Relaxation of the diaphragm has the opposite effect , passively recoiling during normal breathing .
The rib cage itself also is able to expand and contract the thoracic cavity to some degree , through the action of other respiratory and accessory respiratory muscles .
As a result , air is sucked into or expelled out of the lungs , always moving down its pressure gradient .
Mammals take oxygen into their lungs , and discard carbon dioxide .
Its outermost cells are constantly lost ; its bottommost cells are constantly dividing and pushing upward .
Its job is to store lipids , and to provide cushioning and insulation .
The thickness of this layer varies widely from species to species .
Sometimes , this color variation is determined by age variation , however , in other cases , it is determined by other factors .
Selective pressures , such as ecological interactions with other populations or environmental conditions , often lead to the variation in mammalian coloration .
These selective pressures favor certain colors in order to increase survival .
Camouflage is the most predominant mechanism for color variation , as it aids in the concealment of the organisms from predators or from their prey .
Coat color can also be for intraspecies communication such as warning members of their species about predators , indicating health for reproductive purposes , communicating between mother and young , and intimidating predators .
Studies have shown that in some cases , differences in female and male coat color could indicate information nutrition and hormone levels , which are important in the mate selection process .
One final mechanism for coat color variation is physiological response purposes , such as temperature regulation in tropical or arctic environments .
Although much has been observed about color variation , much of the genetic that link coat color to genes is still unknown .
The genetic sites where pigmentation genes are found are known to affect phenotype by : 1 -RRB- altering the spatial distribution of pigmentation of the hairs , and 2 -RRB- altering the density and distribution of the hairs .
Quantitative trait mapping is being used to better understand the distribution of loci responsible for pigmentation variation .
However , although the genetic sites are known , there is still much to learn about how these genes are expressed .
The monotremes have a sex determination system different from that of most other mammals .
Like marsupials and most other mammals , monotreme young are larval and fetus-like , as the presence of epipubic bones prevents the expansion of the torso , forcing them to produce small young .
A marsupial has a short gestation period , typically shorter than its estrous cycle , and gives birth to an undeveloped newborn that then undergoes further development ; in many species , this takes place within a pouch-like sac , the marsupium , located in the front of the mother 's abdomen .
Even non-placental eutherians probably reproduced this way .
Intelligence itself is not easy to define , but indications of intelligence include the ability to learn , matched with behavioral flexibility .
While the earliest mammals were probably predators , different species have since adapted to meet their dietary requirements in a variety of ways .
Some eat other animals -- this is a carnivorous diet -LRB- and includes insectivorous diets -RRB- .
Other mammals , called herbivores , eat plants .
A herbivorous diet includes subtypes such as fruit-eating and grass-eating .
Carnivorous mammals have a simple digestive tract , because the proteins , lipids , and minerals found in meat require little in the way of specialized digestion .
Plants , on the other hand , contain complex carbohydrates , such as cellulose .
The digestive tract of an herbivore is therefore host to bacteria that ferment these substances , and make them available for digestion .
The bacteria are either housed in the multichambered stomach or in a large cecum .
Since small mammals have a high ratio of heat-losing surface area to heat-generating volume , they tend to have high energy requirements and a high metabolic rate .
Mammals that weigh less than about 18 oz -LRB- 500 g -RRB- are mostly insectivorous because they can not tolerate the slow , complex digestive process of a herbivore .
Larger animals , on the other hand , generate more heat and less of this heat is lost .
They can therefore tolerate either a slower collection process -LRB- those that prey on larger vertebrates -RRB- or a slower digestive process -LRB- herbivores -RRB- .
The only large insectivorous mammals are those that feed on huge colonies of insects -LRB- ants or termites -RRB- .
The deliberate or accidental hybridising of two or more species of closely related animals through captive breeding is a human activity which has been in existence for millennia and has grown in recent times for economic purposes .
The number of successful interspecific mammalian hybrids is relatively small , although it has come to be known that there is a significant number of naturally occurring hybrids between forms or regional varieties of a single species .
Indeed , the distinction between some hitherto distinct species can become clouded once it can be shown that they may not only breed but produce fertile offspring .
Some hybrid animals exhibit greater strength and resilience than either parent .
This is known as hybrid vigor .
The existence of the mule -LRB- donkey sire ; horse dam -RRB- being used widely as a hardy draught animal throughout ancient and modern history is testament to this .
There is some speculation that the donkey itself may be the result of an ancient hybridisation between two wild ass species or sub-species .
Hybrid animals are normally infertile partly because their parents usually have slightly different numbers of chromosomes , resulting in unpaired chromosomes in their cells , which prevents division of sex cells and the gonads from operating correctly , particularly in males .
There are exceptions to this rule , especially if the speciation process was relatively recent or incomplete as is the case with many cattle and dog species .
Normally behavior traits , natural hostility , natural ranges and breeding cycle differences maintain the separateness of closely related species and prevent natural hybridisation .
However , the widespread disturbances to natural animal behaviours and range caused by human activity , cities , dumping grounds with food , agriculture , fencing , roads and so on do force animals together which would not normally breed .
Clear examples exist between the various sub-species of grey wolf , coyote and domestic dog in North America .
They were spotted passing the straits en route to Surat .
Every continued in pursuit and managed to overhaul Ganj-i-Sawai , which resisted strongly before eventually striking .
When the news arrived in England it caused an outcry .
The plunder of Aurangzeb 's treasure ship had serious consequences for the English East India Company .
In 1712 , another act renewed the status of the company , though the debts were repaid .
The licence was prolonged until 1766 by yet another act in 1730 .
At this time , Britain and France became bitter rivals .
Frequent skirmishes between them took place for control of colonial possessions .
As home to the revolution , Britain experienced higher standards of living .
Its spiralling cycle of prosperity , demand and production had a profound influence on overseas trade .
XI -RRB- .
Although these small outposts remained French possessions for the next two hundred years , French ambitions on Indian territories were effectively laid to rest , thus eliminating a major source of economic competition for the company .
The company , fresh from a colossal victory , and with the backing of its own private well-disciplined and experienced army , was able to assert its interests in the Carnatic region from its base at Madras and in Bengal from Calcutta , without facing any further obstacles from other colonial powers .
They received no training in administration or leadership to make them independent of their British officers .
After the war Hong Kong island was ceded to Britain under the Treaty of Nanking and the Chinese market opened to the opium traders of Britain and other nations .
The Jardines and Apcar and Company dominated the trade , although P&O also tried to take a share .
Legalisation stimulated domestic Chinese opium production and increased the importation of opium from Turkey and Persia .
This increased competition for the Chinese market led to India reducing its opium output and diversifying its exports .
Despite stiff resistance from the East India lobby in parliament and from the Company 's shareholders , the Act passed .
The Council was headed by Warren Hastings , the incumbent Governor , who became the first Governor-General of Bengal , with an ill-defined authority over the Bombay and Madras Presidencies .
His nomination , made by the Court of Directors , would in future be subject to the approval of a Council of Four appointed by the Crown .
Initially , the Council consisted of Lt. General Sir John Clavering , The Honourable Sir George Monson , Sir Richard Barwell , and Sir Philip Francis .
Hastings was entrusted with the power of peace and war .
The costs of administration were to be met by the company .
The Company initially welcomed these provisions , but the annual burden of the payment contributed to the steady decline of its finances .
This Act clearly demarcated borders between the Crown and the Company .
Having temporarily achieved a state of truce with the Crown , the Company continued to expand its influence to nearby territories through threats and coercive actions .
The Indian Princes had become vassals of the Company .
The Company was forced to petition Parliament for assistance .
The building had become known as East India House by 1661 .
It was completely rebuilt and enlarged in 1726 -- 9 ; and further significantly remodelled and expanded in 1796 -- 1800 .
It was finally vacated in 1860 and demolished in 1861 -- 62 .
The docks were taken over by the Port of London Authority in 1909 , and closed in 1967 .
The motto was AUSPICIO REGIS ET SENATUS ANGLIÆ -LRB- Latin : By right of the King and the Senate of England -RRB- .
Many of the East India Company records are freely available online under an agreement that the Families in British India Society has with the British Library .
Published catalogues exist of East India Company ships ' journals and logs , 1600 -- 1834 ; and of some of the Company 's daughter institutions , including the East India Company College , Haileybury , and Addiscombe Military Seminary .
Definitions of `` Southeast Asia '' vary , but most definitions include the area represented by the countries -LRB- sovereign states and dependent territories -RRB- listed below .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In the 11th century , a turbulent period occurred in the history of Maritime Southeast Asia .
Along with Kadaram , Pannai in present-day Sumatra and Malaiyur and the Malayan peninsula were attacked too .
Samudera Pasai converted to Islam in the year 1267 , the King of Malacca Parameswara married the princess of Pasai , and the son became the first sultan of Malacca .
Soon , Malacca became the center of Islamic study and maritime trade , and other rulers followed suit .
There are several theories to the Islamisation process in Southeast Asia .
Another theory is trade .
The expansion of trade among West Asia , India and Southeast Asia helped the spread of the religion as Muslim traders from Southern Yemen -LRB- Hadramout -RRB- brought Islam to the region with their large volume of trade .
This is evident in the Arab-Indonesian , Arab-Singaporean , and Arab-Malay populations who were at one time very prominent in each of their countries .
The second theory is the role of missionaries or Sufis .
Finally , the ruling classes embraced Islam and that further aided the permeation of the religion throughout the region .
A later UN report stated that four million people died in Indonesia as a result of famine and forced labour during the Japanese occupation .
Geological uplifts in the region have also produced some impressive mountains , culminating in Puncak Jaya in Papua , Indonesia at 5,030 metres -LRB- 16,500 feet -RRB- , on the island of New Guinea ; it is the only place where ice glaciers can be found in Southeast Asia .
The second tallest peak is Mount Kinabalu in Sabah , Malaysia on the island of Borneo with a height of 4,095 metres -LRB- 13,435 feet -RRB- .
The highest mountain in Southeast Asia is Hkakabo Razi at 5,967 meters and can be found in northern Burma sharing the same range of its parent peak , Mount Everest .
The rain forest is the second largest on earth -LRB- with the Amazon being the largest -RRB- .
An exception to this type of climate and vegetation is the mountain areas in the northern region , where high altitudes lead to milder temperatures and drier landscape .
Other parts fall out of this climate because they are desert like .
This line runs along what is now known to be a tectonic plate boundary , and separates Asian -LRB- Western -RRB- species from Australasian -LRB- Eastern -RRB- species .
A significant portion of Southeast Asia , however , has not changed greatly and remains an unaltered home to wildlife .
The nations of the region , with only few exceptions , have become aware of the need to maintain forest cover not only to prevent soil erosion but to preserve the diversity of flora and fauna .
The shallow waters of the Southeast Asian coral reefs have the highest levels of biodiversity for the world 's marine ecosystems , where coral , fish and molluscs abound .
While Southeast Asia is rich in flora and fauna , Southeast Asia is facing severe deforestation which causes habitat loss for various endangered species such as orangutan and the Sumatran tiger .
At the same time , haze has been a regular occurrence .
Even prior to the penetration of European interests , Southeast Asia was a critical part of the world trading system .
First Spaniards -LRB- Manila galleon -RRB- and Portuguese , then the Dutch , and finally the British and French became involved in this enterprise in various countries .
The penetration of European commercial interests gradually evolved into annexation of territories , as traders lobbied for an extension of control to protect and expand their activities .
The overseas Chinese community has played a large role in the development of the economies in the region .
The region 's economy greatly depends on agriculture ; rice and rubber have long been prominent exports .
Manufacturing and services are becoming more important .
Newly industrialised countries include Indonesia , Malaysia , Thailand , and the Philippines , while Singapore and Brunei are affluent developed economies .
The region notably manufactures textiles , electronic high-tech goods such as microprocessors and heavy industrial products such as automobiles .
Since the early 1990s , `` even the non-ASEAN nations such as Cambodia , Laos , Vietnam and Burma , where the income derived from tourism is low , are attempting to expand their own tourism industries . ''
By 1998 , those receipts had dropped to less than 6 % of GDP while Thailand and Lao PDR increased receipts to over 7 % .
The distribution of the religions and people is diverse in Southeast Asia and varies by country .
Some 30 million overseas Chinese also live in Southeast Asia , most prominently in Christmas Island , Indonesia , Malaysia , the Philippines , Singapore , and Thailand , and also , as the Hoa , in Vietnam .
In Burma , the Burmese account for more than two-thirds of the ethnic stock in this country , while ethnic Thais and Vietnamese account for about four-fifths of the respective populations of those countries .
Countries in Southeast Asia practice many different religions .
Buddhism is predominant in Thailand , Cambodia , Laos , Burma , Vietnam and Singapore .
Ancestor worship and Confucianism are also widely practised in Vietnam and Singapore .
Christianity is predominant in the Philippines , eastern Indonesia , East Malaysia and East Timor .
Religions and peoples are diverse in Southeast Asia and not one country is homogeneous .
Christianity also predominates in the rest of the part of the Philippines , New Guinea and Timor .
Pockets of Hindu population can also be found around Southeast Asia in Singapore , Malaysia etc. .
Balinese Hinduism is somewhat different from Hinduism practised elsewhere , as Animism and local culture is incorporated into it .
In addition , there are also older tribal religious practices in remote areas of Sarawak in East Malaysia , Highland Philippines and Papua in eastern Indonesia .
In Burma , Sakka -LRB- Indra -RRB- is revered as a nat .
The culture in Southeast Asia is very diverse : on mainland Southeast Asia , the culture is a mix of Indochinese -LRB- Burma , Cambodia , Laos and Thailand -RRB- and Chinese -LRB- Singapore and Vietnam -RRB- .
Singapore and Vietnam show more Chinese influence in that Singapore , although being geographically a Southeast Asian nation , is home to a large Chinese majority and Vietnam was in China 's sphere of influence for much of its history .
Throughout Vietnam 's history , it has had no direct influence from India - only through contact with the Thai , Khmer and Cham peoples .
The arts of Southeast Asia have affinity with the arts of other areas .
Dance in much of Southeast Asia includes movement of the hands as well as the feet , to express the dance 's emotion and meaning of the story that the ballerina is going to tell the audience .
An example is the Wayang Kulit -LRB- Shadow Puppet -RRB- and literature like the Ramayana .
The antiquity of this form of writing extends before the invention of paper around the year 100 in China .
The outer portion was decorated .
This material would have been more durable than paper in the tropical climate of Southeast Asia .
Various forms of weaponry are sometimes used .
These facts were once kept highly secret , but they are now openly declared as the truth .
Although professional wrestling started out as petty acts in sideshows , traveling circuses and carnivals , today it is a billion-dollar industry .
Pro wrestling was also instrumental in making pay-per-view a viable method of content delivery .
For example , New York State still regulates `` professional wrestling '' through the New York State Athletic Commission -LRB- SAC -RRB- .
Professional wrestling shows can be considered a form of theatre in the round , with the ring , ringside area , and entryway comprising a thrust stage .
However , there is a much more limited concept of a fourth wall than in most theatric performances .
However , even though it is now standard , many announcers will explicitly state this -LRB- e.g. `` The following contest is set for one fall with a 20-minute time limit '' -RRB- .
British wrestling matches held under Admiral-Lord Mountevans rules are 2 out of 3 falls .
In matches with multiple competitors , an elimination system may be used .
Many modern specialty matches have been devised , with unique winning conditions .
As a result , the ladder can be used as a weapon .
Another common specialty match is known as the battle royal .
When the match begins , the simple objective is to throw the opponent over the top rope and out of the ring with both feet on the floor in order to eliminate that opponent .
The last wrestler standing is declared the winner .
A variant on this type of match is the WWE 's Royal Rumble where two wrestlers enter the ring to start the match and other wrestlers follow in 90 second intervals -LRB- previously 2 minutes -RRB- until 30-40 wrestlers have entered the ring .
All other rules stay the same .
For more match types , see Professional wrestling match types .
Due to the legitimate role that referees play in wrestling of serving as liaison between the bookers backstage and the wrestlers in the ring -LRB- the role of being a final arbitrator is merely kayfabe -RRB- , the referee is present , even in matches that do not at first glance appear to require a referee -LRB- such as a ladder match , as it is no holds barred , and the criteria for victory could theoretically be assessed from afar -RRB- .
Face special referees will often fight back against hostile heel wrestlers , particularly if the special referee is either a wrestler themselves or a famous martial artist -LRB- such as Tito Ortiz in the main event at TNA 's THard Justice in 2005 -RRB- .
A cloth apron hangs over the edges of the ring .
Guardrails or a similar barrier enclose this area from the audience .
Wrestlers are generally expected to stay within the confines of the ring , though matches sometimes end up outside the ring , and even in the audience , to add excitement .
In some team matches , only one entrant from each team may be designated as the `` legal '' or `` active '' wrestler at any given moment .
Sometimes , poly-sided matches that pit every one for themselves will incorporate tagging rules .
This often results in pins that can easily be kicked out of , if the defensive wrestler is even slightly conscious .
In matches involving multiple wrestlers -LRB- such as triple threat matches or tag team matches -RRB- , wrestlers who see a pin attempt that , if successful , would result in them losing the match are expected to run in and break the pin attempt by performing some sort of offensive maneuver on the wrestler attempting the pin .
However , these moves , simple as they are , still leave the pinning wrestler on top of the pinned wrestler .
Occasionally , a wrestler will reach for a rope -LRB- see rope breaks below -RRB- , only to put their hand back on the mat so they can crawl towards the rope some more ; this is not a submission , and the referee decides what their intent is .
This is called a `` rope break '' , and it is one of the most common ways to break a submission hold .
Instead , they use these free limbs to either grab one of the ring ropes -LRB- the bottom one is the most common , as it is nearest the wrestlers , though other ropes sometimes are used for standing holds such as Chris Masters ' Master Lock -RRB- or drape their foot across , or underneath one .
Once this has been accomplished , and the accomplishment is witnessed by the referee , the referee will demand that the offending wrestler break the hold , and start counting to five if the wrestler does not .
Any participant who stands up in time will end the count for everyone else .
At NXT TakeOver : Rival in 2015 , the referee stopped the match when Sami Zayn could not defend himself due to an injury sustained against Kevin Owens for the NXT Championship .
The count is broken and restarted when a wrestler in the ring exits the ring .
As they were technically inside the ring for a split second before exiting again , it is sufficient to restart the count .
Heels often use this tactic in order to buy themselves more time to catch their breath , or to attempt to frustrate their babyface opponents .
Although a countout can technically be considered a disqualification -LRB- as it is , for all intents and purposes , an automatic loss suffered as a result of violating a match rule -RRB- , the two concepts are often distinct in wrestling .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In practice , not all rule violations will result in a disqualification as the referee may use their own judgement and is not obligated to stop the match .
In some cases , a referee might disqualify a person under the presumption that it was that wrestler who knocked them out ; most referee knockouts are arranged to allow a wrestler , usually a heel , to gain an advantage .
For example , a wrestler may get whipped into a referee at a slower speed , knocking the ref down for short amount of time ; during that interim period , one wrestler may pin their opponent for a three-count and would have won the match but for the referee being down -LRB- sometimes , another referee will sprint to the ring from backstage to attempt to make the count , but by then , the other wrestler has had enough time to kick-out on their own accord -RRB- .
The latter can occur if , for example , one opponent 's shoulders touch the mat while maintaining a submission hold against another opponent .
If the opponent in the hold begins to tap out at the same time a referee counts to three for pinning the opponent delivering the hold , both opponents have legally achieved scoring conditions simultaneously .
A wrestling match may be declared a no contest if the winning conditions are unable to occur .
Although the terms are sometimes used interchangeably in practice , this usage is technically incorrect .
All of these contribute to the profit of the promotion company .
These personalities are a gimmick intended to heighten interest in a wrestler without regard to athletic ability .
An individual wrestler may sometimes use their real name , or a minor variation of it , for much of their career , such as Angelo Poffo , Ernie Ladd , Verne Gagne , Bret Hart , and Randy Orton .
Others can keep one ring name for their entire career -LRB- cases in point include Chris Jericho , Shawn Michaels , CM Punk and Ricky Steamboat -RRB- , or may change from time to time to better suit the demands of the audience or company .
Many wrestlers -LRB- such as The Rock and The Undertaker -RRB- are strongly identified with their character , even responding to the name in public or between friends .
A professional wrestling character 's popularity can grow to the point that it makes appearances in other media -LRB- see Hulk Hogan and El Santo -RRB- or even give the performer enough visibility to enter politics -LRB- Antonio Inoki and Jesse Ventura , among others -RRB- .
In recent years , however , antiheroes have also become prominent in professional wrestling .
This may be an abrupt , surprising event , or it may slowly build up over time .
It almost always is accomplished with a markable change in behavior on the part of the character .
Others may have no noticeable effect on the character 's status .
If a character repeatedly switches between being a face and heel , this lessens the effect of such turns , and may result in apathy from the audience .
He , along with the stable of D-Generation X , is generally credited with ushering in the Attitude Era of WWF programming .
In some cases a wrestler may possess admirable physical traits but perceived mediocre public speaking abilities -LRB- such as Brock Lesnar -RRB- , or their gimmick may be that of a `` wild savage '' needing a handler -LRB- such as Kamala -RRB- .
Some of these have also gone on to become recognized stars , such as Tammy Lynn Sytch , Stacy Keibler , and Miss Elizabeth .
Longer story arcs can result from multiple matches over the course of time .
Since most promotions have a championship title , competition for the championship is a common impetus for stories .
The same type of good vs. evil storylines were also once popular in roller derby .
Other stories result from a natural rivalry between two or more characters .
Celebrities would also be involved in storylines .
However other circumstances may also determine the use of a championship .
A combination of a championship 's lineage , the caliber of performers as champion , and the frequency and manner of title changes , dictates the audience 's perception of the title 's quality , significance and reputation .
As such , the most accomplished or decorated wrestlers tend to be revered as legends despite the predetermined nature of title reigns .
While invented long before , the practice of including music with the entrance gained rapid popularity during the 1980s , largely as a result of the huge success of Hulk Hogan and the WWF , and their Rock 'n' Wrestling Connection .
The NWA , however , ceased to acknowledge Burke as their Women 's World champion in 1954 , and instead acknowledged June Byers as champion after a controversial finish to a high-profile match between Burke and Byers that year .
Female wrestling is usually handled by promotions that specialize in joshi puroresu rather than divisions of otherwise male-dominated promotions , as is the case in the United States .
However , joshi puroresu promotions usually have agreements with male puroresu promotions such that they recognize each other 's titles as legitimate , and may share cards .
Despite these restrictions , many mixed tag matches do feature some physical interaction between participants of different genders .
For example , a heel may take a cheap shot at the female wrestler of the opposing team to draw a negative crowd reaction .
This began with Luna Vachon , who faced men in ECW and WWF .
While it is a rare feat in WWE , in TNA , ODB participates in singles intergender matches .
They also wrestled professionals in worked , often battle royal or handicap , matches -LRB- usually booked so the bear won -RRB- .
Though they have wrestled around the world and continue to do so , wrestling bears enjoyed their greatest popularity in the Southern United States , during the 1960s and 1970s .
The practice of bear wrestling has met strong opposition from animal rights activists in recent decades , contributing to its lack of mainstream acceptance .
Professional wrestling in the U.S. tends to have a heavy focus on story building and the establishment of characters -LRB- and their personalities -RRB- .
The relationship between different characters can also be very complex .
The difference in styles is due to the independent evolution of the sport in Mexico beginning in the 1930s and the fact that wrestlers in the cruiserweight division -LRB- peso semicompleto -RRB- are often the most popular wrestlers in Mexican lucha libre .
Wrestlers often execute high flying moves characteristic of lucha libre by utilizing the wrestling ring 's ropes to catapult themselves towards their opponents , using intricate combinations in rapid-fire succession , and applying complex submission holds .
The style of Japanese professional wrestling -LRB- puroresu -RRB- is again different .
With its origins in traditional American style of wrestling and still being under the same genre , it has become an entity in itself .
Those involved in producing professional wrestling have developed a kind of global fraternity , with familial bonds , shared language and passed-down traditions .
The permanent rosters of most promotions develop a backstage pecking order , with veterans mediating conflicts and mentoring younger wrestlers .
Those who are interested in the backstage occurrences , future storylines , and reasonings behind company decisions read newsletters written by journalists with inside ties to the wrestling industry .
These `` rags '' or `` dirt sheets '' have expanded into the Internet , where their information can be dispensed on an up-to-the-minute basis .
Some have expanded into radio shows .
Conversely , celebrities from other sports or general pop culture also become involved with wrestling for brief periods of time .
, Nacho Libre , and the Santo film series .
From Parts Unknown ... is an award-nominated Canadian drama about the rise and fall of a fictional wrestler .
One of the lead characters on the Disney Channel series Kim Possible was a huge fan of pro wrestling and actually featured it on an episode -LRB- with two former WWE wrestlers voicing the two fictitious wrestlers featured in the episode -RRB- .
Many courses , theses , essays , and dissertations have analyzed wrestling 's conventions , content , and its role in modern society .
Barthes argued that it should be looked at not as a scamming of the ignorant , but as spectacle ; a mode of theatric performance for a willing , if bloodthirsty , audience .
Wrestling is described as performed art which demands an immediate reading of the juxtaposed meanings .
The logical conclusion is given least importance over the theatrical performers of the wrestlers and the referee .
This work is considered a foundation of all later study .
The characters and storylines portrayed by a successful promotion are seen to reflect the current mood , attitudes , and concerns of that promotion 's society -LRB- and can , in turn , influence those same things -RRB- .
The 2005 release Lipstick and Dynamite , Piss and Vinegar : The First Ladies of Wrestling chronicled the development of women 's wrestling throughout the 20th century .
MTV 's documentary series True Life featured two episodes titled `` I 'm a Professional Wrestler '' and `` I Want to Be a Professional Wrestler '' .
Other documentaries have been produced by The Learning Channel -LRB- The Secret World of Professional Wrestling -RRB- and A&E -LRB- Hitman Hart : Wrestling with Shadows -RRB- .
Strikes are often stiff , especially in Japan and in independent wrestling promotions such as Combat Zone Wrestling -LRB- CZW -RRB- and Ring of Honor -LRB- ROH -RRB- .
Professional wrestler Davey Richards said in 2015 , `` We train to take damage , we know we are going to take damage and we accept that '' .
In short , the higher the sensitivity , the grainier the image will be .
or ° W. -RRB- corresponding with the last number visible on the exposed plate after development and fixation .
The Scheinergrade -LRB- Sch . -RRB-
Speed was expressed in degrees Scheiner , originally ranging from 1 ° Sch .
to 20 ° Sch. , where an increment of 19 ° Sch .
came close to a doubling of sensitivity .
` Tenths ' were later abandoned with DIN 4512:1957 -11 , and the example above would be written as `` 18 ° DIN '' .
Vice versa , `` old '' Weston film speed ratings could be converted into `` new '' Westons and the ASA scale by adding the same amount , that is , a film rating of 100 Weston -LRB- up to 1955 -RRB- corresponded with 125 ASA -LRB- as per ASA PH2.5-1954 and before -RRB- .
ASA Z38.2.1-1943 was revised in 1946 and 1947 before the standard grew into ASA PH2.5-1954 .
-LRB- See also : Exposure Index -LRB- EI -RRB- . -RRB-
For example , an Ilford HP3 that had been rated at 200 ASA before 1960 was labeled 400 ASA afterwards without any change to the emulsion .
For black-and-white negative film , the `` speed point '' m is the point on the curve where density exceeds the base + fog density by 0.1 when the negative is developed so that a point n where the log of exposure is 1.3 units greater than the exposure at point m has a density 0.8 greater than the density at point m .
The ISO arithmetic speed is determined from :
Therefore , each f-number factor of the square root of two -LRB- approximately 1.4 -RRB- is also a stop , so lenses are typically marked in that progression : f/1 .4 , 2 , 2.8 , 4 , 5.6 , 8 , 11 , 16 , 22 , 32 , etc. .
This rule is called reciprocity .
The manufacturers do not indicate that the 3200 number is an ISO rating on their packaging .
The usual design is that the camera 's parameters for interpreting the sensor data values into sRGB values are fixed , and a number of different EI choices are accommodated by varying the sensor 's signal gain in the analog realm , prior to conversion to digital .
A few camera designs also provide EI adjustment through a choice of lightness parameters for the interpretation of sensor data values into sRGB ; this variation allows different tradeoffs between the range of highlights that can be captured and the amount of noise introduced into the shadow areas of the photo .
The choices are based solely on the manufacturer 's opinion of what EI values produce well-exposed sRGB images at the various sensor sensitivity settings .
The factor 78 is chosen such that exposure settings based on a standard light meter and an 18-percent reflective surface will result in an image with a grey level of 18 % / √ 2 = 12.7 % of saturation .
If the noise-based speed -LRB- 40:1 -RRB- is lower than the saturation-based speed , or undefined because of high noise , the saturation-based speed is specified , rounded upwards to a standard value , because using the noise-based speed would lead to overexposed images .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
As an `` alpha '' global city , Mexico City is one of the most important financial centers in the Americas .
Mexico 's capital is both the oldest capital city in the Americas and one of two founded by Amerindians -LRB- Native Americans -RRB- , the other being Quito .
Mexico City served as the political , administrative and financial center of a major part of the Spanish colonial empire .
In recent years , the local government has passed a wave of liberal policies , such as abortion on request , a limited form of euthanasia , no-fault divorce , and same-sex marriage .
The city grew as the population did , coming up against the lake 's waters .
Floods were not only an inconvenience but also a health hazard , since during flood periods human waste polluted the city 's streets .
By draining the area , the mosquito population dropped as did the frequency of the diseases they spread .
The concept of nobility flourished in New Spain in a way not seen in other parts of the Americas .
Spaniards encountered a society in which the concept of nobility mirrored that of their own .
Spaniards respected the indigenous order of nobility and added to it .
In the ensuing centuries , possession of a noble title in Mexico did not mean one exercised great political power , for one 's power was limited even if the accumulation of wealth was not .
The concept of nobility in Mexico was not political but rather a very conservative Spanish social one , based on proving the worthiness of the family .
Hidalgo and several criollos were involved in a planned revolt against the Spanish colonial government , and the plotters were betrayed .
Fearing his arrest , Hidalgo commanded his brother Mauricio as well as Ignacio Allende and Mariano Abasolo to go with a number of other armed men to make the sheriff release the pro-independence inmates there on the night of September 15 .
They managed to set eighty free .
Around 6:00 am September 16 , 1810 , Hidalgo ordered the church bells to be rung and gathered his congregation .
Flanked by Allende and Juan Aldama , he addressed the people in front of his church , encouraging them to revolt .
Unrest followed for the next several decades , as different factions fought for control of Mexico .
Included are major actions at the battles of Molino del Rey and Chapultepec , culminating with the fall of Mexico City .
The American invasion into the Federal District was first resisted during the Battle of Churubusco on August 8 where the Saint Patrick 's Battalion , which was composed primarily of Catholic Irish and German immigrants , but also Canadians , English , French , Italians , Poles , Scots , Spaniards , Swiss , and Mexican people , fought for the Mexican cause repelling the American attacks .
The invasion culminated with the storming of Chapultepec Castle in the city itself .
Serving in the Mexican defense were the cadets later immortalized as Los Niños Héroes -LRB- the `` Boy Heroes '' -RRB- .
The Mexican forces fell back from Chapultepec and retreated within the city .
Attacks on the Belén and San Cosme Gates came afterwards .
During this era of Porfirian rule , the city underwent an extensive modernization .
Many of Mexico City 's major attractions and landmarks were built during this era in this style .
Under relentless growth , the Mexico City government could barely keep up with services .
Villagers from the countryside who continued to pour into the city to escape poverty only compounded the city 's problems .
Air and water pollution has been contained and improved in several areas due to government programs , the renovation of vehicles and the modernization of public transportation .
Although this earthquake was not as deadly or destructive as many similar events in Asia and other parts of Latin America , it proved to be a disaster politically for the one-party government .
This valley is located in the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt in the high plateaus of south-central Mexico .
Seismic activity is frequent here .
This soft base is collapsing due to the over-extraction of groundwater , called groundwater-related subsidence .
This sinking is causing problems with runoff and wastewater management , leading to flooding problems , especially during the rainy season .
The area has two main seasons .
The dry season runs from November to May , when the air is relatively drier .
This dry season subdivides into a cold period and a warm period .
Due in large part to the persuasion of representative Servando Teresa de Mier , Mexico City was chosen because it was the center of the country 's population and history , even though Querétaro was closer to the center geographically .
This area did not include the population centers of the towns of Coyoacán , Xochimilco , Mexicaltzingo and Tlalpan , all of which remained as part of the State of Mexico .
-LRB- The Mexican -- American War had just been fought . -RRB-
The Central Department was integrated by the former municipalities of Mexico City , Tacuba , Tacubaya and Mixcoac .
From 1941 to 1970 , the Federal District comprised twelve delegaciones and Mexico City .
Since then , in a de facto manner , the whole Federal District , whose delegaciones had by then almost formed a single urban area , began to be considered a synonym of Mexico City .
The first elected head of government was Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas .
The Federal District is divided into 40 electoral constituencies of similar population which elect one representative by first-past-the-post plurality -LRB- FPP -RRB- , locally called `` uninominal deputies '' .
The overall composition of the Legislative Assembly is :
In April of the same year , the Legislative Assembly expanded provisions on abortions , becoming the first federal entity to expand abortion in Mexico beyond cases of rape and economic reasons , to permit it regardless of the reason should the mother request it before the twelfth week of pregnancy .
For administrative purposes , the Federal District is divided into 16 `` delegaciones '' or boroughs .
The 16 boroughs of the Federal District with their 2010 populations are :
The boroughs are composed by hundreds of colonias or neighborhoods , which have no jurisdictional autonomy or representation .
Santa María la Ribera and San Rafael are the latest neighborhoods of magnificent Porfiriato architecture seeing the first signs of gentrification .
Cuajimalpa , Cuauhtémoc and Azcapotzalco had very high values ; respectively .8994 -LRB- 15th nationally -RRB- , .8922 -LRB- 23rd -RRB- and .8915 -LRB- 25th -RRB- .
Mexico City 's HDI for the 2005 report was of .9012 -LRB- very high -RRB- , and its 2010 value of .9225 -LRB- very high -RRB- or -LRB- by newer methodology -RRB- .8307 , and Mexico 's highest .
These include the National Institutes of Cardiology , Nutrition , Psychiatry , Oncology , Pediatrics , Rehabilitation , among others .
The World Bank has sponsored a project to curb air pollution through public transport improvements and the Mexican government has started shutting down polluting factories .
Trucks must use only liquefied petroleum gas -LRB- LPG -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Mexico City is one of the most important economic hubs in Latin America .
Excluding the rest of the Mexican economy , Mexico City alone would rank as the 30th largest economy in the world .
Due to the limited non-urbanized space at the south -- most of which is protected through environmental laws -- the contribution of the Federal District in agriculture is the smallest of all federal entities in the country .
He also signed the North American Free Trade Agreement -LRB- NAFTA -RRB- .
By contrast , corporate office buildings set their base in the city .
Historically , and since pre-Hispanic times , the Valley of Anahuac has been one of the most densely populated areas in Mexico .
When the Federal District was created in 1824 , the urban area of Mexico City extended approximately to the area of today 's Cuauhtémoc borough .
At the beginning of the 20th century , the elites began migrating to the south and west and soon the small towns of Mixcoac and San Ángel were incorporated by the growing conurbation .
This was the last Mexican Census which asked people to self-identify themselves with an heritage other than Amerindian .
However , the census had the particularity that , unlike racial/ethnic census in other countries , it was focused in the perception of cultural heritage rather than in a racial perception , leading to a good number of white people to identify with `` Mixed heritage '' due cultural influence .
The growth of the city has extended beyond the limits of the Federal District to 59 municipalities of the state of Mexico and 1 in the state of Hidalgo .
While no official figures have been reported , population estimates of each of these communities are quite significant .
Famous landmarks in the Historic Center include the Plaza de la Constitución -LRB- Zócalo -RRB- , the main central square with its epoch-contrasting Spanish-era Metropolitan Cathedral and National Palace , ancient Aztec temple ruins Templo Mayor -LRB- `` Major Temple '' -RRB- and modern structures , all within a few steps of one another .
Today , this avenue is an important financial district in which the Mexican Stock Exchange and several corporate headquarters are located .
Another piece of architecture is the Fine Arts Palace , a white marble theatre/museum whose weight is such that it has gradually been sinking into the soft ground below .
The Plaza of the Three Cultures in the Tlatelolco neighbourhood , and the shrine and Basilicas of Our Lady of Guadalupe are also important sites .
It has either the third or fourth-highest number of theatres in the world after New York , London and perhaps Toronto .
He and his wife Frida Kahlo lived in Coyoacán , where several of their homes , studios , and art collections are open to the public .
It is heavily subsidized , and has some of the lowest fares in the world , each trip costing 5.00 pesos from 05:00 am to midnight .
Several stations display pre-Columbian artifacts and architecture that were discovered during the metro 's construction .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- However , the metro covers less than half of the total urban area .
The Metro stations are also differentiated by the use of icons and glyphs which were proposed for people who could not read .
The specific icons were developed based on historical -LRB- characters , sites , pre-Hispanic motifs -RRB- , linguistic , symbolic -LRB- glyphs -RRB- or location references and has being emulated in further transportations alternatives in the City and in other Mexican cities .
Mexico City is the only city in the world to use the icon reference and has become a popular culture trademark for the city .
As the microbuses were removed from its route , it was hoped that the Metrobús could reduce pollution and decrease transit time for passengers .
In June 2013 , Mexico City 's mayor announced two more lines to come : Line 5 serving Eje 3 Oriente and Line 6 serving Eje 5 Norte .
The eje vial network is based on a quasi-Cartesian grid , with the ejes themselves being called Eje 1 Poniente , Eje Central , and Eje 1 Oriente , for example , for the north-south roads , and Eje 2 Sur and Eje 3 Norte , for example , for east-west roads .
Ring roads are the Circuito Interior -LRB- inner ring -RRB- , Anillo Periférico ; the Circuito Exterior Mexiquense -LRB- `` State of Mexico outer loop '' -RRB- toll road skirting the northeastern and eastern edges of the metropolitan area , the Chamapa-La Venta toll road skirting the northwestern edge , and the Arco Norte completely bypassing the metropolitan area in an arc from northwest -LRB- Atlacomulco -RRB- to north -LRB- Tula , Hidalgo -RRB- to east -LRB- Puebla -RRB- .
Street parking in urban neighborhoods is mostly controlled by the franeleros a.k.a. `` viene vienes '' -LRB- lit .
`` come on , come on '' -RRB- , who ask drivers for a fee to park , in theory to guard the car , but with the implicit threat that the franelero will damage the car if the fee is not paid .
Double parking is common -LRB- with franeleros moving the cars as required -RRB- , impeding on the available lanes for traffic to pass .
The local government continuously strives for a reduction of massive traffic congestion , and has increased incentives for making a bicycle-friendly city .
within 300 metres -LRB- 980 feet -RRB- of one another and are fully automatic using a transponder based card .
This airport is Latin America 's second busiest and one of the largests in traffic , with daily flights to United States and Canada , mainland Mexico , Central America and the Caribbean , South America , Europe and Asia .
Aeroméxico -LRB- Skyteam -RRB- is based at this airport , and provide codeshare agreements with non-Mexican airlines that span the entire globe .
This traffic exceeds the current capacity of the airport , which has historically centralized the majority of air traffic in the country .
An alternate option is Lic .
Having been capital of a vast pre-Hispanic empire , and also the capital of richest viceroyalty within the Spanish Empire -LRB- ruling over a vast territory in the Americas and Spanish West Indies -RRB- , and , finally , the capital of the United Mexican States , Mexico City has a rich history of artistic expression .
Directly in front of this building is the beautiful Museo Nacional de Arte -LRB- Munal -RRB- -LRB- the National Museum of Art -RRB- .
Porfirio Díaz 's regime sponsored arts , especially those that followed the French school .
Popular arts in the form of cartoons and illustrations flourished , e.g. those of José Guadalupe Posada and Manuel Manilla .
It was in the second half of the 20th century that the artistic movement began to drift apart from the Revolutionary theme .
Mexico City has numerous museums dedicated to art , including Mexican colonial , modern and contemporary art , and international art .
The collection includes pieces by Picasso , Klee , Kandinsky , Warhol and many others , though most of the collection is stored while visiting exhibits are shown .
The Museo de Arte Moderno -LRB- Museum of Modern Art -RRB- is a repository of Mexican artists from the 20th century , including Rivera , Orozco , Siqueiros , Kahlo , Gerzso , Carrington , Tamayo , among others , and also regularly hosts temporary exhibits of international modern art .
The Colección Júmex is a contemporary art museum located on the sprawling grounds of the Jumex juice company in the northern industrial suburb of Ecatepec .
It is said to have the largest private contemporary art collection in Latin America and hosts pieces from its permanent collection as well as traveling exhibits by leading contemporary artists .
The new Museo Júmex in Nuevo Polanco was slated to open in November 2013 .
The Museo de San Ildefonso , housed in the Antiguo Colegio de San Ildefonso in Mexico City 's historic downtown district is a 17th-century colonnaded palace housing an art museum that regularly hosts world-class exhibits of Mexican and international art .
Recent exhibits have included those on David LaChapelle , Antony Gormley and Ron Mueck .
The National Museum of Art -LRB- Museo Nacional de Arte -RRB- is also located in a former palace in the historic center .
Permanent exhibits include those on the Holocaust and other large-scale atrocities .
Mexico City is home to a number of orchestras offering season programs .
There are also many smaller ensembles that enrich the city 's musical scene , including the Carlos Chávez Youth Symphony , the New World Orchestra -LRB- Orquesta del Nuevo Mundo -RRB- , the National Polytechnical Symphony and the Bellas Artes Chamber Orchestra -LRB- Orquesta de Cámara de Bellas Artes -RRB- .
The city is also a leading center of popular culture and music .
There are a multitude of venues hosting Spanish and foreign-language performers .
There are numerous venues for smaller musical ensembles and solo performers .
These include the Hard Rock Live , Bataclán , Foro Scotiabank , Lunario , Circo Volador and Voilá Acoustique .
The Centro Nacional de las Artes -LRB- National Center for the Arts has several venues for music , theatre , dance .
Mexico City offers a variety of cuisines .
The city also has several branches of renowned international restaurants and chefs .
Association football is the country 's most popular and most televised franchised sport .
The Olympic Stadium in Ciudad Universitaria is home to the football club giants Universidad Nacional , with a seating capacity of over 52,000 .
The Estadio Azul , which seats 33,042 fans , is near the World Trade Center Mexico City in the Nochebuena neighborhood , and is home to the giants Cruz Azul .
-LRB- This too will change thanks to Rio , 2016 Summer Games host -RRB- .
The ICF Flatwater Racing World Championships were hosted here in 1974 and 1994 .
Three Nobel laureates , several Mexican entrepreneurs and most of Mexico 's modern-day presidents are among its former students .
Other major higher-education institutions in the city include the Metropolitan Autonomous University -LRB- UAM -RRB- , the National School of Anthropology and History -LRB- ENAH -RRB- , the Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México -LRB- ITAM -RRB- , the Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education -LRB- 3 campuses -RRB- , the Universidad Panamericana -LRB- UP -RRB- , the Universidad La Salle , the Universidad del Valle de Mexico -LRB- UVM -RRB- , the Universidad Anáhuac , Simon Bolivar University -LRB- USB -RRB- , the Alliant International University , the Universidad Iberoamericana , El Colegio de México -LRB- Colmex -RRB- , Escuela Libre de Derecho and the Centro de Investigación y Docencia Económica , -LRB- CIDE -RRB- .
The select and privileged group of Mexican scientists and artists belonging to this institution -- membership is for life -- include , among many , Mario Lavista , Ruy Pérez Tamayo , José Emilio Pacheco , Marcos Moshinsky -LRB- d. 2009 -RRB- , Guillermo Soberón Acevedo .
Mexico City is Latin America 's leading center for the television , music and film industries .
It is also Mexico 's most important for the printed media and book publishing industries .
Other major papers include Milenio , Crónica , El Economista and El Financiero .
Every major neighborhood in the city has its own borough-regulated market , often more than one .
Mexico City has three zoos .
Chapultepec Zoo , the San Juan de Aragon Zoo and Los Coyotes Zoo .
Visitors can see about 243 specimens of different species including kangaroos , giant panda , gorillas , caracal , hyena , hippos , jaguar , giraffe , lemur , lion , among others .
Zoo San Juan de Aragon is near the San Juan de Aragon Park in the Gustavo A. Madero .
Other guests are the golden eagle , pronghorn , bighorn sheep , caracara , zebras , African elephant , macaw , hippo , among others .
It was inaugurated on February 2 , 1999 .
You can admire eagles , ajolotes , coyotes , macaws , bobcats , Mexican wolves , raccoons , mountain lions , teporingos , foxes , white-tailed deer .
Chilango is used pejoratively by people living outside Mexico City to `` connote a loud , arrogant , ill-mannered , loutish person '' .
Migrating Germanic tribes commingled with the local Gallo-Roman populations in what is now Swabia and Bavaria .
A major part of Attila 's army were Germans , during the Huns ' campaign against the Roman Empire .
Linguists distinguish low Saxon , Franconian , Bavarian , Thuringian and Alemannic varieties in modern German .
Thus people who would be considered `` Germans '' , with a common culture , language , and worldview different from that of the surrounding rural peoples , colonized trading towns as far north of present-day Germany as Bergen -LRB- in Norway -RRB- , Stockholm -LRB- in Sweden -RRB- , and Vyborg -LRB- now in Russia -RRB- .
The Empire itself was not entirely German either .
The Congress of Vienna was essentially conservative , assuring that little would change in Europe and preventing Germany from uniting .
By the 1820s , large numbers of Jewish German women had intermarried with Christian German men and had converted to Christianity .
There were several reasons behind this war .
As German nationalism grew strongly inside the German Confederation and neither could decide on how Germany was going to be unified into a nation-state .
Germans were also forced to leave the former eastern territories of Germany , which were annexed by Poland -LRB- Silesia , Pomerania , parts of Brandenburg and southern part of East Prussia -RRB- and the Soviet Union -LRB- northern part of East Prussia -RRB- .
It was a lingua franca in the Holy Roman Empire .
People of German origin are found in various places around the globe .
Other significant centres are Canada , Argentina , South Africa and France each accounting for at least 1 million .
Kantianism inspired the work of Schopenhauer and Nietzsche as well as German idealism defended by Fichte and Hegel .
A number of German intellectuals were also influential in sociology , most notably Adorno , Habermas , Horkheimer , Luhmann , Simmel , Tönnies , and Weber .
They were preceded by such key physicists as Hermann von Helmholtz , Joseph von Fraunhofer , and Gabriel Daniel Fahrenheit , among others .
Artists such as Herbert Grönemeyer , Scorpions , Rammstein , Nena , Dieter Bohlen , Tokio Hotel and Modern Talking have enjoyed international fame .
Germany hosts many large rock music festivals annually .
German artists also make up a large percentage of Industrial music acts , which is called Neue Deutsche Härte .
Amongst Germany 's famous artists there are various Dutch entertainers , such as Johannes Heesters .
It was particularly influential during the years of the Weimar Republic with German expressionists such as Robert Wiene and Friedrich Wilhelm Murnau .
-LRB- 2003 -RRB- , Gegen die Wand -LRB- Head-on -RRB- -LRB- 2004 -RRB- and Der Untergang -LRB- Downfall -RRB- -LRB- 2004 -RRB- have enjoyed international success .
Through this , he altered the course of European and world history and established Protestantism .
Other religions , atheists or not specified constituted 38.8 % of the population at the time .
Among `` others '' are Protestants not included in Evangelical Church of Germany , and other Christians such as the Restorationist New Apostolic Church .
Protestantism was more common among the citizens of Germany .
It also attracts the greatest audience , with hundreds of thousands of spectators attending Bundesliga matches and millions more watching on television .
In the annual Nation Brands Index global survey , Germany became significantly and repeatedly more highly ranked after the tournament .
People in 20 different states assessed the country 's reputation in terms of culture , politics , exports , its people and its attractiveness to tourists , immigrants and investments .
Germany has been named the world 's second most valued nation among 50 countries in 2010 .
The wars launched a new movement that was born in France itself during the French Revolution .
Germans , for the most part , had been a loose and disunited people since the Reformation when the Holy Roman Empire was shattered into a patchwork of states .
Prussia under Otto von Bismarck would ride on the coat-tails of nationalism to unite all of modern-day Germany .
Following the defeat in World War I , influence of German-speaking elites over Central and Eastern Europe was greatly limited .
Austria-Hungary was split up .
For decades after the Second World War , any national symbol or expression was a taboo .
However , the Germans are becoming increasingly patriotic .
Another study in 2009 , carried out by the Identity Foundation in Düsseldorf , showed that 73 % of the Germans were proud of their country , twice more than 8 years earlier .
You have become Europe 's indispensable nation . ''
According to Jacob Heilbrunn , a senior editor at The National Interest , such a statement is unprecedented when taking into consideration Germany 's history .
`` This was an extraordinary statement from a top official of a nation that was ravaged by Germany during World War II .
And it reflects a profound shift taking place throughout Germany and Europe about Berlin 's position at the center of the Continent . ''
Heilbrunn believes that the adage , `` what was good for Germany was bad for the European Union '' has been supplanted by a new mentality -- what is in the interest of Germany is also in the interest of its neighbors .
Indeed , this German sphere of influence has been welcomed by the countries that border it , as demonstrated by Polish foreign minister Radek Sikorski 's effusive praise for his country 's western neighbor .
This shift in thinking is boosted by a newer generation of Germans who see World War II as a distant memory .
The settlement became the headquarters of the New Haven Colony .
For over a century , New Haven citizens had fought in the colonial militia alongside regular British forces , as in the French and Indian War .
The Farmington Canal , created in the early 19th century , was a short-lived transporter of goods into the interior regions of Connecticut and Massachusetts , and ran from New Haven to Northampton , Massachusetts .
See `` Museums '' below for more information .
-LRB- Winchester would continue to produce arms in New Haven until 2006 , and many of the buildings that were a part of the Winchester plant are now a part of the Winchester Repeating Arms Company Historic District . -RRB-
Jewish immigration to New Haven has left an enduring mark on the city .
Certain sections of downtown New Haven were redeveloped to include museums , new office towers , a hotel , and large shopping complexes .
Most New Haveners refer to these men as `` The Three Judges '' .
In addition , several smaller streams flow through the city 's neighborhoods , including Wintergreen Brook , the Beaver Ponds Outlet , Wilmot Brook , Belden Brook , and Prospect Creek .
New Haven has a long tradition of urban planning and a purposeful design for the city 's layout .
The city could be argued to have some of the first preconceived layouts in the country .
The Green remains the social center of the city today .
The city has many distinct neighborhoods .
Simultaneously , the growth and expansion of Yale University further affected the economic shift .
Yale and Yale-New Haven are also among the largest employers in the state , and provide more $ 100,000 + - salaried positions than any other employer in Connecticut .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Eight Courant 100 companies are based in Greater New Haven , with four headquartered in New Haven proper .
Vion Pharmaceuticals is traded OTC -LRB- OTC BB : VIONQ.OB -RRB- .
There are 52,941 housing units at an average density of 2,808.5 per square mile -LRB- 1,084.4 / km ² -RRB- .
Hispanic or Latino residents of any race were 27.4 % of the population .
New Haven was the subject of Who Governs ?
After the tests were scored , no blacks scored high enough to qualify for consideration for promotion , so the city announced that no one would be promoted .
New Haven is a notable center for higher education .
There are more than 60 cities in the country that have a Promise-type program for their students .
Represented cuisines include Malaysian , Ethiopian , Spanish , Belgian , French , Greek , Latin American , Mexican , Italian , Thai , Chinese , Japanese , Vietnamese , Korean , Indian , Jamaican , Cuban , Peruvian , Syrian/Lebanese , and Turkish .
Modern Apizza on State Street , which opened in 1934 , is also well-known .
Smaller theatres include the Little Theater on Lincoln Street .
The theatre is used for student productions as well as the home to weekly services to a local non-denominational church , the City Church New Haven .
Other parishes in the city celebrate the Feast of Saint Anthony of Padua and a carnival in honor of St. Bernadette Soubirous .
Believing the upkeep on the venue to be a drain of tax dollars , the DeStefano administration closed the Coliseum in 2002 ; it was demolished in 2007 .
The NHAC , built adjacent to Hillhouse High School , is used for New Haven public schools athletics , as well as large-scale area and state sporting events ; it is the largest high school indoor sports complex in the state .
New Haven has many architectural landmarks dating from every important time period and architectural style in American history .
Frank Lloyd Wright , Marcel Breuer , Alexander Jackson Davis , Philip C. Johnson , Gordon Bunshaft , Louis Kahn , James Gamble Rogers , Frank Gehry , Charles Willard Moore , Stefan Behnisch , James Polshek , Paul Rudolph , Eero Saarinen and Robert Venturi all have designed buildings in New Haven .
Of these , nine are among the 60 U.S. National Historic Landmarks in Connecticut .
The cannons of Fort Nathan Hale were successful in defying British war ships during the War of 1812 .
The site is now listed on the National Register of Historic Places and receives thousands of visitors each year .
Both of the lighthouses and the carousel are listed on the National Register of Historic Places .
Since then , bike lanes have also been added to sections of Howard Ave , Elm St , Dixwell Avenue , Water Street , Clinton Avenue and State Street .
The city also has several major surface arteries .
Rail transportation access is available , with a private switch engine for yard movements and private siding for loading and unloading .
The New Haven area supports several medical facilities that are considered some of the best hospitals in the country .
New Haven has been depicted in a number of movies .
The filming of Crystal Skull involved an extensive chase sequence through the streets of New Haven .
BYU offers programs in liberal arts , engineering , agriculture , management , physical and mathematical sciences , nursing and law .
Hence , October 16 , 1875 is commonly held as BYU 's founding date .
Under Maeser 's direction the school educated many luminaries including future U.S. Supreme Court Justice George Sutherland and future U.S. Senator Reed Smoot among others .
A series of odd managerial decisions by Cluff led to his demotion ; however , in his last official act , he proposed to the Board that the Academy be named `` Brigham Young University '' .
The suggestion received a large amount of opposition , with many members of the Board saying that the school was n't large enough to be a university , but the decision ultimately passed .
Nevertheless , he was an excellent orator and organizer .
After some controversy among locals over BYU 's purchase of this property , construction began in 1909 on the first building on the current campus , the Karl G. Maeser Memorial .
The religious nature of the school seemed at the time to collide with this scientific theory .
A few have described the school at this time as nothing more than a `` religious seminary '' .
However , many of its graduates at this time would go on to great success and become well renowned in their fields .
Harris made several important changes to the school , reorganizing it into a true university , whereas before , its organization had remnants of the Academy days .
At the beginning of his tenure , the school was not officially recognized as a university by any accreditation organization .
By the end of his term , the school was accredited under all major accrediting organizations at the time .
He was eventually replaced by Howard S. McDonald , who received his doctorate from the University of California .
Wilkinson was responsible for the building of over eighty structures on the campus , many of which still stand .
The quality of the students also increased , leading to higher educational standards at the school .
During his administration , a new library was also added , doubling the library space on campus .
Lee was responsible for the Benson Science Building and the Museum of Art on campus .
The planes crashed on a Tuesday , hours before the weekly devotional normally held at BYU .
Bateman was followed by Cecil O. Samuelson in 2003 .
U.S. News and World Report describes BYU 's selectivity as being `` more selective '' and compares it with such universities as the University of Texas at Austin and The Ohio State University .
For 2016 , U.S. News & World Report ranked BYU as tied for 66th for national universities in the United States .
A 2013 Quarterly Journal of Economics study of where the nation 's top high school students choose to enroll ranked BYU No. 21 in its peer-reviewed study .
For 2009 , the university 's School of Accountancy , which is housed within the Marriott School , received two No. 3 rankings for its undergraduate program -- one by Public Accounting Report and the other by U.S. News & World Report .
The same two reporting agencies also ranked the school 's MAcc program No. 3 and No. 8 in the nation , respectively .
Scientists associated with BYU have created some notable inventions .
In prestigious scholarships , BYU has produced 10 Rhodes Scholars , four Gates Scholars in the last six years , and in the last decade has claimed 41 Fulbright scholars and 3 Jack Kent Cooke scholars .
During any given semester , about one-third of the student body is enrolled in foreign language classes , a rate nearly four times the national average .
It was also selected as a Center for International Business Education Research , a function of which is to train business employees in international languages and relations .
Beyond this , BYU also runs a very large study abroad program , with satellite centers in London , Jerusalem , and Paris , as well as more than 20 other sites .
A few special additions enhance the language-learning experience .
The new rules have not affected BYU 's accreditation , as the university 's chosen accrediting body allows `` religious colleges and universities to place limitations on academic freedom so long as they publish those limitations candidly '' , according to associate academic vice president Jim Gordon .
The AAUP 's concern was not with restrictions on the faculty member 's religious expression but with a failure , as alleged by the faculty member and AAUP , that the restrictions had not been adequately specified in advance by BYU : `` The AAUP requires that any doctrinal limitations on academic freedom be laid out clearly in writing .
We -LSB- AAUP -RSB- concluded that BYU had failed to do so adequately . ''
BYU also manages some courses and majors through the David M. Kennedy Center for International Studies and `` miscellaneous '' college departments , including Undergraduate Education , Graduate Studies , Independent Study , Continuing Education , and the Honors Program .
The buildings feature a wide variety of architectural styles , each building being built in the style of its time .
The grass , trees , and flower beds on BYU 's campus are impeccably maintained .
Furthermore , views of the Wasatch Mountains , -LRB- including Mount Timpanogos -RRB- can be seen from the campus .
Furthermore , BYU 's Marriott Center , used as a basketball arena , can seat over 22,000 and is one of the largest on-campus arenas in the nation .
Interestingly absent on the campus of this church owned university is a campus chapel .
Notwithstanding , each Sunday LDS Church services for students are conducted on campus , but due to the large number of students attending these services , nearly all of the buildings and possible meeting spaces on campus are utilized -LRB- in addition , many students attend services off campus in LDS chapels in the surrounding communities -RRB- .
The campus is home to several museums containing exhibits from many different fields of study .
This Museum aids in academic pursuits of students at BYU via research and study of the artworks in its collection .
The Museum is also open to the general public and provides educational programming .
The Museum of Peoples and Cultures is a museum of archaeology and ethnology .
It focuses on native cultures and artifacts of the Great Basin , American Southwest , Mesoamerica , Peru , and Polynesia .
It has been featured in magazines , newspapers , and on television internationally .
The Monte L. Bean Life Science Museum was formed in 1978 .
It features several forms of plant and animal life on display and available for research by students and scholars .
The campus also houses several performing arts facilities .
Students use its stage in a variety of theatre experiments , as well as for Pardoe Series performances .
It seats 500 people , and has quite a large stage with a proscenium opening of 19 by 55 feet -LRB- 17 m -RRB- .
A smaller , black box theater , it allows a variety of seating and staging formats .
It seats 125 , and measures 30 by 50 feet -LRB- 15 m -RRB- .
It seats 280 .
The university has stated that `` we have a responsibility to be wise stewards of the earth and its resources . ''
The student groups BYU Recycles , Eco-Response , and BYU Earth educate students , faculty , staff , and administrators about how the campus can decrease its environmental impact .
BYU 's Ballroom dance team has won first place in Latin or Standard -LRB- or both -RRB- many times when they have competed at the Blackpool Dance Festival , and they were the first U.S. team to win the formation championships at the famed British Championships in Blackpool , England in 1972 .
In addition , BYU has a number of other notable dance teams and programs .
These teams include the Theatre Ballet , Contemporary Dance Theatre , Living Legends , and International Folk Dance Ensemble .
BYU boasts one of the largest dance departments in the nation .
Many students from all different majors across campus participate in various dance classes each semester .
Nineteen of these teams played mainly in the Mountain West Conference from its inception in 1999 until the school left that conference in 2011 .
Prior to that time BYU teams competed in the Western Athletic Conference .
All teams are named the `` Cougars '' , and Cosmo the Cougar has been the school 's mascot since 1953 .
The NCAA allows students to serve missions for two years without subtracting that time from their eligibility period .
This has caused minor controversy , but is largely recognized as not lending the school any significant advantage , since players receive no athletic and little physical training during their missions .
Beginning in the 2011 season , BYU football competes in college football as an independent .
In addition , most other sports now compete in the West Coast Conference .
Teams in swimming and diving and indoor track and field for both men and women joined the men 's volleyball program in the Mountain Pacific Sports Federation .
For outdoor track and field , the Cougars became an Independent .
Softball returned to the Western Athletic Conference , but spent only one season in the WAC ; the team moved to the Pacific Coast Softball Conference after the 2012 season .
The softball program may move again after the 2013 season ; the July 2013 return of Pacific to the WCC will enable that conference to add softball as an official sport .
This phrase is used in reference to the school 's mission as an `` ambassador '' to the world for the LDS Church and thus , for Jesus Christ .
Leaders encourage students and faculty to help fulfill the goal by following the teachings of their religion , adhering to the school 's honor code , and serving others with the knowledge they gain while attending .
Many young men would often attend a semester or two of higher education prior to beginning missionary service .
This policy change will likely impact what has been the traditional incoming freshman class at BYU .
All students and faculty , regardless of religion , are required to agree to adhere to an honor code .
Early forms of the Church Educational System Honor Code are found as far back as the days of the Brigham Young Academy and early school President Karl G. Maeser .
This led to what the Honor Code represents today : rules regarding chastity , dress , grooming , drugs , and alcohol .
Students and faculty found in violation of standards are either warned or called to meet with representatives of the Honor Council .
In certain cases , students and faculty can be expelled from the school or lose tenure .
Both LDS and non-LDS students are required to meet annually with a Church leader to receive an ecclesiastical endorsement for both acceptance and continuance .
Various LGBT advocacy groups have protested the honor code and criticized it as being anti-gay , and The Princeton Review ranked BYU as the 3rd most LGBT-unfriendly school in the United States .
BYU 's social and cultural atmosphere is unique .
Brigham Young University 's Honor Code , which all BYU students agree to follow as a condition of studying at BYU , prohibits the consumption of alcoholic beverages , tobacco , etc. .
BYU 's 2014 '' # 1 stone cold '' sober rating marked the 17th year in a row that the school had earned that rating .
According to the Uniform Crime Reports , incidents of crime in Provo are lower than the national average .
Four of BYU 's thirteen presidents were alumni of the University .
BYU also graduated American activist and contributor for ABC News Elizabeth Smart-Gilmour .
In entertainment and television , BYU is represented by Jon Heder '02 -LRB- best known for his role as Napoleon Dynamite -RRB- , writer-director Daryn Tufts ' 98 , Golden Globe-nominated Aaron Eckhart ' 94 , animator and filmmaker Don Bluth ' 54 , Jeopardy! all-time champion Ken Jennings ' 00 , and Richard Dutcher , the `` Father of Mormon Cinema . ''
In the music industry BYU is represented by lead singer of the Grammy Award winning band Imagine Dragons Dan Reynolds , multi-platinum selling drummer Elaine Bradley from the band Neon Trees , crossover dubstep violinist Lindsey Stirling , former American Idol contestant Carmen Rasmusen , Mormon Tabernacle Choir director Mack Wilberg and pianist Massimiliano Frani .
A number of BYU alumni have found success in professional sports , representing the University in 7 MLB World Series , 5 NBA Finals , and 25 NFL Super Bowls .
In baseball , BYU alumni include All-Stars Rick Aguilera ' 83 , Wally Joyner ' 84 , and Jack Morris ' 76 .
Other symptoms may include shortness of breath , nausea , feeling faint , a cold sweat , or feeling tired .
Among those over 75 years old , about 5 % have had an MI with little or no history of symptoms .
An MI may cause heart failure , an irregular heartbeat , or cardiac arrest .
Risk factors include high blood pressure , smoking , diabetes , lack of exercise , obesity , high blood cholesterol , poor diet , and excessive alcohol intake , among others .
MIs are less commonly caused by coronary artery spasms , which may be due to cocaine , significant emotional stress , and extreme cold , among others .
In ST elevation MIs treatments which attempt to restore blood flow to the heart are typically recommended and include angioplasty , where the arteries are pushed open , or thrombolysis , where the blockage is removed using medications .
After an MI , lifestyle modifications , along with long term treatment with aspirin , beta blockers , and statins , are typically recommended .
The onset of symptoms in myocardial infarction -LRB- MI -RRB- is usually gradual , over several minutes , and rarely instantaneous .
These symptoms are likely induced by a massive surge of catecholamines from the sympathetic nervous system , which occurs in response to pain and the blood flow abnormalities that result from dysfunction of the heart muscle .
Some are part of a retail chain of many stores , while others may be independent retailers .
All the major British cities had flourishing department stores by the mid-or late nineteenth century .
At its zenith the store had buildings on both sides of Deansgate linked by a subterranean passage `` Kendals Arcade '' and an art nouveau tiled food hall .
Other large Manchester stores included Paulden 's -LRB- currently Debenhams -RRB- and Lewis 's -LRB- now a Primark -RRB- .
The shop floors were structured so that goods could be made more accessible to customers .
There were elegant restaurants with modest prices , a library , reading and writing rooms , special reception rooms for French , German , American and `` Colonial '' customers , a First Aid Room , and a Silence Room , with soft lights , deep chairs , and double-glazing , all intended to keep customers in the store as long as possible .
Staff members were taught to be on hand to assist customers , but not too aggressively , and to sell the merchandise .
They flourished in the early 19th century , with La Belle Jardiniere -LRB- 1824 -RRB- , Aux Trois Quartiers -LRB- 1829 -RRB- , and Le Petit Saint Thomas -LRB- 1830 -RRB- .
It originally had four departments , twelve employees , and a floor space of three hundred meters .
The income rose from twenty million francs in 1870 to 72 million at the time of the Boucicaut 's death in 1877 .
The floor space had increased from three hundred square meters in 1838 to fifty thousand , and the number of employees had increased from twelve in 1838 to 1788 in 1879 .
By 1880 half the employees were women ; unmarried women employees lived in dormitories on the upper floors .
In a neighborhood with few public spaces , it provided a consumer version of the public square .
Its advertisements promised the opportunity to participate in the newest , most fashionable consumerism at reasonable cost .
The latest technology was featured , such as cinemas and exhibits of inventions like X-ray machines -LRB- that could be used to fit shoes -RRB- and the gramophone .
-1876 -RRB- , an emigrant from Great Britain , as a small dry goods store on Pine Street in New York City .
In 1925 , Arnold , Constable merged with Stewart & Company and expanded into the suburbs , first with a 1937 store in New Rochelle , New York and later in Hempstead and Manhasset on Long Island , and in New Jersey .
Financial problems led to bankruptcy in 1975 .
Though it was clad in white marble to look like a Renaissance palazzo , the building 's cast iron construction permitted large plate glass windows that permitted major seasonal displays , especially in the Christmas shopping season .
His innovations were quickly copied by other department stores .
Subsequent department stores founded in Philadelphia included Strawbridge and Clothier , Gimbels , Lit Brothers , and Snellenbergs .
It was the premier department store on the main shopping street in the Midwest , State Street in Chicago .
Upscale shoppers came by train from throughout the region , patronizing nearby hotels .
Field 's also brought with it the now famous Frango mints brand that became so closely identified with Marshall Field 's and Chicago from the now defunct Frederick & Nelson Department store .
Marshall Field 's also had the firsts , among many innovations by Marshall Field 's .
It was the first store to offer revolving credit and the first department store to use escalators .
Marshall Field 's book department in the State Street store was legendary ; it pioneered the concept of the `` book signing . ''
Moreover , every year at Christmas , Marshall Field 's downtown store windows were filled with animated displays as part of the downtown shopping district display ; the `` theme '' window displays became famous for their ingenuity and beauty , and visiting the Marshall Field 's windows at Christmas became a tradition for Chicagoans and visitors alike , as popular a local practice as visiting the Walnut Room with its equally famous Christmas tree or meeting `` under the clock '' on State Street .
David Jones claims to be the oldest department store in the world still trading under its original name .
Today Myer and David Jones , located nationally , are practically the national department stores duopoly in Australia .
Since then , the Myer retail group has grown to be Australia 's largest retailer .
Harris Scarfe , though only operating in four states and one territory , is a department store using both the large full-line and small discount department store formats .
Most department stores in Australia have their own credit card companies , each having their own benefits while the discount department stores do not have their own credit card rights .
Other department stores in Canada are : Canadian Tire , Sears Canada , Ogilvy , Les Ailes de la Mode , Giant Tiger , Co-op , Costco and Holt Renfrew .
Grocery giant Superstores carry many non-grocery items akin to a department store .
Historically , department stores were a significant component in Canadian economic life , and chain stores such as Eaton 's , Charles Ogilvy Limited , Freiman 's , Spencer 's , Simpsons , Morgan 's , and Woodward 's were staples in their respective communities .
Department stores in Canada are similar in design and style to department stores in the United States .
Before the 1950s , the department store held an eminent place in both Canada and Australia , during both the Great Depression and World War II .
Competition was not the only reason for the department stores ' weakening strength ; the changing structure of cities also affected them .
The compact and centralized 19th century city with its mass transit lines converging on the downtown was a perfect environment for department store growth .
There are different department store groups dominating different regions .
In 1907 , another former Hong Kong expatriate in Australia , the Kwok 's family , returned to Hong Kong and founded Wing On .
Illums only store on Amagertorv in Copenhagen has the appearance of a department store with 20 % run by Magasin , but has individual shop owners making it a shopping centre .
But in people 's mind it remains a department store .
Germany used to have a number of department stores ; nowadays only a few of them remain .
Others like Hertie , Wertheim and Horten AG were taken over by others and either fully integrated or later closed .
Other international department stores include Debenhams and Marks & Spencer .
This department store is targeting middle up market with price range from affordable to luxury , poised to be the largest upscale department store .
Galeries Lafayette , Debenhams , Harvey Nichols , Marks & Spencer , Seibu and Sogo are all operated by PT .
Mitra Adiperkasa .
They were active patrons of department stores .
Unlike others , Delany 's had not evolved gradually from a smaller shop on site .
Thus it could claim to be the first purpose-built Department Store in the world .
Wal-Mart operates Suburbia for lower income shoppers , along with stores under the brand names of Wal-Mart , Bodega Aurrera , and Superama .
The iconic department stores of New Zealand 's three major centres are Smith & Caughey 's -LRB- founded 1880 -RRB- , in New Zealand 's most populous city , Auckland ; Kirkcaldie & Stains -LRB- founded 1863 -RRB- in the capital , Wellington ; and Ballantynes -LRB- founded 1854 -RRB- in New Zealand 's second biggest city , Christchurch .
Historical department stores include DIC .
Discount chains include The Warehouse , Kmart Australia , and the now-defunct DEKA .
Later on in the twentieth century these eventually gave way to stores such as Felix B. Maduro , Sarah Panamá , Figali , Danté , Sears , Gran Morrison and smaller ones such as Bon Bini , Cocos , El Lider , Piccolo and Clubman among others .
During the course of the American occupation of the Philippines , many department stores were built throughout the city , many of which were located in Escolta .
Heacock 's , a luxury department store , was considered as the best department store in the Orient .
After the war , department stores were once again alive with the establishment of Shoemart -LRB- now SM -RRB- , and Rustan 's .
At present , due to the huge success of shopping malls , department stores in the Philippines usually are anchor tenants within malls .
SM Supermalls and Robinsons Malls are two of the country 's most prominent mall chains , all of which has Department Store sections .
In Puerto Rico , various department stores have operated , such as Sears , JC Penney , Macy 's , Kmart , Wal-Mart , Marshalls , Burlington Coat Factory , T.J. Maxx , Costco , Sam 's Club and others .
Topeka , Capri and Pitusa are competitors on the Puerto Rican market that also have hypermarkets operating under their names .
Stenbock-Fermor conceived of the Passage as more than a mere shopping mall , but also as a cultural and social centre for the people of St Petersburg .
The concert hall became renowned as a setting for literary readings attended by the likes of Dostoevsky and Turgenev .
It operated stores throughout Russia and targeted consumers across class , gender , and ethnic lines .
GUM was designed to advance the Bolsheviks ' goals of eliminating private enterprise and rebuilding consumerism along socialist lines , as well as democratizing consumption for workers and peasants nationwide .
GUM became a major propaganda purveyor , with advertising and promotional campaigns that taught Russians the goals of the regime and attempted to inculcate new attitudes and behavior .
In trying to create a socialist consumer culture from scratch , GUM recast the functions and meanings of buying and selling , turning them into politically charged acts that could either contribute to or delay the march toward utopian communism .
GUM 's main function became one of distributing whatever the factories sent them , regardless of consumer demand or quality .
Other popular stores are Mega -LRB- shopping malls -RRB- , Stockmann , and Marks & Spencer .
Media Markt , M-video , Technosila , and White Wind -LRB- Beliy Veter -RRB- sell large number of electronic devices .
The five most prevalent chains are Lotte , Hyundai , Shinsegae , Galleria , AK plaza .
Hyundai Department Store has about 14 stores -LRB- 13dept , 1outlet -RRB- , and there are 10 stores in Shinsegae .
Shinsegae has 3 outlet store with Simon .
Galleria has 5 , AK has 5 stores .
Galleriaeast and west is well known by luxury goods .
From fashion items to electric appliances , people can buy various kinds of products .
Every weekend , people are fond of going around these department stores , because their location is usually easy to visit .
El Corte Inglés stores tend to be vast buildings , selling a very broad range of products and the group also controls a number of other retail formats including supermarket chain ` Supercor ' and hypermarket chain ` Hipercor ' .
Other competitors such as ` Simago ' and ` Galerías Preciados ' closed in the 1990s , however El Corte Inglés , faces major competition from French discount operators such as Carrefour and Auchan .
It is still known to many of its customers as Bainbridge , despite the name change to ` John Lewis ' .
In terms of retailing history , one of the most significant facts about the Newcastle Bainbridge shop , is that as early as 1849 weekly takings were recorded by department , making it the earliest of all department stores .
This ledger survives and is kept in the John Lewis archives .
Also , Kendals in Manchester can lay claim to being one of the oldest department stores in the UK .
Beginning as a small shop owned by S. and J. Watts in 1796 , its sold a variety of goods .
Expanding the space , rather than use it as a typical warehouse simply to showcase textiles , it became a vast bazaar .
The Kendal Milne signage still remains over the main entrance to the art deco building in the city 's Deansgate .
All major cities have their distinctive local department stores , which anchored the downtown shopping district until the arrival of the malls in the 1960s .
They all operated branches in the suburbs , but all closed in the late twentieth century .
Chain department stores grew rapidly after 1920 , and provided competition for the downtown upscale department stores , as well as local department stores in small cities .
It deemphasized the latest fashions in favor of practicality and durability , and allowed customers to select goods without the aid of a clerk .
Its stores were oriented to motorists -- set apart from existing business districts amid residential areas occupied by their target audience ; had ample , free , off-street parking ; and communicated a clear corporate identity .
In the 1930s , the company designed fully air-conditioned , `` windowless '' stores whose layout was driven wholly by merchandising concerns .
After World War II Hudson 's realized that the limited parking space at its downtown skyscraper would increasingly be a problem for its customers .
It was the largest suburban shopping center in the world , and quickly became the main shopping destination for northern and western Detroit , and for much of the suburbs .
Dayton 's grew to 19 stores under the Dayton 's name plus five other regional names acquired by Dayton-Hudson .
The Dayton-Hudson Corporation closed the flagship J. L. Hudson Department Store in downtown Detroit in 1983 , but expanded its other retail operations .
In 2002 , Dayton 's and Hudson 's were consolidated into the Marshall Field 's name .
In 2005 , May Department Stores acquired all of the Marshall Field 's stores and shortly thereafter , Macy 's acquired May .
In 1879 , it opened a seven-story landmark which was the first department store in the city 's downtown .
In December 1986 , Horne 's was acquired by a local investor group following ADG 's acquisition by May Department Stores .
The statement that `` discoveries are ... property '' goes back earlier .
The concept 's origins can potentially be traced back further .
Some commentators have noted that the objective of intellectual property legislators and those who support its implementation appears to be `` absolute protection '' .
`` If some intellectual property is desirable because it encourages innovation , they reason , more is better .
The thinking is that creators will not have sufficient incentive to invent unless they are legally entitled to capture the full social value of their inventions '' .
Recently there has also been much debate over the desirability of using intellectual property rights to protect cultural heritage , including intangible ones , as well as over risks of commodification derived from this possibility .
The issue still remains open in legal scholarship .
The value of intellectual property is considered similarly high in other developed nations , such as those in the European Union .
The scope of the patented invention or the extent of protection is defined in the claims of the granted patent .
There is safe harbor in many jurisdictions to use a patented invention for research .
Copyright infringement is reproducing , distributing , displaying or performing a work , or to make derivative works , without permission from the copyright holder , which is typically a publisher or other business representing or assigned by the work 's creator .
While copyright is created the instance a work is fixed , generally the copyright holder can only get money damages if the owner registers the copyright .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Enforcement of copyright is generally the responsibility of the copyright holder .
There are limitations and exceptions to copyright , allowing limited use of copyrighted works , which does not constitute infringement .
This law contains two provisions criminalizing two sorts of activity .
The first , 18 U.S.C. § 1831 -LRB- a -RRB- , criminalizes the theft of trade secrets to benefit foreign powers .
The second , 18 U.S.C. § 1832 , criminalizes their theft for commercial or economic purposes .
-LRB- The statutory penalties are different for the two offenses . -RRB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
He claims that the term `` operates as a catch-all to lump together disparate laws -LSB- which -RSB- originated separately , evolved differently , cover different activities , have different rules , and raise different public policy issues '' and that it creates a `` bias '' by confusing these monopolies with ownership of limited physical things , likening them to `` property rights '' .
He mentions that `` if copyright were a natural right nothing could justify terminating this right after a certain period of time '' .
They argue such an analogy fails because physical property is generally rivalrous while intellectual works are non-rivalrous -LRB- that is , if one makes a copy of a work , the enjoyment of the copy does not prevent enjoyment of the original -RRB- .
According to the Committee , when systems fail to do so they risk infringing upon the human right to food and health , and to cultural participation and scientific benefits .
`` An IPR driven regime is therefore not a regime that is conductive to the investment of R&D of products that are socially valuable to predominately poor populations '' .
:1108 -- 9
Another limitation of current U.S. Intellectual Property legislation is its focus on individual and joint works ; thus , copyright protection can only be obtained in ` original ' works of authorship .
In framing its presentations , the association has claimed that people are entitled to the property that is produced by their labor .
These doctrinal reforms have further strengthened the industry , lending the MPAA even more power and authority .
The growth of the Internet , and particularly distributed search engines like Kazaa and Gnutella , have represented a challenge for copyright policy .
The electronic age has seen an increase in the attempt to use software-based digital rights management tools to restrict the copying and use of digitally based works .
This can hinder legal uses , affecting public domain works , limitations and exceptions to copyright , or uses allowed by the copyright holder .
Some copyleft licenses , like GNU GPL 3 , are designed to counter that .
Laws may permit circumvention under specific conditions like when it is necessary to achieve interoperability with the circumventor 's program , or for accessibility reasons ; however , distribution of circumvention tools or instructions may be illegal .
The Miami metropolitan area is the eighth-largest metropolitan area in the United States .
He described seeing a thick wall of red mangroves spread mile after mile , some reaching as high as 70 feet -LRB- 21 m -RRB- , with intertwined and elevated roots making landing difficult .
It was part of a large expansion of British territory following the country 's victory in the Seven Years ' War .
In order to induce settlers to move to the two new colonies reports of the natural wealth of Florida were published in England .
As a result of these initiatives northeastern Florida prospered economically in a way it never did under Spanish rule .
These American settlers established a permanent foothold in the area and ignored Spanish officials .
This flag would later become known as the `` Bonnie Blue Flag '' .
The United States now effectively controlled East Florida .
.
Andrew Jackson served as military governor of the newly acquired territory , but only for a brief period .
Many Seminole left at this time .
Florida has one of the highest average precipitation levels of any state , in large part because afternoon thunderstorms are common in much of the state from late spring until early autumn .
A narrow eastern part of the state including Orlando and Jacksonville receives between 2,400 and 2,800 hours of sunshine annually .
The rest of the state , including Miami , receives between 2,800 and 3,200 hours annually .
Florida is the most hurricane-prone state , with subtropical or tropical water on a lengthy coastline .
It is rare for a hurricane season to pass without any impact in the state by at least a tropical storm .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The limestone is topped with sandy soils deposited as ancient beaches over millions of years as global sea levels rose and fell .
The population of Florida in the 2010 census was 18,801,310 .
In 2010 , the center of population of Florida was located between Fort Meade and Frostproof .
Many of these were of English or Scotch-Irish descent ; however , their families have lived in the state for so long , that they choose to identify as having `` American '' ancestry or do not know their ancestry .
Out of the 57.9 % , the largest groups were 12.0 % German -LRB- 2,212,391 -RRB- , 10.7 % Irish -LRB- 1,979,058 -RRB- , 8.8 % English -LRB- 1,629,832 -RRB- , 6.6 % Italian -LRB- 1,215,242 -RRB- , 2.8 % Polish -LRB- 511,229 -RRB- , and 2.7 % French -LRB- 504,641 -RRB- .
White Americans of all European backgrounds are present in all areas of the state .
Those of English and Irish ancestry are present in large numbers in all the urban/suburban areas across the state .
Florida 's Hispanic population includes large communities of Cuban Americans in Miami and Tampa , Puerto Ricans in Orlando and Tampa , and Mexican/Central American migrant workers .
The Hispanic community continues to grow more affluent and mobile .
As of 2011 , 57.0 % of Florida 's children under the age of 1 belonged to minority groups .
Florida has a large and diverse Hispanic population , with Cubans and Puerto Ricans being the largest groups in the state .
Puerto Ricans are more widespread throughout the state , though the heaviest concentrations are in the Orlando area of Central Florida .
Out of the 16.0 % , 4.0 % -LRB- 741,879 -RRB- were West Indian or Afro-Caribbean American .
They moved for jobs , better education for their children and the chance to vote and participate in society .
By 1960 the proportion of African Americans in the state had declined to 18 % .
Conversely large numbers of northern whites moved to the state .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Today , large concentrations of black residents can be found in northern and central Florida .
In 2010 , Florida had the highest percentage of West Indians in the United States , with 2.0 % -LRB- 378,926 -RRB- from Haitian ancestry , and 1.3 % -LRB- 236,950 -RRB- Jamaican .
All other -LRB- non-Hispanic -RRB- Caribbean nations were well below 0.1 % of Florida residents .
In this period , African Americans were still disenfranchised by the state 's constitution and discriminatory practices ; in the 19th century they had made up most of the Republican Party .
South Florida and the Miami metropolitan area are dominated by both racial minorities and white liberals .
Because of this , the area has consistently voted as one of the most Democratic areas of the state .
The Daytona Beach area is similar demographically and the city of Orlando has a large Hispanic population , which has often favored Democrats .
This is characteristic of its voter base throughout the Deep South .
The fast-growing I-4 corridor area , which runs through Central Florida and connects the cities of Daytona Beach , Orlando , and Tampa/St .
Petersburg , has had a fairly even breakdown of Republican and Democratic voters .
In the closely contested 2000 election , the state played a pivotal role .
Their ruling affirmed the map previously approved by Leon County Judge Terry Lewis , who had overseen the original trial .
It particularly makes changes in South Florida .
In 2010 , it became the fourth largest exporter of trade goods .
In 2010 -- 11 , the state budget was $ 70.5 billion , having reached a high of $ 73.8 billion in 2006 -- 07 .
A 2009 list of national housing markets that were hard hit in the real estate crash included a disproportionate number in Florida .
In 2003 , TSRI announced plans to establish a major science center in Palm Beach , a 364,000 square feet -LRB- 33,800 m2 -RRB- facility on 100 acres -LRB- 40 ha -RRB- , which TSRI planned to occupy in 2006 .
The busiest Amtrak train stations in Florida in 2011 were : Sanford -LRB- 259,944 -RRB- , Orlando -LRB- 179,142 -RRB- , Tampa Union Station -LRB- 140,785 -RRB- , Miami -LRB- 94,556 -RRB- , and Jacksonville -LRB- 74,733 -RRB- .
Miami Central Station , the city 's rapid transit , commuter rail , intercity rail , and bus hub , is under construction .
Mercury joined the band in 1970 , suggested `` Queen '' as a new band name , and adopted his familiar stage name .
John Deacon was recruited prior to recording their eponymous debut album in 1973 .
Queen first charted in the UK with their second album , Queen II , in 1974 , but it was the release of Sheer Heart Attack later that year and A Night at the Opera in 1975 which brought them international success .
The latter featured `` Bohemian Rhapsody '' , which stayed at number one in the UK for nine weeks and popularised the music video .
By the early 1980s , Queen were one of the biggest stadium rock bands in the world .
Their performance at 1985 's Live Aid is ranked among the greatest in rock history by various music publications , with a 2005 industry poll ranking it the best .
Since then , May and Taylor have occasionally performed together , including with Paul Rodgers -LRB- 2004 -- 09 -RRB- and with Adam Lambert -LRB- since 2011 -RRB- .
Bulsara felt that he and the band had the same tastes and soon became a keen fan of Smile .
When asked about the name , Bulsara explained , `` I thought up the name Queen .
It 's just a name , but it 's very regal obviously , and it sounds splendid .
It 's a strong name , very universal and immediate .
It had a lot of visual potential and was open to all sorts of interpretations .
I was certainly aware of gay connotations , but that was just one facet of it . ''
They recorded four of their own songs , `` Liar '' , `` Keep Yourself Alive '' , `` The Night Comes Down '' and `` Jesus '' , for a demo tape ; no record companies were interested .
The lions embrace a stylised letter Q , the crab rests atop the letter with flames rising directly above it , and the fairies are each sheltering below a lion .
There is also a crown inside the Q and the whole logo is over-shadowed by an enormous phoenix .
The original logo , as found on the reverse-side of the first album cover , was a simple line drawing but more intricate colour versions were used on later sleeves .
However , Trident found it difficult to find a label for a band bearing a name with such connotation during the early 1970s .
The album was certified gold in the UK and the US .
This image would be used as the basis for the 1975 `` Bohemian Rhapsody '' music video production .
The album reached number five on the British album chart and became the first Queen album to chart in the UK .
The album is the first real testament to the band 's distinctive layered sound , and features long complex instrumental passages , fantasy-themed lyrics , and musical virtuosity .
The Daily Vault described the number as `` menacing '' .
Critical reaction was mixed ; the Winnipeg Free Press , while praising the band 's debut album , described Queen II as a `` over-produced monstrosity '' .
Allmusic has described the album as a favourite among the band 's hardcore fans , and it is the first of three Queen albums to feature in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die .
While recuperating , May was initially absent when the band started work on their third album , but he returned midway through the recording process .
It gave the band their first real experience of international success , and was a hit on both sides of the Atlantic .
The album experimented with a variety of musical genres , including British music hall , heavy metal , ballads , ragtime , and Caribbean .
At this point , Queen started to move away from the progressive tendencies of their first two releases into a more radio-friendly , song-orientated style .
In recent years , the album has received acclaim from music publications : In 2006 , Classic Rock ranked it number 28 in `` The 100 Greatest British Rock Albums Ever '' , and in 2007 , Mojo ranked it No. 88 in `` The 100 Records That Changed the World '' .
It is also the second of three Queen albums to feature in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die .
Grant wanted them to sign with Led Zeppelin 's own production company , Swan Song Records .
At the time , it was the most expensive album ever produced .
Like its predecessor , the album features diverse musical styles and experimentation with stereo sound .
The album was very successful in Britain , and went triple platinum in the United States .
The British public voted it the 13th greatest album of all time in a 2004 Channel 4 poll .
It has also ranked highly in international polls ; in a worldwide Guinness poll , it was voted the 19th greatest of all time , while an ABC poll saw the Australian public vote it the 28th greatest of all time .
A Night at the Opera has frequently appeared in `` greatest albums '' lists reflecting the opinions of critics .
Among other accolades , it was ranked number 16 in Q Magazine 's `` The 50 Best British Albums Ever '' in 2004 , and number 11 in Rolling Stone 's `` The 100 Greatest Albums of All Time '' as featured in their Mexican edition in 2004 .
It was also placed at No. 230 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of `` The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time '' in 2003 .
A Night at the Opera is the third and final Queen album to be featured in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die .
Mercury 's close friend and advisor , Capital London radio DJ Kenny Everett , played a pivotal role in giving the single exposure .
It is the third-best-selling single of all time in the UK , surpassed only by Band Aid 's `` Do They Know It 's Christmas ? ''
and Elton John 's `` Candle in the Wind 1997 '' , and is the best-selling commercial single in the UK .
It also reached number nine in the United States -LRB- a 1992 re-release reached number two on the Billboard Hot 100 for five weeks -RRB- .
It is the only single ever to sell a million copies on two separate occasions , and became the Christmas number one twice in the UK , the only single ever to do so .
The band decided to make a video to help go with the single and hired Trilion , a subsidiary of the former management company Trident Studios , using new technology to create the video ; the result is generally considered to have been the first `` true '' music video ever produced , and popularised the medium .
The album 's first track `` Death on Two Legs '' is said to be written by Mercury about Norman Sheffield and the former management at Trident who helped make the video so popular .
Although other bands , including the Beatles , had made short promotional films or videos of songs prior to this , generally , those were specifically made to be aired on specific television shows .
On the impact of `` Bohemian Rhapsody '' , Rolling Stone states : `` Its influence can not be overstated , practically inventing the music video seven years before MTV went on the air . ''
The second single from the album , `` You 're My Best Friend '' , the second song composed by John Deacon , and his first single , peaked at number sixteen in the United States and went on to become a worldwide Top Ten hit .
It again borrowed the name of a Marx Brothers movie , and its cover was similar to that of A Night at the Opera , a variation on the same Queen Crest .
Musically , A Day at the Races was by both fans ' and critics ' standards a strong effort , reaching number one in the UK and Japan , and number five in the US .
The song went to number two in the UK , and number thirteen in the US .
On 1 December 1976 , Queen were the intended guests on London 's early evening Today programme , but they pulled out at the last-minute , which saw their late replacement on the show , EMI labelmate the Sex Pistols , give their seminal interview .
Reviews of the album in recent years have been more favourable .
Another notable track from Jazz , `` Do n't Stop Me Now '' , provides another example of the band 's exuberant vocal harmonies .
In 1978 , Queen toured the US and Canada , and spent much of 1979 touring in Europe and Japan .
The song made the top 10 in many countries , topped the Australian ARIA Charts for seven consecutive weeks , and was the band 's first number one single in the United States where it topped the Billboard Hot 100 for four weeks .
Having written the song on guitar and played rhythm on the record , Mercury played rhythm guitar while performing the song live , which was the first time he ever played guitar in concert .
It featured the singles `` Crazy Little Thing Called Love '' and `` Another One Bites the Dust '' , both of which reached number one in the US .
The album topped the Billboard 200 for five weeks , and sold over four million copies in the US .
It was also the first appearance of a synthesiser on a Queen album .
Heretofore , their albums featured a distinctive `` No Synthesisers ! ''
sleeve note .
The note is widely assumed to reflect an anti-synth , pro- `` hard '' - rock stance by the band , but was later revealed by producer Roy Thomas Baker to be an attempt to clarify that those albums ' multi-layered solos were created with guitars , not synths , as record company executives kept assuming at the time .
In October of the same year , Queen performed for more than 150,000 fans on 9 October at Monterrey -LRB- Estadio Universitario -RRB- and 17 and 18 at Puebla -LRB- Estadio Zaragoza -RRB- , Mexico .
May was also scathing of Prenter , who was Mercury 's manager from the early 1980s to 1984 , for being dismissive of the importance of radio stations , such as the US networks , and their vital connection between the artist and the community , and for denying them access to Mercury .
The tour featured nine sold-out dates in October in Bophuthatswana , South Africa , at the arena in Sun City .
Upon returning to England , they were the subject of outrage , having played in South Africa during the height of apartheid and in violation of worldwide divestment efforts and a United Nations cultural boycott .
An industry poll in 2005 ranked it the greatest rock performance of all time .
Mercury 's powerful , sustained note during the a cappella section came to be known as `` The Note Heard Round the World '' .
I remember thinking ` oh great , they 've picked it up ' and then I thought ` this is not a Queen audience ' .
This is a general audience who 've bought tickets before they even knew we were on the bill .
And they all did it .
How did they know ?
Nobody told them to do it . ''
The Magic Tour 's highlight was at Wembley Stadium in London and resulted in the live double album , Queen at Wembley , released on CD and as a live concert DVD , which has gone five times platinum in the US and four times platinum in the UK .
Queen could not book Wembley for a third night , but they did play at Knebworth Park .
More than one million people saw Queen on the tour -- 400,000 in the United Kingdom alone , a record at the time .
The album continued the direction of A Kind of Magic , using a pop-rock sound mixed with a few heavy numbers .
It spawned the European hits `` I Want It All '' , `` Breakthru '' , `` The Invisible Man '' , `` Scandal '' , and `` The Miracle '' .
The Miracle also began a change in direction of Queen 's songwriting philosophy .
Since the band 's beginning , nearly all songs had been written by and credited to a single member , with other members adding minimally .
After fans noticed Mercury 's increasingly gaunt appearance in 1988 , rumours began to spread that Mercury was suffering from AIDS .
Mercury flatly denied this , insisting he was merely `` exhausted '' and too busy to provide interviews .
Despite his deteriorating health , the lead singer continued to contribute .
For the last two albums made while Mercury was still alive , the band credited all songs to Queen , rather than specific members of the group , freeing them of internal conflict and differences .
That same year , Mercury made his final public appearance when he joined the rest of Queen to collect the Brit Award for Outstanding Contribution to British Music .
Mercury was increasingly ill and could barely walk when the band recorded `` The Show Must Go On '' in 1990 .
Because of this , May had concerns about whether he was physically capable of singing it .
Recalling Mercury 's successful performance May states ; `` he went in and killed it , completely lacerated that vocal '' .
May says of Mercury : `` He just kept saying .
` Write me more .
Write me stuff .
I want to just sing this and do it and when I am gone you can finish it off . '
He had no fear , really . ''
`` Bohemian Rhapsody '' was re-released as a single shortly after Mercury 's death , with `` These Are the Days of Our Lives '' as the double A-side .
The single went to number one in the UK , remaining there for five weeks -- the only recording to top the Christmas chart twice and the only one to be number one in four different years -LRB- 1975 , 1976 , 1991 , and 1992 -RRB- .
Initial proceeds from the single -- approximately # 1,000,000 -- were donated to the Terrence Higgins Trust .
Wayne 's World footage was used to make a new music video for `` Bohemian Rhapsody '' , with which the band and management were delighted .
Featuring tracks such as `` Too Much Love Will Kill You '' and `` Heaven for Everyone '' , it was constructed from Mercury 's final recordings in 1991 , material left over from their previous studio albums and re-worked material from May , Taylor , and Mercury 's solo albums .
The album also featured the song `` Mother Love '' , the last vocal recording Mercury made prior to his death , which he completed using a drum machine , over which May , Taylor and Deacon later added the instrumental track .
After completing the penultimate verse , Mercury had told the band he `` was n't feeling that great '' and stated , `` I will finish it when I come back , next time '' ; however , he never made it back into the studio , so May later recorded the final verse of the song .
The Paris concert was only the second time Queen had played live since Mercury 's death , prompting Elton John to urge them to perform again .
During this time , they were billed as Queen + followed by the guest singer 's name .
By this point , Queen 's vast amount of record sales made them the second best selling artist in the UK of all time , behind the Beatles .
In 2002 , Queen were awarded the 2,207 th star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame , which is located at 6358 Hollywood Blvd. .
May and Taylor spent time at Mandela 's home , discussing how Africa 's problems might be approached , and two years later the band was made ambassadors for the 46664 cause .
Brian May 's website also stated that Rodgers would be `` featured with '' Queen as `` Queen + Paul Rodgers '' , not replacing Mercury .
Paul is just such a great singer .
He 's not trying to be Freddie . ''
The Foo Fighters paid homage to the band in performing `` Tie Your Mother Down '' to open the ceremony before being joined on stage by May , Taylor , and Paul Rodgers , who played a selection of Queen hits .
On 15 August 2006 , Brian May confirmed through his website and fan club that Queen + Paul Rodgers would begin producing their first studio album beginning in October , to be recorded at a `` secret location '' .
The Kharkiv concert was later released on DVD .
The tour then moved to Russia , and the band performed two sold-out shows at the Moscow Arena .
Having completed the first leg of its extensive European tour , which saw the band play 15 sold-out dates across nine countries , the UK leg of the tour sold out within 90 minutes of going on sale and included three London dates , the first of which was The O2 on 13 October .
The last leg of the tour took place in South America , and included a sold-out concert at the Estadio José Amalfitani , Buenos Aires .
The album contains 20 of Queen 's biggest hits spanning their entire career and was released in four different formats : single disc , double disc -LRB- with commentary -RRB- , double disc with feature book , and a vinyl record .
Prior to its release , a competition was run by Queen online to guess the track listing as a promotion for the album .
He was quoted as saying , `` The greatest debate , though , is always about when we will next play together as Queen .
At the moment , in spite of the many rumours that are out there , we do not have plans to tour in 2010 .
Music is never far away from us .
Every day , doors seem to open , and every day , we interact , perhaps more than ever before , with the world outside .
It is a time of exciting transition in Rock music and in ` The Business ' .
It 's good that the pulse still beats '' .
For the first time since the late 1980s , Queen 's catalogue will have the same distributor worldwide , as their current North American label -- Hollywood Records -- is currently distributed by Universal -LRB- for a time in the late 1980s , Queen was on EMI-owned Capitol Records in the US -RRB- .
Farrell stated : `` I have to keep Chris away from Queen , who want him and they 're not gon na get him unless we 're not doing anything .
Then they can have him . ''
In the same month , Paul Rodgers stated he may tour with Queen again in the near future .
The collaboration garnered a positive response from both fans and critics , resulting in speculation about future projects together .
Queen were scheduled to headline Sonisphere at Knebworth on 7 July 2012 with Adam Lambert before the festival was cancelled .
Brian May commented , `` It 's a worthy challenge for us , and I 'm sure Adam would meet with Freddie 's approval . ''
Queen expressed disappointment at the cancellation and released a statement to the effect that they were looking to find another venue .
Both shows sold out within 24 hours of tickets going on open sale .
A third London date was scheduled for 14 July .
The band will also tour Australia and New Zealand in August/September 2014 .
May referred to the Beatles as being `` our bible in the way they used the studio and they painted pictures and this wonderful instinctive use of harmonies . ''
Queen composed music that drew inspiration from many different genres of music , often with a tongue-in-cheek attitude .
Sonic experimentation figured heavily in Queen 's songs .
A distinctive characteristic of Queen 's music are the vocal harmonies which are usually composed of the voices of May , Mercury , and Taylor best heard on the studio albums A Night at the Opera and A Day at the Races .
Besides vocal harmonies , Queen were also known for multi-tracking voices to imitate the sound of a large choir through overdubs .
The band 's vocal structures have been compared with the Beach Boys , but May stated they were not `` much of an influence '' .
Queen have been recognised as having made significant contributions to such genres as hard rock , and heavy metal , among others .
Hence , the band have been cited as an influence by many other musicians .
In 2004 the song was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame .
Many scholars consider the `` Bohemian Rhapsody '' music video ground-breaking , and credit it with popularising the medium .
Rock historian Paul Fowles states the song is `` widely credited as the first global hit single for which an accompanying video was central to the marketing strategy '' .
It has been hailed as launching the MTV age .
Acclaimed for their stadium rock , in 2005 an industry poll ranked Queen 's performance at Live Aid in 1985 as the best live act in history .
In 2007 , they were also voted the greatest British band in history by BBC Radio 2 listeners .
In 2009 , `` We Will Rock You '' and `` We Are the Champions '' were inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame , and the latter was voted the world 's favourite song in a global music poll .
Queen are one of the most bootlegged bands ever , according to Nick Weymouth , who manages the band 's official website .
In a project called Queen : The Top 100 Bootlegs , many of these have been made officially available to download for a nominal fee from Queen 's website , with profits going to the Mercury Phoenix Trust .
In 2012 , Gigwise readers named Queen the best band of past 60 years .
Brian May stated in 2008 that they were considering writing a sequel to the musical .
The musical toured around the UK in 2009 , playing at Manchester Palace Theatre , Sunderland Empire , Birmingham Hippodrome , Bristol Hippodrome , and Edinburgh Playhouse .
So far , only two of the band 's albums , A Night at the Opera and The Game , have been fully remixed into high-resolution multichannel surround on DVD-Audio .
Several films have featured their songs performed by other artists .
.
Each contestant was required to sing a Queen song during that week of the competition .
Songs which appeared on the show included `` Bohemian Rhapsody '' , `` Fat Bottomed Girls '' , `` The Show Must Go On '' , `` Who Wants to Live Forever '' , and `` Innuendo '' .
Brian May later criticised the show for editing specific scenes , one of which made the group 's time with contestant Ace Young look negative , despite it being the opposite .
The performance was included on the show 's Volume 1 soundtrack CD .
The following week 's episode , `` Journey to Regionals '' , features a rival choir performing `` Bohemian Rhapsody '' in its entirety .
The song was featured on the episode 's EP .
Time commented with approval on his singing ability and visual similarity to Mercury .
However , in July 2013 , Baron Cohen dropped out of the role due to `` creative differences '' between him and the surviving band members .
Presbyterian churches derive their name from the presbyterian form of church government , which is governed by representative assemblies of elders .
Many Reformed churches are organized this way , but the word `` Presbyterian , '' when capitalized , is often applied uniquely to the churches that trace their roots to the Scottish and English churches that bore that name and English political groups that formed during the English Civil War .
In fact , most Presbyterians found in England can trace a Scottish connection , and the Presbyterian denomination was also taken to North America mostly by Scots and Scots-Irish immigrants .
The Presbyterian denominations in Scotland hold to the theology of John Calvin and his immediate successors , although there are a range of theological views within contemporary Presbyterianism .
Local congregations of churches which use presbyterian polity are governed by sessions made up of representatives of the congregation -LRB- elders -RRB- ; a conciliar approach which is found at other levels of decision-making -LRB- presbytery , synod and general assembly -RRB- .
In the twentieth century , some Presbyterians played an important role in the ecumenical movement , including the World Council of Churches .
Many Presbyterian denominations have found ways of working together with other Reformed denominations and Christians of other traditions , especially in the World Communion of Reformed Churches .
Presbyterians in the United States came largely from Scotch-Irish immigrants communities , and also from New England Yankee communities that had originally been Congregational but changed because of an agreed-upon `` Plan of Union of 1801 '' for frontier areas .
As the Catholic Church resisted the reformers , several different theological movements splintered from the Church and bore different denominations .
The Presbyterian church traces its ancestry back primarily to England and Scotland .
Many branches of Presbyterianism are remnants of previous splits from larger groups .
Teaching and ruling elders are ordained and convene in the lowest council known as a session or consistory responsible for the discipline , nurture , and mission of the local congregation .
Pastors are called by individual congregations .
This group may variously be known as a `` Deacon Board '' , `` Board of Deacons '' `` Diaconate '' , or `` Deacons ' Court '' .
These are sometimes known as `` presbyters '' to the full congregation .
The presbytery sends representatives to a broader regional or national assembly , generally known as the General Assembly , although an intermediate level of a synod sometimes exists .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
This has two implications .
It is this community understanding of theology that is expressed in confessions .
These documents are Calvinistic in their doctrinal orientation .
This directory documented Reformed worship practices and theology adopted and developed over the preceding century by British Puritans , initially guided by John Calvin and John Knox .
However , there is not one fixed `` Presbyterian '' worship style .
Most Presbyterian churches follow the traditional liturgical year and observe the traditional holidays , holy seasons , such as Advent , Christmas , Ash Wednesday , Holy Week , Easter , Pentecost , etc. .
They also make use of the appropriate seasonal liturgical colors , etc. .
Many , incorporate ancient liturgical prayers and responses into the communion services and follow a daily , seasonal , and festival lectionary .
Until the late 19th century , very few Presbyterians ever referred to their buildings as `` churches . ''
Presbyterians believed that meeting-houses -LRB- now called churches -RRB- are buildings to support the worship of God .
The decor in some instances was austere so as not to detract from worship .
Early Presbyterian meeting-houses were extremely plain .
The pulpit , often raised so as only to be accessible by a staircase , was the centerpiece of the building .
Usually a Presbyterian church will not have statues of saints , nor the ornate altar more typical of a Roman Catholic church .
There may be a rail between the communion table and the `` Chancel '' behind it , which may contain a more decorative altar-type table , choir loft , or choir stalls , lectern and clergy area .
This not only emphasized the resurrection , but also acknowledges historical aspects of Presbyterianism .
A baptismal font will be located either at the entrance or near the chancel area .
Presbyterian architecture generally makes significant use of symbolism .
You may also find decorative and ornate stained glass windows depicting scenes from the bible .
Some Presbyterian churches will also have ornate statues of Christ or Graven Scenes from the Last Supper located behind the Chancel .
St. Giles Cathedral -LRB- Church Of Scotland - The Mother Church of Presbyterians -RRB- does have a Crucifix next to one of the Pulpits that hangs alongside .
The image of Christ is more of faint image and more modern design .
After a period of religious convulsion and political conflict culminating in a victory for the Protestant party at the Siege of Leith the authority of the Church of Rome was abolished in favour of Reformation by the legislation of the Scottish Reformation Parliament in 1560 .
King James VI and I moved the Church of Scotland towards an episcopal form of government , and in 1637 , James ' successor , Charles I and William Laud , the Archbishop of Canterbury , attempted to force the Church of Scotland to use the Book of Common Prayer .
What resulted was an armed insurrection , with many Scots signing the Solemn League and Covenant .
The Covenanters would serve as the government of Scotland for nearly a decade , and would also send military support to the Parliamentarians during the English Civil War .
However , legislation by the United Kingdom parliament allowing patronage led to splits in the Church .
Cartwright 's controversial lectures at Cambridge University condemning the episcopal hierarchy of the Elizabethan Church led to his deprivation of his post by Archbishop John Whitgift and his emigration abroad .
Presbyterian government was established in London and Lancashire and in a few other places in England , although Presbyterian hostility to the execution of Charles I and the establishment of the republican Commonwealth of England meant that Parliament never enforced the Presbyterian system in England .
The re-establishment of the monarchy in 1660 brought the return of Episcopal church government in England -LRB- and in Scotland for a short time -RRB- ; but the Presbyterian church in England continued in Non-Conformity , outside of the established church .
Thomas Bradbury published several sermons bearing on the controversy , and in 1719 , `` An answer to the reproaches cast on the dissenting ministers who subscribed their belief of the Eternal Trinity . ''
.
Some , that is Crown Court -LRB- Covent Garden , London -RRB- , St Andrew 's -LRB- Stepney , London -RRB- and Swallow Street -LRB- London -RRB- , did not join the English denomination , which is why there are Church of Scotland congregations in England such as those at Crown Court , and St Columba 's , Pont Street -LRB- Knightsbridge -RRB- in London .
There is also a congregation in the heart of London 's financial district called London City Presbyterian Church that is also affiliated with Free Church of Scotland .
Among the congregations the PCofE brought to the URC were Tunley -LRB- Lancashire -RRB- , Aston Tirrold -LRB- Oxfordshire -RRB- and John Knox Presbyterian Church , Stepney , London -LRB- now part of Stepney Meeting House URC -RRB- -- these are among the sole survivors today of the English Presbyterian churches of the 17th century .
The URC also has a presence in Scotland , mostly of former Congregationalist Churches .
Presbyterians , along with Roman Catholics in Ulster and the rest of Ireland , suffered under the discriminatory Penal Laws until they were revoked in the early 19th century .
Presbyterianism is represented in Ireland by the Presbyterian Church in Ireland , the Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster , the Non-subscribing Presbyterian Church of Ireland , the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Ireland and the Evangelical Presbyterian Church .
The area experienced a `` mini '' reformation , in that many converts were made to Presbyterianism , prompting persecution .
In some cases , the converts left towns and villages to establish their own neighboring villages .
The arrival of the United States to the area prompted the Catholic church to modernize and make efforts at winning the converts back , many of which did return .
However , there are still stalwart Presbyterians and Presbyterian churches in the area .
A sizable minority of Canadian Presbyterians , primarily in southern Ontario but also throughout the entire nation , withdrew , and reconstituted themselves as a non-concurring continuing Presbyterian body .
They regained use of the original name in 1939 .
The Independent Presbyterian Church and the Presbyterian Reformed Church in Mexico , the National Conservative Presbyterian Church in Mexico are existing churches in the Reformed tradition .
The Fundamentalist Presbyterian church in Brazil was influenced by Karl McIntosh and the Bible Presbyterian church USA and has around 1 800 members .
The Independent Presbyterian Church in Brasil was founded in 1903 by pastor Pereira , has 500 congregations and 75 000 members .
The United Presbyterian Church in Brazil has around 4 000 members .
There are also ethnic Korean Presbyterian churches in the country .
The Reformed Churches in Brazil were recently founded by the Canadian Reformed Churches with the Reformed Church in the Netherlands -LRB- liberated -RRB- .
A number of partnerships exist between presbyteries in Africa and the PC -LRB- USA -RRB- , including specific connections with Lesotho , Malawi , South Africa , Ghana and Zambia .
For example , the Lackawanna Presbytery , located in Northeastern Pennsylvania , has a partnership with a presbytery in Ghana .
The Presbyterian Church of Nigeria , western Africa is also healthy and strong in mostly the southern states of this nation , strong density in the south-eastern states of this country .
Beginning from Cross River state , the nearby coastal states , Rivers state , Lagos state to Ebonyi and Abia States .
It was a mission of the Free Presbyterian church of Scotland .
The Restored Reformed Church works with RPCM .
Evangelical Presbyterian Church in Malawi is an existing small church .
Often the churches there have one main congregation and a number of Prayer Houses develop .
The Presbyterian schism began with the controversy in relation to the Japanese shrine worship enforced during the Japanese colonial period and the establishment of a minor division -LRB- Koryu-pa , 고려파 , later The Koshin Presbyterian Church in Korea , Koshin 고신 -RRB- in 1952 .
The controversy divided the PCK into two denominations , The Presbyterian Church of Korea -LRB- Tonghap , 통합 -RRB- and The General Assembly of Presbyterian Church in Korea -LRB- Hapdong , 합동 -RRB- in 1959 .
His colleague George Leslie Mackay , of the Canadian Presbyterian Mission , was active in Danshui and north Taiwan from 1872 to 1901 ; he founded the island 's first university and hospital , and created a written script for Taiwanese Minnan .
The English and Canadian missions joined together as the PCT in 1912 .
Former ROC president Lee Teng-hui -LRB- in office 1988 -- 2000 -RRB- is a Presbyterian .
Hence there is a strong presence of Presbyterians in Shillong -LRB- the present capital of Meghalaya -RRB- and the areas adjoining it .
Presbyterians participated in the mergers that resulted in the Church of North India and the Church of South India.Sohra
Presbyterian churches were founded in each colony , some with links to the Church of Scotland and others to the Free Church .
There were also congregations originating from United Presbyterian Church of Scotland as well as a number founded by John Dunmore Lang .
The third who did not unite had various reasons for so acting , often cultural attachment but often conservative theological or social views .
The theology of the church is now generally conservative and Reformed .
A number of small Presbyterian denominations have arisen since the 1950s through migration or schism .
The PCV -LRB- Presbyterian Church of Vanuatu -RRB- is headed by a moderator with offices in Port Vila .
The PCV is particularly strong in the provinces of Tafea , Shefa , and Malampa .
The Province of Sanma is mainly Presbyterian with a strong Roman Catholic minority in the Francophone areas of the province .
Vanuatu is the only country in the South Pacific with a significant Presbyterian heritage and membership .
The PCV is a founding member of the Vanuatu Christian Council -LRB- VCC -RRB- .
The PCV runs many primary schools and Onesua secondary school .
The church is strong in the rural villages .
During the GDR period , church membership was discouraged and has continued shrinking since the reunification in 1990 .
The highest Protestant concentrations are in the small villages of southern and western Thuringia , whereas the bigger cities are even more non-religious -LRB- up to 88 % in Gera -RRB- .
Catholic regions are the Eichsfeld in the northwest and parts of the Rhön Mountains around Geisa in the southwest .
Protestant church membership is shrinking rapidly , whereas the Catholic Church is somewhat more stable because of Catholic migration from Poland , Southern Europe and West Germany .
Other religions play no significant role in Thuringia .
Furthermore , there are some Orthodox communities of Eastern European migrants and some traditional Protestant Free churches in Thuringia without any societal influence .
Their origin is not completely known .
An older theory claimed that they were successors of the Hermunduri , but later research rejected the idea .
Their various lands formed the Free State of Thuringia , founded in 1920 , together with some other small principalities .
With the division of the house of Wettin in 1485 , Thuringia went to the senior Ernestine branch of the family , which subsequently subdivided the area into a number of smaller states , according to the Saxon tradition of dividing inheritance amongst male heirs .
In Mühlhausen and elsewhere , the Anabaptists found many adherents .
In 1920 , after World War I , these small states merged into one state , called Thuringia ; only Saxe-Coburg voted to join Bavaria instead .
The coat of arms of this new state was simpler than they had been previously .
He also ensured that whenever an important position came up within Thuringia , he used his power to ensure that a Nazi was given that post .
The landscapes of Thuringia are quite diverse .
The central and northern part of Thuringia is defined by the 3000 km ² wide Thuringian Basin , a very fertile and flat area around the Unstrut river and completely surrounded by the following hill chains -LRB- clockwise from the north-west -RRB- : Dün , Hainleite , Windleite , Kyffhäuser , Hohe Schrecke , Schmücke , Finne , Ettersberg , Steigerwald , Thuringian Forest , Hörselberge and Hainich .
Within the Basin the smaller hill chains Fahner Höhe and Heilinger Höhen .
South of the Thuringian Basin is the Land 's largest mountain range , marked by the Thuringian Forest in the north-west , the Thuringian Highland in the middle and the Franconian Forest in the south-east .
To the south-west , the Forest is followed up by Werra river valley , dividing it from the Rhön Mountains in the west and the Grabfeld plain in the south .
Eastern Thuringia , commonly described as the area east of Saale and Loquitz valley , is marked by a hilly landscape , rising slowly from the flat north to the mountainous south .
The far eastern region -LRB- east of Weiße Elster -RRB- is the Osterland or Altenburger Land along Pleiße river , a flat , fertile and densely settled agricultural area .
Thuringia is Germany 's only state without connection to navigable waterways .
However , most of the plains have been cleared and are in intensive agricultural use while most of the forests are planted with spruce and pine .
In comparison to the forest , agriculture is still quite conventional and dominated by large structures and monocultures .
Since the beginning of Urbanisation around 1840 , the Thuringian cities have higher growth rates resp .
Migration plays an important role in Thuringia .
The internal migration shows a strong tendency from rural areas towards the big cities .
Between Thuringia and the other German states , the balance is negative : In 2012 , Thuringia lost 6,500 persons to other federal states , the most to Bavaria , Saxony , Hesse and Berlin .
Only with Saxony-Anhalt and Brandenburg the balance is positive .
In 2009 , the balance was +700 , in 2010 +1,800 , in 2011 +2,700 and in 2012 +4,800 .
The most important countries of origin of the Thuringia migrants from 2008 to 2012 were Poland -LRB- +1,700 -RRB- , Romania -LRB- +1,200 -RRB- , Afghanistan -LRB- +1,100 -RRB- and Serbia/Montenegro/Kosovo -LRB- +1,000 -RRB- , whereas the balance was negative with Switzerland -LRB- − 2,800 -RRB- and Austria -LRB- − 900 -RRB- .
Today , all municipalities within districts are equal in law , whether they are towns or villages .
The most important industrial branches today are engineering and metalworking , vehicle production and food industries .
On the other hand , the late 19th century brought new types of mines to Thuringia : the lignite surface mining around Meuselwitz near Altenburg in the east of the Land started in the 1870s , and two potash mining districts were established around 1900 .
Together , they accounted for a significant part of the world 's potash production in the mid-20th century .
The centre was Ronneburg near Gera in eastern Thuringia and the operating company Wismut was under direct Soviet control .
The decrease is caused on the one hand by the emergence of new jobs and on the other by a marked decrease in the working-age population , caused by emigration and low birth rates for decades .
External immigration into Thuringia has been encouraged by the government since about 2010 to counter this problem .
The A4 runs from Frankfurt in Hesse via Eisenach , Gotha , Erfurt , Weimar , Jena and Gera to Dresden in Saxony , connecting Thuringia 's most important cities .
At Hermsdorf junction it is connected with the A9 .
The A71 crosses the Land in southwest-northeast direction , connecting Würzburg in Bavaria via Meiningen , Suhl , Ilmenau , Arnstadt , Erfurt and Sömmerda with Sangerhausen and Halle in Saxony-Anhalt .
The A73 starts at the A71 south of Erfurt in Suhl and runs south towards Nuremberg in Bavaria .
The A38 is another west-east connection in the north of Thuringia running from Göttingen in Lower Saxony via Heiligenstadt and Nordhausen to Leipzig in Saxony .
Furthermore , there is a dense network of federal highways complementing the motorway network .
Envisaged projects include upgrades of the B247 from Gotha to Leinefelde to improve Mühlhausen 's connection to the national road network , the B19 from Eisenach to Meiningen to improve access to Bad Salzungen and Schmalkalden , and the B88 and B281 for strengthening the Saalfeld/Rudolstadt region .
Health care in Thuringia is currently undergoing a concentration process .
Early-years education is quite common in Thuringia .
The German higher education system comprises two forms of academic institutions : universities and polytechnics -LRB- Fachhochschule -RRB- .
It was founded in 1558 , and today has 21,000 students .
The second-largest is the Technische Universität Ilmenau with 7,000 students , founded in 1894 , which offers many technical disciplines such as engineering and mathematics .
Finally , there are colleges for those studying for a technical qualification while working in a related field -LRB- Berufsakademie -RRB- at Eisenach -LRB- 600 students -RRB- and Gera -LRB- 700 students -RRB- .
Thuringia 's leading research centre is Jena , followed by Ilmenau .
By 1920 , many branch lines had been built , giving Thuringia one of the densest rail networks in the world before World War II with about 2,500 km of track .
On the other hand , most of the main lines were refurbished after 1990 , resulting in improved speed of travel .
The most important railway lines at present are the Thuringian Railway , connecting Halle and Leipzig via Weimar , Erfurt , Gotha and Eisenach with Frankfurt and Kassel and the Saal Railway from Halle/Leipzig via Jena and Saalfeld to Nuremberg .
The former has an hourly ICE/IC service from Dresden to Frankfurt while the latter is served hourly by ICE trains from Berlin to Munich .
Both ICE routes will then use the Erfurt -- Leipzig/Halle high-speed railway , and the Berlin-Munich route will continue via the Nuremberg -- Erfurt high-speed railway .
Only the segment west of Erfurt of the Frankfurt-Dresden line will continue to be used by ICE trains after 2017 , with an increased line speed of 200 km/h -LRB- currently 160 km/h -RRB- .
Erfurt 's central station , which was completely rebuilt for this purpose in the 2000s -LRB- decade -RRB- , will be the new connection between both ICE lines .
The most important regional railway lines in Thuringia are the Neudietendorf -- Ritschenhausen railway from Erfurt to Würzburg and Meiningen , the Weimar -- Gera railway from Erfurt to Chemnitz , the Sangerhausen -- Erfurt railway from Erfurt to Magdeburg , the Gotha -- Leinefelde railway from Erfurt to Göttingen , the Halle -- Kassel railway from Halle via Nordhausen to Kassel and the Leipzig -- Hof railway from Leipzig via Altenburg to Zwickau and Hof .
Most regional and local lines have hourly service , but some run only every other hour .
Thus predation is often , though not always , carnivory .
All these consumption categories fall under the rubric of consumer-resource systems .
It can often be difficult to separate various types of feeding behaviors .
Some predators kill large prey and dismember or chew it prior to eating it , such as a jaguar or a human ; others may eat their -LRB- usually much smaller -RRB- prey whole , as does a bottlenose dolphin swallowing a fish , or a snake , duck or stork swallowing a frog .
In some cases , the venom , as in rattlesnakes and some spiders , contributes to the digestion of the prey item even before the predator begins eating .
In other cases , the prey organism may die in the mouth or digestive system of the predator .
Seed predation and egg predation are other forms of true predation , as seeds and eggs represent potential organisms .
Predators of this classification need not eat prey entirely .
For example , some predators can not digest bones , while others can .
Some may eat only part of an organism , as in grazing -LRB- see below -RRB- , but still consistently cause its direct death .
Grazing livestock may pull some grass out at the roots , but most is simply grazed upon , allowing the plant to regrow once again .
Some species however have more loose associations with their hosts .
Lepidoptera -LRB- butterfly and moth -RRB- larvae may feed parasitically on only a single plant , or they may graze on several nearby plants .
They are much like parasites in their close symbiotic relationship with their host or hosts .
Like the previous two classifications parasitoid predators do not kill their hosts instantly .
However , unlike parasites , they are very similar to true predators in that the fate of their prey is quite inevitably death .
By this stage the young wasp -LRB- s -RRB- are developed sufficiently to move to the next stage in their life cycle .
Among predators there is a large degree of specialization .
Many predators specialize in hunting only one species of prey .
The specialists are usually particularly well suited to capturing their preferred prey .
The prey in turn , are often equally suited to escape that predator .
Some predators specialize in certain classes of prey , not just single species .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Predators are often another organism 's prey , and likewise prey are often predators .
Though blue jays prey on insects , they may in turn be prey for cats and snakes , and snakes may be the prey of hawks .
Secondary consumers are a type of carnivore , but there are also tertiary consumers eating these carnivores , quartary consumers eating them , and so forth .
A carnivore may eat both secondary and tertiary consumers , and its prey may itself be difficult to classify for similar reasons .
Even herbivores such as the giant panda may supplement their diet with meat .
Another manner in which predation and competition are connected is throughout intraguild predation .
For example , grazers of a grassland may prevent a single dominant species from taking over .
The relationship between predator and prey is one that is typically beneficial to the predator , and detrimental to the prey species .
The more convincing camouflage is , the more likely it is that the organism will go unseen .
Another example of batesian mimicry is the io moth , -LRB- Automeris io -RRB- , which has markings on its wings that resemble an owl 's eyes .
Female fireflies of the genus Photuris , for example , copy the light signals of other species , thereby attracting male fireflies , which are then captured and eaten -LRB- see aggressive mimicry -RRB- .
When hunger is not an issue , in general most predators will not seek to attack prey since the costs outweigh the benefits .
For instance , a large predatory fish like a shark that is well fed in an aquarium will typically ignore the smaller fish swimming around it -LRB- while the prey fish take advantage of the fact that the apex predator is apparently uninterested -RRB- .
Surplus killing represents a deviation from this type of behaviour .
Social predation allows some animals to organize hunts of creatures that would easily escape a single predator ; thus chimpanzees can prey upon colobus monkeys , and Harris 's hawks can cut off all possible escapes for a doomed rabbit .
Even without complex intelligence but instinct alone , some ant species can destroy much larger creatures .
Pet cats and pet mice , for example , may live together in the same human residence without incident as companions .
Predatory animals often use their usual methods of attacking prey to inflict or to threaten grievous injury to their own predators .
Mobbing can be an interspecies activity : it is common for birds to respond to mobbing calls of a different species .
Many birds will show up at the sight of mobbing and watch and call , but not participate .
Some organisms pose a threat to their predators -- for example they may be poisonous , or able to harm them physically .
For example , bright coloration in Variable Checkerspot butterflies leads to decreased predation attempts by avian predators .
It is obvious that predators depend on prey for survival , and this is reflected in predator populations being affected by changes in prey populations .
It is not so obvious , however , that predators affect prey populations .
Humans also lack innate weaponry such as claws .
Without crafted weapons , society , or cleverness , a lone human can easily be defeated by fit predatory animals , such as wild dogs , big cats and bears -LRB- see Man-eater -RRB- .
However , humans are not solitary creatures ; they are social animals with highly developed social behaviors .
Cannibalism has occurred in various places , among various cultures , and for various reasons .
Low numbers would n't be a problem for apex predators if there was an abundance of prey and no competition or niche overlap , a scenario that is rarely , if ever , encountered in the wild .
A predator 's effect on its prey species is hard to see in the short-term .
If a predator overhunts its prey , the prey population will lower to numbers that are too scarce for the predators to find .
This will cause the predator population to dip , decreasing the predation pressure on the prey population .
The decrease in predators will allow the small number of prey left to slowly increase their population to somewhere around their previous abundance , which will allow the predator population to increase in response to the greater availability of resources .
This is a risk that wildlife conservationists encounter when introducing predators to prey that have not coevolved with the same or similar predators .
This possibility depends largely on how well and how fast the prey species is able to adapt to the introduced predator .
One way that this risk can be avoided is if the predator finds an alternative prey species or if an alternative prey species is introduced -LRB- something that ecologists and environmentalists try to avoid whenever possible -RRB- .
An alternative prey species would help to lift some of the predation pressure from the initial prey species , giving the population a chance to recover , however it does not guarantee that the initial prey species will be able to recover as the initial prey population may have been hunted to below sustainable numbers or to complete extinction .
Predators may be put to use in conservation efforts to control introduced species .
Predators from its natural range may be introduced to control populations , though in some cases this has little effect , and may even cause unforeseen problems .
Marvel counts among its characters such well-known superheroes as Spider-Man , Iron Man , Captain America , Wolverine , Thor , Hulk , Ant-Man , such teams as the Avengers , the Guardians of the Galaxy , the Fantastic Four , the Inhumans and the X-Men , and antagonists such as Doctor Doom , The Enchantress , Green Goblin , Ultron , Doctor Octopus , Thanos , Magneto and Loki .
Martin Goodman , a pulp magazine publisher who had started with a Western pulp in 1933 , was expanding into the emerging -- and by then already highly popular -- new medium of comic books .
The issue was a great success , with it and a second printing the following month selling , combined , nearly 900,000 copies .
While its contents came from an outside packager , Funnies , Inc. , Timely had its own staff in place by the following year .
It , too , proved a hit , with sales of nearly one million .
Goodman formed Timely Comics , Inc. , beginning with comics cover-dated April 1941 or Spring 1941 .
Goodman 's business strategy involved having his various magazines and comic books published by a number of corporations all operating out of the same office and with the same staff .
Atlas did not achieve any breakout hits and , according to Stan Lee , Atlas survived chiefly because it produced work quickly , cheaply , and at a passable quality .
Subsequently , Marvel comics developed a reputation for focusing on characterization and adult issues to a greater extent than most superhero comics before them , a quality which the new generation of older readers appreciated .
Its young hero suffered from self-doubt and mundane problems like any other teenager , something readers could identify with .
All of these elements struck a chord with the older readers , such as college-aged adults , and they successfully gained in a way not seen before .
It was Kirby 's artwork with its tension and psychedelia that made it perfect for the times -- or was it Lee 's bravado and melodrama , which was somehow insecure and brash at the same time ? ''
The market reacted well to the storyline , and the CCA subsequently revised the Code the same year .
A series of new editors-in-chief oversaw the company during another slow time for the industry .
Marvel was able to capitalize on its successful superhero comics of the previous decade by acquiring a new newsstand distributor and greatly expanding its comics line .
Goodman increased the price and size of Marvel 's November 1971 cover-dated comics from 15 cents for 36 pages total to 25 cents for 52 pages .
DC followed suit , but Marvel the following month dropped its comics to 20 cents for 36 pages , offering a lower-priced product with a higher distributor discount .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- But by the end of the decade , Marvel 's fortunes were reviving , thanks to the rise of direct market distribution -- selling through those same comics-specialty stores instead of newsstands .
Star Comics , a children-oriented line differing from the regular Marvel titles , was briefly successful during this period .
These were collectible trading cards that featured the characters and events of the Marvel Universe .
In addition , the company created an alternate universe imprint , Ultimate Marvel , that allowed the company to reboot its major titles by revising and updating its characters to introduce to a new generation .
, a relaunch of most of the company 's major titles with different creative teams .
Marvel NOW !
In April 2013 , Marvel and other Disney conglomerate components began announcing joint projects .
Various publishers took up the licenses from 1978 to 2002 .
Also , with the various licensed films being released beginning in 1997 , various publishers put out movie novelizations .
However , this only includes characters Universal is currently using , other characters in their `` families '' -LRB- X-Men , Avengers , Fantastic Four , etc. -RRB- , and the villains associated with said characters .
It originated with the overseas possessions and trading posts established by England between the late 16th and early 18th centuries .
At its height , it was the largest empire in history and , for over a century , was the foremost global power .
As a result , its political , legal , linguistic and cultural legacy is widespread .
At the peak of its power , the phrase `` the empire on which the sun never sets '' was often used to describe the British Empire , because its expanse around the globe meant that the sun was always shining on at least one of its territories .
British attention soon turned towards Asia , Africa , and the Pacific .
The British Empire expanded to include India , large parts of Africa and many other territories throughout the world .
Alongside the formal control it exerted over its own colonies , British dominance of much of world trade meant that it effectively controlled the economies of many regions , such as Asia and Latin America .
Domestically , political attitudes favoured free trade and laissez-faire policies and a gradual widening of the voting franchise .
During this century , the population increased at a dramatic rate , accompanied by rapid urbanisation , causing significant social and economic stresses .
To seek new markets and sources of raw materials , the Conservative Party under Disraeli launched a period of imperialist expansion in Egypt , South Africa , and elsewhere .
Canada , Australia , and New Zealand became self-governing dominions .
Subsequent military and economic tensions between Britain and Germany were major causes of the First World War , during which Britain relied heavily upon its empire .
The conflict placed enormous strain on the military , financial and manpower resources of Britain .
Although the British Empire achieved its largest territorial extent immediately after World War I , Britain was no longer the world 's pre-eminent industrial or military power .
In the Second World War , Britain 's colonies in South-East Asia were occupied by Imperial Japan .
Despite the final victory of Britain and its allies , the damage to British prestige helped to accelerate the decline of the empire .
The transfer of Hong Kong to China in 1997 marked for many the end of the British Empire .
After independence , many former British colonies joined the Commonwealth of Nations , a free association of independent states .
The foundations of the British Empire were laid when England and Scotland were separate kingdoms .
Cabot led another voyage to the Americas the following year but nothing was heard of his ships again .
No further attempts to establish English colonies in the Americas were made until well into the reign of Queen Elizabeth I , during the last decades of the 16th century .
By this time , Spain had become the dominant power in the Americas and was exploring the Pacific ocean , Portugal had established trading posts and forts from the coasts of Africa and Brazil to China , and France had begun to settle the Saint Lawrence River area , later to become New France .
That year , Gilbert sailed for the West Indies with the intention of engaging in piracy and establishing a colony in North America , but the expedition was aborted before it had crossed the Atlantic .
Now at peace with its main rival , English attention shifted from preying on other nations ' colonial infrastructures to the business of establishing its own overseas colonies .
The Caribbean initially provided England 's most important and lucrative colonies , but not before several attempts at colonisation failed .
The colonies soon adopted the system of sugar plantations successfully used by the Portuguese in Brazil , which depended on slave labour , and -- at first -- Dutch ships , to sell the slaves and buy the sugar .
To ensure that the increasingly healthy profits of this trade remained in English hands , Parliament decreed in 1651 that only English ships would be able to ply their trade in English colonies .
This led to hostilities with the United Dutch Provinces -- a series of Anglo-Dutch Wars -- which would eventually strengthen England 's position in the Americas at the expense of the Dutch .
The Virginia Company 's charter was revoked in 1624 and direct control of Virginia was assumed by the crown , thereby founding the Colony of Virginia .
The London and Bristol Company was created in 1610 with the aim of creating a permanent settlement on Newfoundland , but was largely unsuccessful .
In 1620 , Plymouth was founded as a haven for puritan religious separatists , later known as the Pilgrims .
Fleeing from religious persecution would become the motive of many English would-be colonists to risk the arduous trans-Atlantic voyage : Maryland was founded as a haven for Roman Catholics -LRB- 1634 -RRB- , Rhode Island -LRB- 1636 -RRB- as a colony tolerant of all religions and Connecticut -LRB- 1639 -RRB- for Congregationalists .
The Province of Carolina was founded in 1663 .
This was formalised in negotiations following the Second Anglo-Dutch War , in exchange for Suriname .
In 1681 , the colony of Pennsylvania was founded by William Penn. .
The American colonies were less financially successful than those of the Caribbean , but had large areas of good agricultural land and attracted far larger numbers of English emigrants who preferred their temperate climates .
From the outset , slavery was the basis of the British Empire in the West Indies .
To facilitate this trade , forts were established on the coast of West Africa , such as James Island , Accra and Bunce Island .
In the British Caribbean , the percentage of the population of African descent rose from 25 percent in 1650 to around 80 percent in 1780 , and in the 13 Colonies from 10 percent to 40 percent over the same period -LRB- the majority in the southern colonies -RRB- .
The episode also had major political consequences , persuading the governments of both England and Scotland of the merits of a union of countries , rather than just crowns .
The primary aim of these companies was to tap into the lucrative spice trade , an effort focused mainly on two regions ; the East Indies archipelago , and an important hub in the trade network , India .
There , they competed for trade supremacy with Portugal and with each other .
Hostilities ceased after the Glorious Revolution of 1688 when the Dutch William of Orange ascended the English throne , bringing peace between the Netherlands and England .
Gibraltar became a critical naval base and allowed Britain to control the Atlantic entry and exit point to the Mediterranean .
France was left control of its enclaves but with military restrictions and an obligation to support British client states , ending French hopes of controlling India .
Along with its victory over France in India , the Seven Years ' War therefore left Britain as the world 's most powerful maritime power .
The American Revolution began with rejection of Parliamentary authority and moves towards self-government .
In response Britain sent troops to reimpose direct rule , leading to the outbreak of war in 1775 .
In 1770 James Cook discovered the eastern coast of Australia while on a scientific voyage to the South Pacific Ocean , claimed the continent for Britain , and named it New South Wales .
Britain continued to transport convicts to New South Wales until 1840 .
The Australian colonies became profitable exporters of wool and gold , mainly because of gold rushes in the colony of Victoria , making its capital Melbourne the richest city in the world and the largest city after London in the British Empire .
European settlement increased through the early decades of the 19th century , with numerous trading stations established , especially in the North .
In 1839 , the New Zealand Company announced plans to buy large tracts of land and establish colonies in New Zealand .
This treaty is considered by many to be New Zealand 's founding document , but differing interpretations of the Maori and English versions of the text have meant that it continues to be a source of dispute .
The Napoleonic Wars were therefore ones in which Britain invested large amounts of capital and resources to win .
Britain was again the beneficiary of peace treaties : France ceded the Ionian Islands , Malta -LRB- which it had occupied in 1797 and 1798 respectively -RRB- , Mauritius , St Lucia , and Tobago ; Spain ceded Trinidad ; the Netherlands Guyana , and the Cape Colony .
Unchallenged at sea , Britain adopted the role of global policeman , a state of affairs later known as the Pax Britannica , and a foreign policy of `` splendid isolation '' .
During the late 18th and early 19th centuries the British Crown began to assume an increasingly large role in the affairs of the Company .
The Company 's eventual end was precipitated by the Indian Rebellion , a conflict that had begun with the mutiny of sepoys , Indian troops under British officers and discipline .
The rebellion took six months to suppress , with heavy loss of life on both sides .
India became the empire 's most valuable possession , `` the Jewel in the Crown '' , and was the most important source of Britain 's strength .
For a while it appeared that another war would be inevitable , but the two countries reached an agreement on their respective spheres of influence in the region in 1878 and on all outstanding matters in 1907 with the signing of the Anglo-Russian Entente .
The destruction of the Russian Navy by the Japanese at the Battle of Port Arthur during the Russo-Japanese War of 1904 -- 05 also limited its threat to the British .
In the process the Voortrekkers clashed repeatedly with the British , who had their own agenda with regard to colonial expansion in South Africa and with several African polities , including those of the Sotho and the Zulu nations .
Eventually the Boers established two republics which had a longer lifespan : the South African Republic or Transvaal Republic -LRB- 1852 -- 77 ; 1881 -- 1902 -RRB- and the Orange Free State -LRB- 1854 -- 1902 -RRB- .
Initially the Canal was opposed by the British ; but once opened , its strategic value was quickly recognised and became the `` jugular vein of the Empire '' .
Although this did not grant outright control of the strategic waterway , it did give Britain leverage .
Joint Anglo-French financial control over Egypt ended in outright British occupation in 1882 .
Sudan was nominally made an Anglo-Egyptian Condominium , but a British colony in reality .
Responsible government was first granted to Nova Scotia in 1848 , and was soon extended to the other British North American colonies .
The term `` dominion status '' was officially introduced at the Colonial Conference of 1907 .
The last decades of the 19th century saw concerted political campaigns for Irish home rule .
Ireland had been united with Britain into the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland with the Act of Union 1800 after the Irish Rebellion of 1798 , and had suffered a severe famine between 1845 and 1852 .
Although the bill , if passed , would have granted Ireland less autonomy within the UK than the Canadian provinces had within their own federation , many MPs feared that a partially independent Ireland might pose a security threat to Great Britain or mark the beginning of the break-up of the empire .
A second Home Rule bill was also defeated for similar reasons .
By the turn of the 20th century , fears had begun to grow in Britain that it would no longer be able to defend the metropole and the entirety of the empire while at the same time maintaining the policy of `` splendid isolation '' .
This agreement was not divulged to the Sharif of Mecca , who the British had been encouraging to launch an Arab revolt against their Ottoman rulers , giving the impression that Britain was supporting the creation of an independent Arab state .
The British declaration of war on Germany and its allies also committed the colonies and Dominions , which provided invaluable military , financial and material support .
The countries continue to commemorate this occasion on Anzac Day .
Canadians viewed the Battle of Vimy Ridge in a similar light .
Britain gained control of Palestine , Transjordan , Iraq , parts of Cameroon and Togo , and Tanganyika .
Nauru was made a combined mandate of Britain and the two Pacific Dominions .
Although the issue of the empire 's security was a serious concern in Britain , at the same time the empire was vital to the British economy .
The Irish Republican Army simultaneously began a guerrilla war against the British administration .
In Britain public opinion was divided over the morality of the event , between those who saw it as having saved India from anarchy , and those who viewed it with revulsion .
In return , Egypt was assisted to join the League of Nations .
In Palestine , Britain was presented with the problem of mediating between the Arab and Jewish communities .
The 1917 Balfour Declaration , which had been incorporated into the terms of the mandate , stated that a national home for the Jewish people would be established in Palestine , and Jewish immigration allowed up to a limit that would be determined by the mandatory power .
This led to increasing conflict with the Arab population , who openly revolted in 1936 .
The parliaments of Canada , Australia , New Zealand , the Union of South Africa , the Irish Free State and Newfoundland were now independent of British legislative control , they could nullify British laws and Britain could no longer pass laws for them without their consent .
Newfoundland reverted to colonial status in 1933 , suffering from financial difficulties during the Great Depression .
British Prime Minister Winston Churchill successfully lobbied President Franklin D. Roosevelt for military aid from the United States , but Roosevelt was not yet ready to ask Congress to commit the country to war .
This wording was ambiguous as to whether it referred to European countries invaded by Germany , or the peoples colonised by European nations , and would later be interpreted differently by the British , Americans , and nationalist movements .
Churchill 's reaction to the entry of the United States into the war was that Britain was now assured of victory and the future of the empire was safe , but the manner in which British forces were rapidly defeated in the Far East irreversibly harmed Britain 's standing and prestige as an imperial power .
The realisation that Britain could not defend its entire empire pushed Australia and New Zealand , which now appeared threatened by Japanese forces , into closer ties with the United States .
Though Britain and the empire emerged victorious from the Second World War , the effects of the conflict were profound , both at home and abroad .
Much of Europe , a continent that had dominated the world for several centuries , was in ruins , and host to the armies of the United States and the Soviet Union , who now held the balance of global power .
At the same time , anti-colonial movements were on the rise in the colonies of European nations .
The situation was complicated further by the increasing Cold War rivalry of the United States and the Soviet Union .
In principle , both nations were opposed to European colonialism .
The `` wind of change '' ultimately meant that the British Empire 's days were numbered , and on the whole , Britain adopted a policy of peaceful disengagement from its colonies once stable , non-Communist governments were available to transfer power to .
This was in contrast to other European powers such as France and Portugal , which waged costly and ultimately unsuccessful wars to keep their empires intact .
Increasing civil unrest and the mutiny of the Royal Indian Navy during 1946 led Attlee to promise independence no later than 1948 .
When the urgency of the situation and risk of civil war became apparent , the newly appointed -LRB- and last -RRB- Viceroy , Lord Mountbatten , hastily brought forward the date to 15 August 1947 .
The borders drawn by the British to broadly partition India into Hindu and Muslim areas left tens of millions as minorities in the newly independent states of India and Pakistan .
India , Pakistan and Sri Lanka became members of the Commonwealth , while Burma chose not to join .
Following the defeat of Japan in the Second World War , anti-Japanese resistance movements in Malaya turned their attention towards the British , who had moved to quickly retake control of the colony , valuing it as a source of rubber and tin .
The fact that the guerrillas were primarily Malayan-Chinese Communists meant that the British attempt to quell the uprising was supported by the Muslim Malay majority , on the understanding that once the insurgency had been quelled , independence would be granted .
Eden infuriated US President Dwight D. Eisenhower , by his lack of consultation , and Eisenhower refused to back the invasion .
Another of Eisenhower 's concerns was the possibility of a wider war with the Soviet Union after it threatened to intervene on the Egyptian side .
Though the invasion force was militarily successful in its objectives , UN intervention and US pressure forced Britain into a humiliating withdrawal of its forces , and Eden resigned .
While the Suez Crisis caused British power in the Middle East to weaken , it did not collapse .
Britain maintained a military presence in the Middle East for another decade .
British withdrawal from the southern and eastern parts of Africa was not a peaceful process .
The British Virgin Islands , Cayman Islands and Montserrat opted to retain ties with Britain , while Guyana achieved independence in 1966 .
A dispute with Guatemala over claims to Belize was left unresolved .
The New Hebrides achieved independence -LRB- as Vanuatu -RRB- in 1980 , with Belize following suit in 1981 .
In 1982 , Britain 's resolve in defending its remaining overseas territories was tested when Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands , acting on a long-standing claim that dated back to the Spanish Empire .
The same year , the Canadian government severed its last legal link with Britain by patriating the Canadian constitution from Britain .
Similarly , the Constitution Act 1986 reformed the constitution of New Zealand to sever its constitutional link with Britain , and the Australia Act 1986 severed the constitutional link between Britain and the Australian states .
In 1984 , Brunei , Britain 's last remaining Asian protectorate , gained its independence .
Some are uninhabited except for transient military or scientific personnel ; the remainder are self-governing to varying degrees and are reliant on the UK for foreign relations and defence .
The British government has stated its willingness to assist any Overseas Territory that wishes to proceed to independence , where that is an option .
The British Antarctic Territory is subject to overlapping claims by Argentina and Chile , while many countries do not recognise any territorial claims in Antarctica .
These sixteen nations are distinct and equal legal entities -- the United Kingdom , Australia , Canada , New Zealand , Papua New Guinea , Antigua and Barbuda , The Bahamas , Barbados , Belize , Grenada , Jamaica , Saint Kitts and Nevis , Saint Lucia , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , Solomon Islands and Tuvalu .
Political boundaries drawn by the British did not always reflect homogeneous ethnicities or religions , contributing to conflicts in formerly colonised areas .
The British Empire was also responsible for large migrations of peoples .
Tensions remain between the white settler populations of these countries and their indigenous minorities , and between white settler minorities and indigenous majorities in South Africa and Zimbabwe .
Settlers in Ireland from Great Britain have left their mark in the form of divided nationalist and unionist communities in Northern Ireland .
Nowadays , botanists study approximately 400,000 species of living organisms of which some 260,000 species are vascular plants and about 248,000 are flowering plants .
One of the earliest was the Padua botanical garden .
Research topics include the study of plant structure , growth and differentiation , reproduction , biochemistry and primary metabolism , chemical products , development , diseases , evolutionary relationships , systematics , and plant taxonomy .
De Materia Medica was widely read for more than 1,500 years .
In the early 13th century , Abu al-Abbas al-Nabati , and Ibn al-Baitar -LRB- d. 1248 -RRB- wrote on botany in a systematic and scientific manner .
They supported the growth of botany as an academic subject .
Lectures were given about the plants grown in the gardens and their medical uses demonstrated .
This established a standardised binomial or two-part naming scheme where the first name represented the genus and the second identified the species within the genus .
The 24th group , Cryptogamia , included all plants with concealed reproductive parts , mosses , liverworts , ferns , algae and fungi .
Innovations in statistical analysis by Ronald Fisher , Frank Yates and others at Rothamsted Experimental Station facilitated rational experimental design and data analysis in botanical research .
Frederick Campion Steward pioneered techniques of micropropagation and plant tissue culture controlled by plant hormones .
With the rise of the related molecular-scale biological approaches of molecular biology , genomics , proteomics and metabolomics , the relationship between the plant genome and most aspects of the biochemistry , physiology , morphology and behaviour of plants can be subjected to detailed experimental analysis .
These technologies enable the biotechnological use of whole plants or plant cell cultures grown in bioreactors to synthesise pesticides , antibiotics or other pharmaceuticals , as well as the practical application of genetically modified crops designed for traits such as improved yield .
Furthermore , it emphasizes structural dynamics .
The theoretical possibility of a practical method for identification of plant species and commercial varieties by DNA barcoding is the subject of active current research .
Plants are crucial to the future of human society as they provide food , oxygen , medicine , and products for people , as well as creating and preserving soil .
Embryophytes are multicellular eukaryotes descended from an ancestor that obtained its energy from sunlight by photosynthesis .
The sexual haploid phase of embryophytes , known as the gametophyte , nurtures the developing diploid embryo sporophyte within its tissues for at least part of its life , even in the seed plants , where the gametophyte itself is nurtured by its parent sporophyte .
However , attention is still given to these groups by botanists , and fungi -LRB- including lichens -RRB- and photosynthetic protists are usually covered in introductory botany courses .
Virtually all staple foods come either directly from primary production by plants , or indirectly from animals that eat them .
The modern forms of the major staple foods , such as maize , rice , wheat and other cereal grasses , pulses , bananas and plantains , as well as flax and cotton grown for their fibres , are the outcome of prehistoric selection over thousands of years from among wild ancestral plants with the most desirable characteristics .
Ethnobotany is the study of the relationships between plants and people .
When applied to the investigation of historical plant -- people relationships ethnobotany may be referred to as archaeobotany or palaeoethnobotany .
The energy in the red and blue light that these pigments absorb is used by chloroplasts to make energy-rich carbon compounds from carbon dioxide and water by oxygenic photosynthesis , a process that generates molecular oxygen -LRB- O2 -RRB- as a by-product .
Their energy is used in the light-independent reactions of the Calvin cycle by the enzyme rubisco to produce molecules of the 3-carbon sugar glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate -LRB- G3P -RRB- .
Plants synthesize a number of unique polymers like the polysaccharide molecules cellulose , pectin and xyloglucan from which the land plant cell wall is constructed .
It is widely regarded as a marker for the start of land plant evolution during the Ordovician period .
Many monocots like maize and the pineapple and some dicots like the Asteraceae have since independently evolved pathways like Crassulacean acid metabolism and the C4 carbon fixation pathway for photosynthesis which avoid the losses resulting from photorespiration in the more common C3 carbon fixation pathway .
These biochemical strategies are unique to land plants .
Others , such as the essential oils peppermint oil and lemon oil are useful for their aroma , as flavourings and spices -LRB- e.g. , capsaicin -RRB- , and in medicine as pharmaceuticals as in opium from opium poppies .
Others are simple derivatives of botanical natural products .
Popular stimulants come from plants , such as caffeine from coffee , tea and chocolate , and nicotine from tobacco .
Most alcoholic beverages come from fermentation of carbohydrate-rich plant products such as barley -LRB- beer -RRB- , rice -LRB- sake -RRB- and grapes -LRB- wine -RRB- .
Sugar , starch , cotton , linen , hemp , some types of rope , wood and particle boards , papyrus and paper , vegetable oils , wax , and natural rubber are examples of commercially important materials made from plant tissues or their secondary products .
Cellulose , the world 's most abundant organic polymer , can be converted into energy , fuels , materials and chemical feedstock .
For example , they can change their environment 's albedo , increase runoff interception , stabilize mineral soils and develop their organic content , and affect local temperature .
Plant responses to climate and other environmental changes can inform our understanding of how these changes affect ecosystem function and productivity .
Moreover , information from studies of community ecology , plant systematics , and taxonomy is essential to understanding vegetation change , habitat destruction and species extinction .
What Mendel learned from studying plants has had far reaching benefits outside of botany .
A familiar example is peppermint , Mentha × piperita , a sterile hybrid between Mentha aquatica and spearmint , Mentha spicata .
This is one of several methods used by plants to promote outcrossing .
These species are said to be dioecious when referring to vascular plant sporophytes and dioicous when referring to bryophyte gametophytes .
Unlike in higher animals , where parthenogenesis is rare , asexual reproduction may occur in plants by several different mechanisms .
The formation of stem tubers in potato is one example .
This is one of several types of apomixis that occur in plants .
This can occur early in development to produce an autopolyploid or partly autopolyploid organism , or during normal processes of cellular differentiation to produce some cell types that are polyploid -LRB- endopolyploidy -RRB- , or during gamete formation .
An allopolyploid plant may result from a hybridisation event between two different species .
Some otherwise sterile plant polyploids can still reproduce vegetatively or by seed apomixis , forming clonal populations of identical individuals .
Durum wheat is a fertile tetraploid allopolyploid , while bread wheat is a fertile hexaploid .
Common dandelion is a triploid that produces viable seeds by apomictic seed .
Model plants such as Arabidopsis thaliana are used for studying the molecular biology of plant cells and the chloroplast .
The single celled green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii , while not an embryophyte itself , contains a green-pigmented chloroplast related to that of land plants , making it useful for study .
Spinach , peas , soybeans and a moss Physcomitrella patens are commonly used to study plant cell biology .
One example of epigenetic change is the marking of the genes by DNA methylation which determines whether they will be expressed or not .
Some epigenetic changes have been shown to be heritable , while others are reset in the germ cells .
During morphogenesis , totipotent stem cells become the various pluripotent cell lines of the embryo , which in turn become fully differentiated cells .
The Charophyte class Charophyceae and the land plant sub-kingdom Embryophyta together form the monophyletic group or clade Streptophytina .
They include mosses , liverworts and hornworts .
Pteridophytic vascular plants with true xylem and phloem that reproduced by spores germinating into free-living gametophytes evolved during the Silurian period and diversified into several lineages during the late Silurian and early Devonian .
Representatives of the lycopods have survived to the present day .
By the end of the Devonian period , several groups , including the lycopods , sphenophylls and progymnosperms , had independently evolved `` megaspory '' -- their spores were of two distinct sizes , larger megaspores and smaller microspores .
Their reduced gametophytes developed from megaspores retained within the spore-producing organs -LRB- megasporangia -RRB- of the sporophyte , a condition known as endospory .
The earliest known seed plants date from the latest Devonian Famennian stage .
Angiosperms produce seeds enclosed in a structure such as a carpel or an ovary .
Ongoing research on the molecular phylogenetics of living plants appears to show that the angiosperms are a sister clade to the gymnosperms .
Photoautotrophs , including all green plants , algae and cyanobacteria gather energy directly from sunlight by photosynthesis .
Molecules are moved within plants by transport processes that operate at a variety of spatial scales .
Subcellular transport of ions , electrons and molecules such as water and enzymes occurs across cell membranes .
Diffusion , osmosis , and active transport and mass flow are all different ways transport can occur .
Examples of elements that plants need to transport are nitrogen , phosphorus , potassium , calcium , magnesium , and sulphur .
.
.
directing the several movements '' .
About the same time , the role of auxins -LRB- from the Greek auxein , to grow -RRB- in control of plant growth was first outlined by the Dutch scientist Frits Went .
This compound mediates the tropic responses of shoots and roots towards light and gravity .
The natural cytokinin zeatin was discovered in corn , Zea mays , and is a derivative of the purine adenine .
They are involved in the promotion of germination and dormancy-breaking in seeds , in regulation of plant height by controlling stem elongation and the control of flowering .
It inhibits cell division , promotes seed maturation , and dormancy , and promotes stomatal closure .
It was so named because it was originally thought to control abscission .
Ethylene is a gaseous hormone that is produced in all higher plant tissues from methionine .
It is now known to be the hormone that stimulates or regulates fruit ripening and abscission , and it , or the synthetic growth regulator ethephon which is rapidly metabolised to produce ethylene , are used on industrial scale to promote ripening of cotton , pineapples and other climacteric crops .
Other plastids contain storage products such as starch -LRB- amyloplasts -RRB- or lipids -LRB- elaioplasts -RRB- .
Uniquely , streptophyte cells and those of the green algal order Trentepohliales divide by construction of a phragmoplast as a template for building a cell plate late in cell division .
The bodies of vascular plants including clubmosses , ferns and seed plants -LRB- gymnosperms and angiosperms -RRB- generally have aerial and subterranean subsystems .
Cells in each system are capable of creating cells of the other and producing adventitious shoots or roots .
Stolons and tubers are examples of shoots that can grow roots .
Roots that spread out close to the surface , such as those of willows , can produce shoots and ultimately new plants .
In fact it is possible to grow an entire plant from a single leaf , as is the case with Saintpaulia , or even a single cell -- which can dedifferentiate into a callus -LRB- a mass of unspecialised cells -RRB- that can grow into a new plant .
In vascular plants , the xylem and phloem are the conductive tissues that transport resources between shoots and roots .
Gymnosperms , such as conifers , cycads , Ginkgo , and gnetophytes are seed-producing plants with open seeds .
Woody plants , such as azaleas and oaks , undergo a secondary growth phase resulting in two additional types of tissues : wood -LRB- secondary xylem -RRB- and bark -LRB- secondary phloem and cork -RRB- .
Some plants reproduce sexually , some asexually , and some via both means .
Systematic botany is part of systematic biology , which is concerned with the range and diversity of organisms and their relationships , particularly as determined by their evolutionary history .
It involves , or is related to , biological classification , scientific taxonomy and phylogenetics .
Biological classification is the method by which botanists group organisms into categories such as genera or species .
Biological classification is a form of scientific taxonomy .
The dominant classification system is called Linnaean taxonomy .
It includes ranks and binomial nomenclature .
Kingdom Plantae belongs to Domain Eukarya and is broken down recursively until each species is separately classified .
For example , the tiger lily is Lilium columbianum .
Lilium is the genus , and columbianum the specific epithet .
The combination is the name of the species .
Phylogenetic studies attempt to discover phylogenies .
As an example , species of Pereskia are trees or bushes with prominent leaves .
They do not obviously resemble a typical leafless cactus such as an Echinocactus .
Some euphorbias have leafless , rounded bodies adapted to water conservation similar to those of globular cacti , but characters such as the structure of their flowers make it clear that the two groups are not closely related .
The cladistic method takes a systematic approach to characters , distinguishing between those that carry no information about shared evolutionary history -- such as those evolved separately in different groups -LRB- homoplasies -RRB- or those left over from ancestors -LRB- plesiomorphies -RRB- -- and derived characters , which have been passed down from innovations in a shared ancestor -LRB- apomorphies -RRB- .
Clive Stace describes this as having `` direct access to the genetic basis of evolution . ''
As a simple example , prior to the use of genetic evidence , fungi were thought either to be plants or to be more closely related to plants than animals .
Despite the study of model plants and increasing use of DNA evidence , there is ongoing work and discussion among taxonomists about how best to classify plants into various taxa .
Madonna is known for reinventing both her music and image , and for maintaining her autonomy within the recording industry .
Music critics have acclaimed her musical productions , which have generated some controversy .
Records -RRB- in 1982 and released her self-titled debut album the following year .
Throughout her career , Madonna has written and produced most of her songs , with many of them reaching number one on the record charts , including `` Like a Virgin '' , `` Into the Groove '' , `` Papa Do n't Preach '' , `` Like a Prayer '' , `` Vogue '' , `` Frozen '' , `` Music '' , `` Hung Up '' , and `` 4 Minutes '' .
However , most of her other films have been panned by critics .
She was ranked at number two , behind only The Beatles , on the Billboard Hot 100 All-Time Top Artists , making her the most successful solo artist in the history of American singles chart .
She has two elder brothers , Anthony -LRB- born 1956 -RRB- and Martin -LRB- born 1957 -RRB- , and three younger siblings , Paula -LRB- born 1959 -RRB- , Christopher -LRB- born 1960 -RRB- , and Melanie -LRB- born 1962 -RRB- .
Madonna later acknowledged that she had not grasped the concept of her mother dying .
I was n't rebellious in a certain way .
I cared about being good at something .
I did n't shave my underarms and I did n't wear make-up like normal girls do .
But I studied and I got good grades ... .
I wanted to be somebody . ''
At this point , Madonna started to resent him for decades , and developed a rebellious attitude .
She would perform cartwheels and handstands in the hallways between classes , dangle by her knees from the monkey bars during recess , and pull up her skirt during class -- all so that the boys could see her underwear .
Madonna said of her move to New York , `` It was the first time I 'd ever taken a plane , the first time I 'd ever gotten a taxi cab .
It was the bravest thing I 'd ever done . ''
Madonna claimed that during a late night she was returning from a rehearsal , when a pair of men held her at knifepoint and forced her to perform fellatio .
Madonna later commented that `` the episode was a taste of my weakness , it showed me that I still could not save myself in spite of all the strong-girl show .
I could never forget it . ''
The two began writing songs together , and Madonna later decided to market herself as a solo act .
Their music impressed DJ and record producer Mark Kamins who arranged a meeting between Madonna and Sire Records founder Seymour Stein .
However , she was not happy with the completed tracks and disagreed with Lucas ' production techniques , so decided to seek additional help .
The overall sound of Madonna was dissonant and in the form of upbeat synthetic disco , using some of the new technology of the time , like the Linn drum machine , Moog bass and the OB-X synthesizer .
It yielded two more hit singles , `` Borderline '' and `` Lucky Star '' .
It topped the charts in several countries and became her first number one album on the Billboard 200 .
It attracted the attention of organizations who complained that the song and its accompanying video promoted premarital sex and undermined family values , and moralists sought to have the song and video banned .
The performance is noted by MTV as an iconic moment in VMA history .
In later years , Madonna commented that she was terrified of the performance .
While filming this video , Madonna started dating actor Sean Penn. .
Like a Virgin was certified diamond by the Recording Industry Association of America and sold more than 25 million copies worldwide .
Although Madonna was not the lead actress for the film , her profile was such that the movie widely became considered -LRB- and marketed -RRB- as a Madonna vehicle .
The New York Times film critic Vincent Canby named it one of the ten best films of 1985 .
She progressed from playing CBGB and the Mudd Club to playing large sporting arenas .
At that time she released two more hit singles from the album , `` Angel '' and `` Dress You Up '' .
She had posed for the photographs as she needed money at the time , and was paid as little as $ 25 a session .
The publication of the photos caused a media uproar , but Madonna remained `` unapologetic and defiant '' .
Rolling Stone magazine was generally impressed with the effort , writing that the album `` sound -LSB- s -RSB- as if it comes from the heart '' .
It resulted in three singles making it to number-one on the Billboard Hot 100 : `` Live to Tell '' , `` Papa Do n't Preach '' and `` Open Your Heart '' , and two more top-five singles : `` True Blue '' and `` La Isla Bonita '' .
She made her theatrical debut in a production of David Rabe 's Goose and Tom-Tom ; the film and play both co-starred Penn. .
The next year , Madonna was featured in the film Who 's That Girl .
In one of her Pepsi commercials , she debuted her song `` Like a Prayer '' .
The corresponding music video featured many Catholic symbols such as stigmata and cross burning , and a dream of making love to a saint , leading the Vatican to condemn the video .
Religious groups sought to ban the commercial and boycott Pepsi products .
Madonna received positive feedback for the album , with Rolling Stone writing that it was `` as close to art as pop music gets '' .
Six singles were released from the album , including `` Like a Prayer '' , which reached number one , and `` Express Yourself '' and `` Cherish '' , both peaking at number two .
To accompany the film , she released the soundtrack album , I 'm Breathless , which included songs inspired by the film 's 1930s setting .
In April 1990 , Madonna began her Blond Ambition World Tour , which was held until August .
Rolling Stone called it an `` elaborately choreographed , sexually provocative extravaganza '' and proclaimed it `` the best tour of 1990 '' .
The tour generated strong negative reaction from religious groups for her performance of `` Like a Virgin '' , during which two male dancers caressed her body before she simulated masturbation .
In response , Madonna said , `` The tour in no way hurts anybody 's sentiments .
It 's for open minds and gets them to see sexuality in a different way .
Their own and others '' .
The Laserdisc release of the tour won Madonna a Grammy Award in 1992 for Best Long Form Music Video .
Its music video featured scenes of sadomasochism , bondage , same-sex kissing , and brief nudity .
Madonna responded to the banning : `` Why is it that people are willing to go and watch a movie about someone getting blown to bits for no reason at all , and nobody wants to see two girls kissing and two men snuggling ? ''
The same year , she founded her own entertainment company , Maverick , consisting of a record company -LRB- Maverick Records -RRB- , a film production company -LRB- Maverick Films -RRB- , and associated music publishing , television broadcasting , book publishing and merchandising divisions .
The deal was a joint venture with Time Warner and paid Madonna an advance of $ 60 million .
The first release from the venture was Madonna 's book , titled Sex .
It consisted of sexually provocative and explicit images , photographed by Steven Meisel .
The book received strong negative reaction from the media and the general public , but sold 1.5 million copies at $ 50 each in a matter of days .
At the same time she released her fifth studio album , Erotica , which debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 .
Its title track peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 .
Erotica also produced five singles : `` Deeper and Deeper '' , `` Bad Girl '' , `` Fever '' , `` Rain '' and `` Bye Bye Baby '' .
It was poorly received by critics .
She also starred in the film Dangerous Game , which was released straight to video in North America .
The New York Times described the film as `` angry and painful , and the pain feels real . ''
Critics and fans reacted negatively , who commented that `` she had gone too far '' and that her career was over .
She made a subdued appearance with Letterman at an awards show and appeared on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno after realizing that she needed to change her musical direction in order to sustain her popularity .
Something to Remember , a collection of ballads , was released in November 1995 .
The album featured three new songs : `` You 'll See '' , `` One More Chance '' , and a cover of Marvin Gaye 's `` I Want You '' .
She said later , `` This is the role I was born to play .
I put everything of me into this because it was much more than a role in a movie .
It was exhilarating and intimidating at the same time ... .
And I am prouder of Evita than anything else I have done . ''
However , as she told Oprah , she was also pregnant during the filming : `` I was winded after every take .
I had to lie on the couch every ten minutes so I could recover from dizzy spells , I was worried that I was shaking the baby around too much and that would injure it in some way . ''
Madonna wrote in her personal diary at the time : `` Ironically , this feeling of vulnerability and weakness is helping me in the movie .
I 'm sure Evita felt this way every day of her life once she discovered she was ill . ''
After its release , Evita garnered critical appreciation .
Madonna once again confounds our expectations .
She plays Evita with a poignant weariness and has more than just a bit of star quality .
Love or hate Madonna-Eva , she is a magnet for all eyes . ''
She released three singles from the Evita soundtrack album , including `` You Must Love Me '' -LRB- which won an Academy Award for Best Original Song in 1997 -RRB- and `` Do n't Cry for Me Argentina '' .
Madonna was later presented with the Artist Achievement Award by Tony Bennett at the 1996 Billboard Music Awards .
Biographer Mary Cross writes that although Madonna was often ill during the filming and worried that her pregnancy would harm the film , she reached some important personal goals : `` Now 38 years old , Madonna had at last triumphed on screen and achieved her dream of having a child , both in the same year .
She had reached another turning point in her career , reinventing herself and her image with the public . ''
After Lourdes ' birth , Madonna became involved in Eastern mysticism and Kabbalah .
She was introduced to Jewish mysticism by actress Sandra Bernhard in 1997 .
American music critic Ann Powers explained that what Madonna searched for with Orbit `` was a kind of a lushness that she wanted for this record .
There was very experimental , more hard stuff like Aphex Twin .
There was party stuff like Fatboy Slim .
That 's not what Madonna wanted for this .
She wanted something more like a singer-songwriter , really .
And William Orbit provided her with that . ''
The album garnered critical acclaim .
It reached number 19 on the Hot 100 solely on radio airplay .
It featured elements from the electronica-inspired Ray of Light era , and like its predecessor , received acclaim from critics .
Collaborating with French producer Mirwais Ahmadzaï , Madonna commented : `` I love to work with the weirdos that no one knows about -- the people who have raw talent and who are making music unlike anyone else out there .
Music is the future of sound . ''
Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic felt that `` Music blows by in a kaleidoscopic rush of color , technique , style and substance .
It has so many depth and layers that it 's easily as self-aware and earnest as Ray of Light . ''
In the U.S. , Music debuted at the top , and became her first number-one album in eleven years since Like a Prayer .
It produced three singles : the Hot 100 number one `` Music '' , `` Do n't Tell Me '' , and `` What It Feels Like for a Girl '' .
The music video of `` What It Feels Like for a Girl '' depicted Madonna committing acts of crime and vandalism , and was banned by MTV and VH1 .
Madonna married Ritchie the following day at nearby Skibo Castle .
The tour visited cities in the U.S. and Europe and was the highest-grossing concert tour of the year by a solo artist , earning $ 75 million from 47 sold-out shows .
She also released her second greatest-hits collection , titled GHV2 , to coincide with the home video release of the tour .
GHV2 debuted at number seven on the Billboard 200 .
Released direct-to-video in the UK , the film was a commercial and critical failure .
It included photography from a photo shoot in W magazine , and seven video segments .
The installation ran from March to May in New York 's Deitch Projects gallery .
It traveled the world in an edited form .
She commented , '' -LSB- American Life -RSB- was like a trip down memory lane , looking back at everything I 've accomplished and all the things I once valued and all the things that were important to me . ''
Larry Flick from The Advocate felt that `` American Life is an album that is among her most adventurous and lyrically intelligent '' while condemning it as `` a lazy , half-arsed effort to sound and take her seriously . ''
Its original music video was canceled as Madonna thought that the video , featuring violence and war imagery , would be deemed unpatriotic since America was then at war with Iraq .
Madonna gave another provocative performance later that year at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards , while singing `` Hollywood '' with Britney Spears , Christina Aguilera , and Missy Elliott .
It was followed with the release of Remixed & Revisited .
The EP contained remixed versions of songs from American Life and included `` Your Honesty '' , a previously unreleased track from the Bedtime Stories recording sessions .
The story was about four English schoolgirls and their envy and jealousy of each other .
Kate Kellway from The Guardian commented , '' -LSB- Madonna -RSB- is an actress playing at what she can never be -- a JK Rowling , an English rose . ''
The book debuted at the top of The New York Times Best Seller list and became the fastest-selling children 's picture book of all time .
In January 2005 , Madonna performed a cover version of the John Lennon song `` Imagine '' at Tsunami Aid .
Musically the album was structured like a club set composed by a DJ .
It was acclaimed by critics , with Keith Caulfield from Billboard commenting that the album was a `` welcome return to form for the Queen of Pop . ''
Confessions on a Dance Floor and its lead single , `` Hung Up '' , went on to reach number one in 40 and 41 countries respectively , earning a place in Guinness World Records .
Gim me !
Gim me !
-LRB- A Man After Midnight -RRB- '' , only the second time that ABBA has allowed their work to be used .
ABBA songwriter Björn Ulvaeus remarked `` It is a wonderful track -- 100 per cent solid pop music . ''
It caused the Russian Orthodox Church and the Federation of Jewish Communities of Russia to urge all their members to boycott her concert .
The adoption raised strong public reaction , because Malawian law requires would-be parents to reside in Malawi for one year before adopting , which Madonna did not do .
She addressed this on The Oprah Winfrey Show , saying that there were no written adoption laws in Malawi that regulated foreign adoption .
They want me to support their court case , a thing I can not do for I know what I agreed with Madonna and her husband . ''
The song was available as a free download during its first week of release .
She also performed it at the London Live Earth concert .
Madonna announced her departure from Warner Bros. .
The documentary was directed by Nathan Rissman , who worked as Madonna 's gardener .
The plot of the film revolved around three friends and their aspirations .
The Times said she had `` done herself proud '' while The Daily Telegraph described the film as `` not an entirely unpromising first effort -LSB- but -RSB- Madonna would do well to hang on to her day job . ''
At the induction ceremony on March 10 , 2008 , Madonna did not sing but asked fellow Hall of Fame inductees and Michigan natives The Stooges to perform her songs `` Burning Up '' and `` Ray of Light '' .
She thanked Christopher Flynn , her dance teacher from 35 years earlier , for his encouragement to follow her dreams .
Containing R&B and urban pop influences , the songs on Hard Candy were autobiographical in nature and saw Madonna collaborating with Justin Timberlake , Timbaland , Pharrell Williams and Nate `` Danja '' Hills .
Don Shewey from Rolling Stone complimented it as an `` impressive taste of her upcoming tour . ''
It received generally positive reviews worldwide though some critics panned it as `` an attempt to harness the urban market '' .
At the 23rd Japan Gold Disc Awards , Madonna received her fifth Artist of the Year trophy from Recording Industry Association of Japan , the most for any artist .
It was extended to the next year , adding new European dates , and after it ended , the total gross was $ 408 million .
The book caused some friction between Madonna and her brother , because of the unsolicited publication .
Problems also arose between Madonna and Ritchie , with the media reporting that they were on the verge of separation .
She decided to adopt from Malawi .
The country 's High Court initially approved the adoption of Chifundo `` Mercy '' James ; however , the application was rejected because Madonna was not a resident of the country .
She also released Celebration , her third greatest-hits album and final release with Warner .
It contained the new songs `` Celebration '' and `` Revolver '' along with 34 hits spanning her career .
Celebration reached number one in the UK , tying her with Elvis Presley as the solo act with most number one albums in the British chart history .
Controversy erupted when Madonna decided to adopt from Malawi again .
I still love Mercy .
She is my dearest . ''
It was her first release under Live Nation , but was distributed by Warner Bros. .
Critical and commercial response to the film was negative .
Madonna contributed the ballad `` Masterpiece '' for the film 's soundtrack , which won her a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song .
The album was well received by music critics , with Priya Elan from NME calling it `` a ridiculously enjoyable romp '' , citing its `` psychotic , soul-bearing stuff '' as `` some of the most visceral stuff she 's ever done . ''
MDNA debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and many other countries worldwide .
Madonna surpassed Elvis Presley 's record for the most number-one album by a solo artist in the UK .
The lead single `` Give Me All Your Luvin ' '' , featuring guest vocals from Minaj and M.I.A. , became Madonna 's record-extending 38th top-ten hit on the Billboard Hot 100 .
The tour has received positive critical reception , but featured controversial subjects such as violence , firearms , human rights , nudity and politics .
Lawsuits threatened against Madonna have also been engaged from the tour .
At the 2013 Billboard Music Awards , Madonna won three trophies for Top Touring Artist , Top Dance Artist and Top Dance Album .
Madonna responded by releasing a statement saying she was saddened that Banda had chosen to act negatively about her endeavors .
`` I have no intention of being distracted by these ridiculous allegations , '' she added .
Later , it was confirmed that Banda had not approved the statement released written by her press team and was `` incandescent with anger '' over the mix-up .
From the beginning of 2014 , Madonna began to make multiple media appearances .
The singer released a statement saying that she was inspired by their work , adding that `` it was obvious to me that I had to get involved and be part of the solution to help Detroit recover '' .
Madonna also began work on her thirteenth studio album , with collaborators including Avicii , Diplo and Natalia Kills .
She posted in response that half of the tracks would not be used on the final release , while the other half had `` changed and evolved '' .
While on tour Madonna became embroiled in a legal battle with Ritchie , over the custody of her son Rocco .
The dispute started when Rocco decided to continue living at England with Ritchie when the Rebel Heart Tour had visited there , while Madonna wanted him to return with her .
Court hearings took place in both New York and London , and after multiple deliberations , Madonna decided to withdraw her application for custody , and appealed for a mutual discussion between herself and Ritchie about Rocco .
As a vocalist , musician , dancer , songwriter , or actress , Madonna 's talents seem modest . ''
He asserts Madonna 's success is in relying on the talents of others , and that her personal relationships have served as cornerstones to the numerous reinventions in the longevity of her career .
Her musical career has been a continuous experimentation with new musical ideas and new images and a constant quest for new heights of fame and acclaim .
Grant concluded that `` having established herself as the queen of popular music , Madonna did not stop there , but continued re-inventing . ''
Musicologist Susan McClary wrote that `` Madonna 's art itself repeatedly deconstructs the traditional notion of the unified subject with finite ego boundaries .
Her pieces explore various ways of constituting identities that refuse stability , that remain fluid , that resist definition . ''
Madonna 's early songwriting skill was developed during her time with the Breakfast Club in 1979 .
According to author Carol Gnojewski , her first attempts at songwriting are perceived as an important self-revelation , as Madonna said : `` I do n't know where -LSB- the songs -RSB- came from .
It was like magic .
I 'd write a song every day .
I said ` Wow , I was meant to do this ' . ''
Rolling Stone has named her `` an exemplary songwriter with a gift for hooks and indelible lyrics . ''
According to Freya Jarman-Ivens , Madonna 's talent for developing `` incredible '' hooks for her songs allows the lyrics to capture the attention of the audience , even without the influence of the music .
As an example , Jarman-Ivens cites the 1985 single `` Into the Groove '' and its line `` Live out your fantasy here with me , just let the music set you free ; Touch my body , and move in time , now I know you 're mine . ''
Her songs also speak about taboo and unconventional issues of their period , such as sexuality and AIDS on Erotica -LRB- 1992 -RRB- .
Many of her lyrics contain innuendos and double entendre , which lead to multiple interpretations among music critics and scholars .
Her early rock roots also can be found on the demo album Pre-Madonna .
Stephen Thomas Erlewine noted that with her self-titled debut album , Madonna began her career as a disco diva , in an era that did not have any such divas to speak of .
The album 's songs reveal several key trends that have continued to define her success , including a strong dance-based idiom , catchy hooks , highly polished arrangements and Madonna 's own vocal style .
It contained references to classical works -LRB- pizzicato synthesizer line that opens `` Angel '' -RRB- ; potential negative reaction from social groups -LRB- `` Dress You Up '' was blacklisted by the Parents Music Resource Center -RRB- ; and retro styles -LRB- `` Shoo-Bee-Doo '' , Madonna 's homage to Motown -RRB- .
Like a Prayer introduced live recorded songs and incorporated different genres of music , including dance , funk , R&B and gospel music .
Her versatility was further shown on I 'm Breathless , which consists predominantly of the 1940s Broadway showtune-flavoured jazz , swing and big band tracks .
Both albums explored element of new jack swing , with Jim Farber from Entertainment Weekly saying that `` she could actually be viewed as new jack swing 's godmother . ''
She tried to remain contemporary by incorporating samples , drum loops and hip hop into her music .
According to Q magazine , American Life was characterized by `` a thumping techno rhythm , liquid keyboard lines , an acoustic chorus and a bizarre Madonna rap . ''
The `` conventional rock songs '' of the album were suffused with dramatic lyrics about patriotism and composition , including the appearance of a gospel choir in the song `` Nothing Fails '' .
Pop vocalists usually sing songs `` straight , '' but Madonna employs subtext , irony , aggression and all sorts of vocal idiosyncrasies in the ways John Lennon and Bob Dylan did . ''
Madonna used a bright , girlish vocal timbre in her early albums which became passé in her later works .
The change was deliberate since she was constantly reminded of how the critics had once labelled her as `` Minnie Mouse on helium '' .
Of this experience she commented , `` I studied with a vocal coach for Evita and I realized there was a whole piece of my voice I was n't using .
Before , I just believed I had a really limited range and was going to make the most of it . ''
Besides singing Madonna has the ability to play several musical instruments .
This helped her to form the band Emmy , where she performed as the guitarist and lead vocalist .
On the liner notes of Pre-Madonna , Stephen Bray wrote : `` I 've always thought she passed up a brilliant career as a rhythm guitarist . ''
After her career breakthrough , Madonna focused mainly in singing but was also credited for playing cowbell on Madonna -LRB- 1983 -RRB- and synthesizer on Like a Prayer -LRB- 1989 -RRB- .
After two decades , Madonna decided to perform with guitar again during the promotion of Music -LRB- 2000 -RRB- .
Since then Madonna has played guitar on every tour , as well as her studio albums .
At the 2002 Orville H. Gibson Guitar Awards , she received nomination for Les Paul Horizon Award , which honors the most promising up-and-coming guitarist .
According to Ablow , the younger a child is at the time of a serious loss , the more profound the influence and the longer lasting the impact .
He concludes that `` some people never reconcile themselves to such a loss at an early age , Madonna is not different than them . ''
She encountered her own worst possible scenario , becoming a victim of male violence , and thereafter turned that full-tilt into her work , reversing the equation at every opportunity . ''
Later , Madonna commented : `` We were all wounded in one way or another by -LSB- her death -RSB- , and then we spent the rest of our lives reacting to it or dealing with it or trying to turn into something else .
The anguish of losing my mom left me with a certain kind of loneliness and an incredible longing for something .
If I had n't had that emptiness , I would n't have been so driven .
Her death had a lot to do with me saying -- after I got over my heartache -- I 'm going to be really strong if I ca n't have my mother .
I 'm going to take care of myself . ''
Taraborrelli felt that in time , no doubt because of the devastation she felt , Madonna would never again allow herself , or even her daughter , to feel as abandoned as she had felt when her mother died .
`` Her death had taught -LSB- Madonna -RSB- a valuable lesson , that she would have to remain strong for herself because , she feared weakness -- particularly her own -- and wanted to be the queen of her own castle . ''
As a young woman , she attempted to broaden her taste in literature , art , and music , and during this time became interested in classical music .
She noted that her favorite style was baroque , and loved Mozart and Chopin because she liked their `` feminine quality '' .
She also grew up listening to David Bowie , whose show was the first rock concert she ever attended .
It was an evocation of the impact religion had on her career .
Her video for the title track contains Catholic symbolism , such as the stigmata .
They were all incredibly funny ... and I saw myself in them ... my girlishness , my knowingness and my innocence . ''
She studied the screwball comedies of the 1930s , particularly those of Lombard , in preparation for the film Who 's That Girl .
The video for `` Vogue '' recreated the style of Hollywood glamour photographs , in particular those by Horst P. Horst , and imitated the poses of Marlene Dietrich , Carole Lombard , and Rita Hayworth , while the lyrics referred to many of the stars who had inspired her , including Bette Davis , described by Madonna as an idol .
However , Madonna 's film career has been largely received negatively by the film critic community .
According to biographer Andrew Morton , `` Madonna puts a brave face on the criticism , but privately she is deeply hurt . ''
Pop artist Andy Warhol 's use of sadomasochistic imagery in his underground films were reflected in the music videos for `` Erotica '' and `` Deeper and Deeper '' .
She has donated millions of dollars to New York and London schools teaching the subject .
She faced opposition from rabbis who felt Madonna 's adoption of the Kabbalah was sacrilegious and a case of celebrity dilettantism .
Madonna defended her studies , saying : `` It would be less controversial if I joined the Nazi Party '' , and that her involvement with the Kabbalah is `` not hurting anybody '' .
During the Re-Invention World Tour , at one point in the show , Madonna and her dancers wore T-shirts that read `` Kabbalists Do It Better '' .
According to them , many of her songs have the imagery of the music video in strong context , while referring to the music .
Cultural critic Mark C. Taylor in his book Nots -LRB- 1993 -RRB- felt that the postmodern art form par excellence is video and the reigning `` queen of video '' is Madonna .
The responses to Madonna 's excessively provocative videos have been predictably contradictory . ''
The media and public reaction towards her most-discussed songs such as `` Papa Do n't Preach '' , `` Like a Prayer '' , or `` Justify My Love '' had to do with the music videos created to promote the songs and their impact , rather than the songs themselves .
Morton felt that `` artistically , Madonna 's songwriting is often overshadowed by her striking pop videos . ''
The imagery and incorporation of Hispanic culture and Catholic symbolism continued with the music videos from the True Blue era .
Author Douglas Kellner noted , `` such ` multiculturalism ' and her culturally transgressive moves turned out to be highly successful moves that endeared her to large and varied youth audiences . ''
The video included scenes of an African-American church choir , Madonna being attracted to a statue of a black saint , and singing in front of burning crosses .
This mix of the sacred and the profane upset the Vatican and resulted in the Pepsi commercial withdrawal .
Madonna 's emergence occurred during the advent of MTV ; Chris Nelson from The New York Times spoke of pop artists like Madonna saying , `` MTV , with its almost exclusively lip-synched videos , ushered in an era in which average music fans might happily spend hours a day , every day , watching singers just mouth the words . ''
The symbiotic relationship between the music video and lip-syncing led to a desire for the spectacle and imagery of the music video to be transferred to live stage shows .
These effects came at the expense of live singing . ''
Metz noted that Madonna represents a paradox as she is often perceived as living her whole life as a performance .
While her big-screen performances are panned , her live performances are critical successes .
Author Elin Diamond explained that reciprocally , the fact that images from Madonna 's videos can be recreated in a live setting enhances the realism of the original videos .
Thus her live performances have become the means by which mediatized representations are naturalized .
Various music journalists , critical theorists , and authors have deemed Madonna the most influential female recording artist of all time .
Author Carol Clerk wrote that `` during her career , Madonna has transcended the term ` pop star ' to become a global cultural icon . ''
Rolling Stone of Spain wrote that `` She became the first viral Master of Pop in history , years before the Internet was massively used .
A pop dialectic , never seen since The Beatles 's reign , which allowed her to keep on the edge of tendency and commerciality . ''
He further asserted that Madonna and Michael Jackson invented the terms Queen and King of Pop .
According to Tony Sclafani from MSNBC , `` It 's worth noting that before Madonna , most music mega-stars were guy rockers ; after her , almost all would be female singers ... When The Beatles hit America , they changed the paradigm of performer from solo act to band .
Madonna changed it back -- with an emphasis on the female . ''
She also topped VH1 's lists of `` 100 Greatest Women in Music '' and `` 50 Greatest Women of the Video Era '' .
As Roger Chapman documents in Culture Wars : An Encyclopedia of Issues , Viewpoints , and Voices , Volume 1 -LRB- 2010 -RRB- , she has drawn frequent condemnation from religious organizations , social conservatives and parental watchdog groups for her use of explicit , sexual imagery and lyrics , religious symbolism , and otherwise `` irreverent '' behavior in her live performances .
The Times wrote that she had `` started a revolution amongst women in music ... Her attitudes and opinions on sex , nudity , style and sexuality forced the public to sit up and take notice . ''
Professor John Fiske noted that the sense of empowerment that Madonna offers is inextricably connected with the pleasure of exerting some control over the meanings of self , of sexuality , and of one 's social relations .
In Doing Gender in Media , Art and Culture -LRB- 2009 -RRB- , the authors noted that Madonna , as a female celebrity , performer , and pop icon , is able to unsettle standing feminist reflections and debates .
Professor Colin Barrow from Cranfield School of Management described Madonna as `` America 's smartest businesswoman ... who has moved to the top of her industry and stayed there by constantly reinventing herself . ''
But that hardly mattered to her . ''
Hazel Blackmore and Rafael Fernández de Castro in the book ¿ Qué es Estados Unidos ?
from the Fondo de Cultura Económica , noted : `` Madonna has been undoubtedly the most important woman in the history of popular music and a great businesswoman in herself ; creating fashion , breaking taboos and provoking controversies . ''
The Guinness World Records acknowledged her as the best-selling female recording artist and the fourth best-selling act of all time , behind The Beatles , Elvis Presley , and Michael Jackson .
According to the Recording Industry Association of America -LRB- RIAA -RRB- , she is the best-selling female rock artist of the 20th century and the second top-selling female albums artist in the United States , with 64.5 million certified albums .
Madonna is the most certified artist of all time in United Kingdom , with 45 awards from the British Phonographic Industry -LRB- BPI -RRB- as of April 2013 .
Overall , Madonna ranks third on all-time top-grossing Billboard Boxscore list , with just The Rolling Stones -LRB- $ 1.84 billion -RRB- and U2 -LRB- $ 1.67 billion -RRB- ahead of her .
In 2008 , Billboard magazine ranked her at number two , behind The Beatles , on the Billboard Hot 100 All-Time Top Artists , making her the most successful solo artist in the history of American singles chart .
Since at least the 19th century , the term London has also referred to the metropolis developed around this core .
The latter constitutes the vast majority of London , though historically it was split between Middlesex -LRB- a now abolished county -RRB- , Essex , Surrey , Kent and Hertfordshire .
London is a leading global city , with strengths in the arts , commerce , education , entertainment , fashion , finance , healthcare , media , professional services , research and development , tourism , and transport all contributing to its prominence .
-LSB- note 3 -RSB- London is a world cultural capital .
London is one of the world 's leading investment destinations , hosting more international retailers and ultra high-net-worth individuals than any other city .
According to the report London also ranks first in the world in software , multimedia development and design , and shares first position in technology readiness .
The possibility can not be ruled out that the Welsh name was borrowed back in from English at a later date , and thus can not be used as a basis from which to reconstruct the original name .
This bridge either crossed the Thames , or went to a now lost island in the river .
Dendrology dated the timbers to 1500 BC .
From around 500 , an Anglo-Saxon settlement known as Lundenwic developed in the same area , slightly to the west of the old Roman city .
Archaeological research shows that this involved abandonment of Lundenwic and a revival of life and trade within the old Roman walls .
The hall became the basis of a new Palace of Westminster .
In 1100 , its population was around 18,000 ; by 1300 it had grown to nearly 100,000 .
The traffic in woollen cloths shipped undyed and undressed from London to the nearby shores of the Low Countries , where it was considered indispensable .
But the tentacles of English maritime enterprise hardly extended beyond the seas of north-west Europe .
The Royal Exchange was founded .
Mercantilism grew , and monopoly trading companies such as the East India Company were established , with trade expanding to the New World .
London became the principal North Sea port , with migrants arriving from England and abroad .
The population rose from an estimated 50,000 in 1530 to about 225,000 in 1605 .
During the English Civil War the majority of Londoners supported the Parliamentary cause .
London was the world 's largest city from about 1831 to 1925 .
Rising traffic congestion led to the creation of the world 's first local urban rail network .
The Metropolitan Board of Works oversaw infrastructure expansion in the capital and some of the surrounding counties ; it was abolished in 1889 when the London County Council was created out of those areas of the counties surrounding the capital .
The role of trendsetter was revived during the punk era .
This was borne out of London 's ever-increasing role as a major international financial centre during the 1980s .
The mayor 's statutory planning strategy is published as the London Plan , which was most recently revised in 2011 .
They are responsible for most local services , such as local planning , schools , social services , local roads and refuse collection .
Certain functions , such as waste management , are provided through joint arrangements .
In 2009 -- 2010 the combined revenue expenditure by London councils and the GLA amounted to just over # 22 billion -LRB- # 14.7 billion for the boroughs and # 7.4 billion for the GLA -RRB- .
London is the seat of the Government of the United Kingdom .
The area of Greater London has incorporated areas that were once part of the historic counties of Middlesex , Kent , Surrey , Essex and Hertfordshire .
-LSB- note 6 -RSB-
The Thames Valley is a floodplain surrounded by gently rolling hills including Parliament Hill , Addington Hills , and Primrose Hill .
Summers are generally warm and sometimes hot .
During the 2003 European heat wave there were 14 consecutive days above 30 °C -LRB- 86.0 °F -RRB- and 2 consecutive days where temperatures reached 38 °C -LRB- 100.4 °F -RRB- , leading to hundreds of heat related deaths .
Winters are generally cool and damp with little temperature variation .
Spring and autumn are mixed seasons and can be pleasant .
In the dense areas , most of the concentration is via medium - and high-rise buildings .
London 's wetland areas support nationally important populations of many water birds .
These urban foxes are noticeably bolder than their country cousins , sharing the pavement with pedestrians and raising cubs in people 's backyards .
Foxes have even sneaked into the Houses of Parliament , where one was found asleep on a filing cabinet .
Generally , however , foxes and city folk appear to get along .
This sample can not be taken to represent Londoners as a whole .
Other mammals found in Greater London are hedgehogs , rats , mice , rabbit , shrew , vole , and squirrels , In wilder areas of Outer London , such as Epping Forest , a wide variety of mammals are found including hare , badger , field , bank and water vole , wood mouse , yellow-necked mouse , mole , shrew , and weasel , in addition to fox , squirrel and hedgehog .
Epping Forest is also known for its fallow deer , which can frequently be seen in herds to the north of the Forest .
Muntjac deer , which escaped from deer parks at the turn of the twentieth century , are also found in the forest .
The table to the right shows the most common countries of birth of London residents .
With increasing industrialisation , London 's population grew rapidly throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries , and it was for some time in the late 19th and early 20th centuries the most populous city in the world .
The region covers an area of 1,579 square kilometres -LRB- 610 sq mi -RRB- .
The population density is 5,177 inhabitants per square kilometre -LRB- 13,410 / sq mi -RRB- , more than ten times that of any other British region .
Figures from the Office for National Statistics show that , in 2010 -LSB- update -RSB- , London 's foreign-born population was 2,650,000 -LRB- 33 per cent -RRB- , up from 1,630,000 in 1997 .
The table to the right shows the 30 most common countries of birth of London residents in 2011 , the date of the last published UK Census .
A portion of the German-born population are likely to be British nationals born to parents serving in the British Armed Forces in Germany .
London is also home to sizeable Muslim , Hindu , Sikh , and Jewish communities .
Following the oil boom , increasing numbers of wealthy Hindus and Middle-Eastern Muslims have based themselves around Mayfair and Knightsbridge in West London .
The majority of British Jews live in London , with significant Jewish communities in Stamford Hill , Stanmore , Golders Green , Finchley , Hampstead , Hendon and Edgware in North London .
There are many accents that are traditionally thought of as London accents .
Over 85 percent -LRB- 3.2 million -RRB- of the employed population of greater London works in the services industries .
Because of its prominent global role , London 's economy had been affected by the Late-2000s financial crisis .
However , by 2010 the City has recovered ; put in place new regulatory powers , proceeded to regain lost ground and re-established London 's economic dominance .
Many national newspapers are edited in London .
London is a major international air transport hub with the busiest city airspace in the world .
In March 2008 its fifth terminal was opened .
Most rail lines terminate around the centre of London , running into eighteen terminal stations , with the exception of the Thameslink trains connecting Bedford in the north and Brighton in the south via Luton and Gatwick airports .
There are plans for a second high speed line linking London to the Midlands , North West England , and Yorkshire .
In 2013 , the network had more than 2 billion commuter trips per annum , more than the Underground .
Crossing the River Thames , linking Greenwich Peninsula and the Royal Docks in the east of the city , the cable car is integrated with London 's Oyster Card ticketing system , although special fares are charged .
A number of world-leading education institutions are based in London .
Members of the University of London have their own admissions procedures , and some award their own degrees .
The United Kingdom 's Royal Ballet , English National Ballet , Royal Opera and English National Opera are based in London and perform at the Royal Opera House , the London Coliseum , Sadler 's Wells Theatre and the Royal Albert Hall as well as touring the country .
London has been the setting for many works of literature .
Modern writers pervasively influenced by the city include Peter Ackroyd , author of a `` biography '' of London , and Iain Sinclair , who writes in the genre of psychogeography .
London has played a significant role in the film industry , and has major studios at Ealing and a special effects and post-production community centred in Soho .
London is a major centre for television production , with studios including BBC Television Centre , The Fountain Studios and The London Studios .
Other significant instruments are at the cathedrals and major churches .
Several music festivals , including the Wireless Festival , South West Four , Lovebox , and Hyde Park 's British Summer Time are all held in London .
London is also a centre for urban music .
In 2003 , the gardens were put on the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites .
Epping Forest is a popular venue for various outdoor activities , including mountain biking , walking , horse riding , golf , angling , and orienteering .
Walking is a popular recreational activity in London .
Areas that provide for walks include Wimbledon Common , Epping Forest , Hampton Court Park , Hampstead Heath , the eight Royal Parks , canals and disused railway tracks .
Among other professional teams based in London include Fulham , Queens Park Rangers , Millwall and Charlton Athletic .
The city has the highest property prices of any European city according to the Office for National Statistics and the European Office of Statistics .
Regulations generally also carry the force of law under the Chevron doctrine .
Many lawsuits turn on the meaning of a federal statute or regulation , and judicial interpretations of such meaning carry legal force under the principle of stare decisis .
In some areas , like aviation and railroads , the federal government has developed a comprehensive scheme that preempts virtually all state law , while in others , like family law , a relatively small number of federal statutes -LRB- generally covering interstate and international situations -RRB- interacts with a much larger body of state law .
Prior to a major change to federal court rules in 2007 , about one-fifth of federal appellate cases were published and thereby became binding precedents , while the rest were unpublished and bound only the parties to each case .
Several legal scholars have argued that the federal judicial power to decide `` cases or controversies '' necessarily includes the power to decide the precedential effect of those cases and controversies .
The rule gradually developed , case-by-case , as an extension of the judiciary 's public policy of effective judicial administration -LRB- that is , in order to efficiently exercise the judicial power -RRB- .
Although federal courts can create federal common law in the form of case law , such law must be linked one way or another to the interpretation of a particular federal constitutional provision , statute , or regulation -LRB- which in turn was enacted as part of the Constitution or after -RRB- .
Only in a few narrow limited areas , like maritime law , has the Constitution expressly authorized the continuation of English common law at the federal level -LRB- meaning that in those areas federal courts can continue to make law as they see fit , subject to the limitations of stare decisis -RRB- .
When hearing claims under state law pursuant to diversity jurisdiction , federal trial courts must apply the statutory and decisional law of the state in which they sit , as if they were a court of that state , even if they believe that the relevant state law is irrational or just bad public policy .
They retain plenary power to make laws covering anything not preempted by the federal Constitution , federal statutes , or international treaties ratified by the federal Senate .
Normally , state supreme courts are the final interpreters of state constitutions and state law , unless their interpretation itself presents a federal issue , in which case a decision may be appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court by way of a petition for writ of certiorari .
State laws have dramatically diverged in the centuries since independence , to the extent that the United States can not be regarded as one legal system as to the majority of types of law traditionally under state control , but must be regarded as 50 separate systems of tort law , family law , property law , contract law , criminal law , and so on .
The Delaware Court of Chancery is the most prominent of the small number of remaining equity courts .
But certain key portions of their civil procedure laws have been modified by their legislatures to bring them closer to federal civil procedure .
These may result in fines and sometimes the loss of one 's driver 's license , but no jail time .
However , there is still significant diversity in the interpretation of other kinds of contracts , depending upon the extent to which a given state has codified its common law of contracts or adopted portions of the Restatement -LRB- Second -RRB- of Contracts .
Myanmar -LRB- myan-MAR i/mi ɑːnˈmɑːr / mee-ahn-MAR , / miˈɛnmɑːr / mee-EN-mar or / maɪˈænmɑːr / my-AN-mar -LRB- also with the stress on first syllable -RRB- ; Burmese pronunciation : -LSB- mjəmà -RSB- -RRB- , -LSB- nb 1 -RSB- officially the Republic of the Union of Myanmar and also known as Burma , is a sovereign state in Southeast Asia bordered by Bangladesh , India , China , Laos and Thailand .
The early 19th century Konbaung Dynasty ruled over an area that included modern Myanmar and briefly controlled Manipur and Assam as well .
The British conquered Myanmar after three Anglo-Burmese Wars in the 19th century and the country became a British colony .
Myanmar became an independent nation in 1948 , initially as a democratic nation and then , following a coup d'état in 1962 , a military dictatorship .
During this time , the United Nations and several other organisations have reported consistent and systematic human rights violations in the country .
This , along with the release of Aung San Suu Kyi and political prisoners , has improved the country 's human rights record and foreign relations , and has led to the easing of trade and other economic sanctions .
There is , however , continuing criticism of the government 's treatment of the Muslim Rohingya minority and its poor response to the religious clashes .
In English , the country is popularly known as either `` Burma '' or `` Myanmar '' i / ˈmjɑːnˌmɑːr / .
The Czech Republic uses officially Myanmar , although its Ministry of Foreign Affairs mentions both Myanmar and Burma on its website .
Human remains and artifacts from this era were discovered in Monywa District in the Sagaing Division .
Evidence also shows the presence of rice-growing settlements of large villages and small towns that traded with their surroundings as far as China between 500 BC and 200 AD .
Iron Age Burmese cultures also had influences from outside sources such as India and Thailand , as seen in their funerary practices concerning child burials .
This indicates some form of communication between groups in Myanmar and other places , possibly through trade .
Several competing Shan States came to dominate the entire northwestern to eastern arc surrounding the Irrawaddy valley .
Despite the wars , cultural synchronisation continued .
Burmese literature `` grew more confident , popular , and stylistically diverse '' , and the second generation of Burmese law codes as well as the earliest pan-Burma chronicles emerged .
His successor Bayinnaung went on to conquer a vast swath of mainland Southeast Asia including the Shan states , Lan Na , Manipur , Mong Mao , the Ayutthaya Kingdom , Lan Xang and southern Arakan .
It restored a smaller , more manageable kingdom , encompassing Lower Myanmar , Upper Myanmar , Shan states , Lan Na and upper Tenasserim .
Its trade and secular administrative reforms built a prosperous economy for more than 80 years .
From the 1720s onward , the kingdom was beset with repeated Meithei raids into Upper Myanmar and a nagging rebellion in Lan Na .
Hanthawaddy forces sacked Ava in 1752 , ending the 266-year-old Toungoo Dynasty .
Burma and Siam went to war until 1855 , but all resulted in a stalemate , exchanging Tenasserim -LRB- to Burma -RRB- and Lan Na -LRB- to Ayutthaya -RRB- .
It was the second-largest empire in Burmese history but also one with a long ill-defined border with British India .
Buddhist monks became the vanguards of the independence movement .
A Burmese Executive Administration headed by Ba Maw was established by the Japanese in August 1942 .
Wingate 's British Chindits were formed into long-range penetration groups trained to operate deep behind Japanese lines .
A similar American unit , Merrill 's Marauders , followed the Chindits into the Burmese jungle in 1943 .
The battles were intense with much of Burma laid waste by the fighting .
Only 1,700 prisoners were taken .
The government cracked down on them on 26 September 2007 .
The crackdown was harsh , with reports of barricades at the Shwedagon Pagoda and monks killed .
There were also rumours of disagreement within the Burmese armed forces , but none was confirmed .
Humanitarian aid was requested but concerns about foreign military or intelligence presence in the country delayed the entry of United States military planes delivering medicine , food , and other supplies .
In addition al-Qaeda signalled an intention to become involved in Myanmar .
This label asserts that the Burmese military is allowing certain civil liberties while clandestinely institutionalising itself further into Burmese politics .
As of July 2013 , about 100 political prisoners remain imprisoned , while conflict between the Burmese Army and local insurgent groups continues .
It is bounded by Laos and Thailand to the southeast .
Smaller mammals are also numerous , ranging from gibbons and monkeys to flying foxes and tapirs .
Among reptile species there are crocodiles , geckos , cobras , Burmese pythons , and turtles .
For a list of protected areas , see List of protected areas of Myanmar .
However , immediately following the elections , the government ended the house arrest of the democracy advocate and leader of the National League for Democracy , Aung San Suu Kyi , and her ability to move freely around the country is considered an important test of the military 's movement toward more openness .
After unexpected reforms in 2011 , NLD senior leaders have decided to register as a political party and to field candidates in future by-elections .
International relations progress indicators continued in September 2012 when Aung San Suu Kyi visited to the US followed by Myanmar 's reformist president visit to the United Nations .
President Barack Obama praised the former general for political and economic reforms , and the cessation of tensions between Myanmar and the United States .
Controversy surrounding the Rohingya population also remains an issue between Bangladesh and Myanmar .
The military is very influential in Myanmar , with all top cabinet and ministry posts usually held by military officials .
Official figures for military spending are not available .
Estimates vary widely because of uncertain exchange rates , but Myanmar 's military forces ' expenses are high .
Members of the United Nations and major international human rights organisations have issued repeated and consistent reports of widespread and systematic human rights violations in Myanmar .
The United Nations General Assembly has repeatedly called on the Burmese Military Junta to respect human rights and in November 2009 the General Assembly adopted a resolution `` strongly condemning the ongoing systematic violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms '' and calling on the Burmese Military Regime `` to take urgent measures to put an end to violations of international human rights and humanitarian law . ''
The UN 's Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict , Radhika Coomaraswamy , who stepped down from her position a week later , met representatives of the Government of Myanmar on 5 July 2012 and stated that she hoped the government 's signing of an action plan would `` signal a transformation . ''
According to Samantha Power , a US delegation raised the issue of child soldiers with the government in October 2012 .
However , she did not comment on the government 's progress towards reform in this area .
The law created three categories of citizenship : citizenship , associate citizenship , and naturalised citizenship .
Naturalized citizenship is only given to those who have at least one parent with one of these types of Burmese citizenship or can provide `` conclusive evidence '' that their parents entered and resided in Burma prior to independence in 1948 .
But the origin of ` most persecuted minority ' statement is unclear .
Whole villages have been `` decimated '' .
Over 300 houses and a number of public buildings have been razed .
According to the Myanmar authorities , the violence , between ethnic Rakhine Buddhists and Rohingya Muslims , left 78 people dead , 87 injured , and thousands of homes destroyed .
In July 2014 five journalists were sentenced to 10 years in jail after publishing a report saying the country was planning to build a new chemical weapons plant .
Journalists described the jailings as a blow to the recently-won news media freedoms that had followed five decades of censorship and persecution .
I guarantee to you that by the end of this year , there will be no prisoners of conscience in Myanmar . ''
Myanmar also had a wealth of natural and labour resources .
The wealth was however , mainly concentrated in the hands of Europeans .
In 1930s , agricultural production fell dramatically as international rice prices declined , and did not recover for several decades .
The government also tried to implement a poorly considered Eight-Year plan .
By the 1950s , rice exports had fallen by two thirds and mineral exports by over 96 % -LRB- as compared to the pre-World War II period -RRB- .
Plans were partly financed by printing money , which led to inflation .
By 1988 , modern varieties were planted on half of the country 's ricelands , including 98 percent of the irrigated areas .
In 2008 rice production was estimated at 50 million tons .
The government of Myanmar controls the gem trade by direct ownership or by joint ventures with private owners of mines .
They are not to discuss politics with foreigners , under penalty of imprisonment and , in 2001 , the Myanmar Tourism Promotion Board issued an order for local officials to protect tourists and limit `` unnecessary contact '' between foreigners and ordinary Burmese people .
There are a small number of border crossings that allow the passage of private vehicles , such as the border between Ruili -LRB- China -RRB- to Mu-se , the border between Htee Kee -LRB- Myanmar -RRB- and Ban Phu Nam Ron -LRB- Thailand -RRB- -LRB- the most direct border between Dawei and Kanchanaburi -RRB- , and the border between Myawaddy -LRB- Myanmar -RRB- and Mae Sot -LRB- Thailand -RRB- .
`` From Mae Sai -LRB- Thailand -RRB- you can cross to Tachileik , but can only go as far as Kengtung .
First Myanmar Investment Co. , Ltd. -LRB- FMI -RRB- became the first stock to be traded after receiving approval for an opening price of 26,000 kyats -LRB- $ 22 -RRB- .
People who were out of the country at the time of the census are not included in these figures .
Population density is 76 per square kilometre -LRB- 200/sq mi -RRB- , among the lowest in Southeast Asia .
10 % of the population are Shan .
The Kayin make up 7 % of the population .
Overseas Indians are 2 % .
The remainder are Kachin , Chin , Rohingya , Anglo-Indians , Gurkha , Nepali and other ethnic minorities .
It is estimated that 52,000 Anglo-Burmese remain in Myanmar .
As of 2009 -LSB- update -RSB- , 110,000 Burmese refugees were living in refugee camps in Thailand .
Sino-Tibetan languages are most widely spoken .
They include Burmese , Karen , Kachin , Chin , and Chinese -LRB- mainly Hokkien -RRB- .
Mon , Palaung , and Wa are the major Austroasiatic languages spoken in Myanmar .
It is also used to write Pali , the sacred language of Theravada Buddhism , as well as several ethnic minority languages , including Shan , several Karen dialects , and Kayah -LRB- Karenni -RRB- , with the addition of specialised characters and diacritics for each language .
Religious edifices and orders have been in existence for many years .
Such persecution and targeting of civilians is particularly notable in Eastern Myanmar , where over 3000 villages have been destroyed in the past ten years .
More than 200,000 Muslims have fled to Bangladesh over the last 20 years to escape Islamophobic persecution .
Independent researchers put the Muslim population at 6 to 10 % of the population -LSB- citation needed -RSB- .
This is manifested in its language , cuisine , music , dance and theatre .
Considered the national epic of Myanmar , the Yama Zatdaw , an adaptation of India 's Ramayana , has been influenced greatly by Thai , Mon , and Indian versions of the play .
Monks are venerated and supported by the lay people .
All male children in Buddhist families are encouraged to be a novice -LRB- beginner for Buddhism -RRB- before the age of twenty and to be a monk after the age of twenty .
British colonial rule introduced Western elements of culture to Burma .
Burma 's education system is modelled after that of the United Kingdom .
Many ethnic minorities , particularly the Karen in the southeast and the Kachin and Chin who populate the north and northeast , practice Christianity .
During the 1920s and 1930s , many Burmese-owned film companies made and produced several films .
The first Burmese sound film was produced in 1932 in Bombay , India with the title Ngwe Pay Lo Ma Ya -LRB- Money Ca n't Buy It -RRB- .
Though few sources in the Bible mention the exilic periods in detail , the experience of diaspora life , from the Ancient Egyptian rule over the Levant , to Assyrian Captivity and Exile , to Babylonian Captivity and Exile , to Seleucid Imperial rule , to the Roman occupation , and the historical relations between Israelites and the homeland , became a major feature of Jewish history , identity and memory .
These numbers include all those who self-identified as Jews in a socio-demographic study or were identified as such by a respondent in the same household .
The exact world Jewish population , however , is difficult to measure .
The etymological equivalent is in use in other languages , e.g. , يَهُودِيّ yahūdī -LRB- sg . -RRB-
, al-yahūd -LRB- pl . -RRB-
-LRB- See Jewish ethnonyms for a full overview . -RRB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Modern archaeology has largely discarded the historicity of the Patriarchs and of the Exodus story , with it being reframed as constituting the Israelites ' inspiring national myth narrative .
The growth of Yahweh-centric belief , along with a number of cultic practices , gradually gave rise to a distinct Israelite ethnic group , setting them apart from other Canaanites .
The Canaanites themselves are archeologically attested in the Middle Bronze Age , while the Hebrew language is the last extant member of the Canaanite languages .
In 587 BC Nebuchadnezzar II , King of the Neo-Babylonian Empire , besieged Jerusalem , destroyed the First Temple , and deported the most prominent citizens of Judah .
In 586 BC , Judah itself ceased to be an independent kingdom , and its remaining Jews were left stateless .
The Second Temple was completed in 515 BCE .
Yehud province was a peaceful part of the Achaemenid Empire until the fall of the Empire in c. 333 BCE to Alexander the Great .
Jews were also politically independent during the Hasmonean dynasty spanning from 140 to 37 BCE and to some degree under the Herodian dynasty from 37 BCE to 6 CE .
Since the destruction of the Second Temple in 70 CE , most Jews have lived in diaspora .
As an ethnic minority in every country in which they live -LRB- except Israel -RRB- , they have frequently experienced persecution throughout history , resulting in a population that has fluctuated both in numbers and distribution over the centuries .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Despite their long-term separation and beside their shared genetic origin , Jews also maintained a common culture , tradition , and language .
Judaism guides its adherents in both practice and belief , and has been called not only a religion , but also a `` way of life , '' which has made drawing a clear distinction between Judaism , Jewish culture , and Jewish identity rather difficult .
Throughout history , in eras and places as diverse as the ancient Hellenic world , in Europe before and after The Age of Enlightenment -LRB- see Haskalah -RRB- , in Islamic Spain and Portugal , in North Africa and the Middle East , India , China , or the contemporary United States and Israel , cultural phenomena have developed that are in some sense characteristically Jewish without being at all specifically religious .
Some factors in this come from within Judaism , others from the interaction of Jews or specific communities of Jews with their surroundings , others from the inner social and cultural dynamics of the community , as opposed to from the religion itself .
This phenomenon has led to considerably different Jewish cultures unique to their own communities , each as authentically Jewish as the next .
Leviticus 24:10 says that the son in a marriage between a Hebrew woman and an Egyptian man is `` of the community of Israel . ''
This is complemented by Ezra 10:2 -- 3 , where Israelites returning from Babylon vow to put aside their gentile wives and their children .
Since the anti-religious Haskalah movement of the late 18th and 19th centuries , halakhic interpretations of Jewish identity have been challenged .
Thus , a mixed marriage is forbidden as is the union of a horse and a donkey , and in both unions the offspring are judged matrilineally .
Some have claimed that in the 1st century of the Christian era , for example , the population more than doubled , from four to 8 -- 10 million within the confines of the Roman Empire , in good part as a result of a wave of conversion .
Another factor that would have made conversion difficult in the Roman world was the halakhic requirement of circumcision , a requirement that proselytizing Christianity quickly dropped .
In addition , historians argue the very figure -LRB- 4 million -RRB- that had been guessed to account for the population of Jews in the ancient Roman Empire is an error that has long been disproven and thus the assumption that conversion impacted Jewish population growth in ancient Rome on a large scale is false .
The 8 million figure is also in doubt as it may refer to a census of total Roman citizens .
Within the world 's Jewish population there are distinct ethnic divisions , most of which are primarily the result of geographic branching from an originating Israelite population , and subsequent independent evolutions .
During the millennia of the Jewish diaspora the communities would develop under the influence of their local environments : political , cultural , natural , and populational .
The divisions between all these groups are approximate and their boundaries are not always clear .
The Mizrahim for example , are a heterogeneous collection of North African , Central Asian , Caucasian , and Middle Eastern Jewish communities that are no closer related to each other than they are to any of the earlier mentioned Jewish groups .
Thus , among Mizrahim there are Egyptian Jews , Iraqi Jews , Lebanese Jews , Kurdish Jews , Libyan Jews , Syrian Jews , Bukharian Jews , Mountain Jews , Georgian Jews , Iranian Jews and various others .
Only in Israel is the Jewish population representative of all groups , a melting pot independent of each group 's proportion within the overall world Jewish population .
By the 3rd century BCE , some Jews of the diaspora were speaking Greek .
These languages were also used by the Jews of Israel at that time .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
For centuries , Jews worldwide have spoken the local or dominant languages of the regions they migrated to , often developing distinctive dialectal forms or branches that became independent languages .
Although many Jews once had sufficient knowledge of Hebrew to study the classic literature , and Jewish languages like Yiddish and Ladino were commonly used as recently as the early 20th century , most Jews lack such knowledge today and English has by and large superseded most Jewish vernaculars .
Some Romance languages , particularly French and Spanish , are also widely used .
In some places , the mother language of the Jewish community differs from that of the general population or the dominant group .
For example , in Quebec , the Ashkenazic majority has adopted English , while the Sephardic minority uses French as its primary language .
Due to both Czarist and Soviet policies , Russian has superseded Yiddish as the language of Russian Jews , but these policies have also affected neighboring communities .
Today , Russian is the first language for many Jewish communities in a number of Post-Soviet states , such as Ukraine and Uzbekistan , as well as for Ashkenazic Jews in Azerbaijan , Georgia , and Tajikistan .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Y DNA studies tend to imply a small number of founders in an old population whose members parted and followed different migration paths .
In most Jewish populations , these male line ancestors appear to have been mainly Middle Eastern .
Scholars such as Harry Ostrer and Raphael Falk believe this indicates that many Jewish males found new mates from European and other communities in the places where they migrated in the diaspora after fleeing ancient Israel .
In contrast , Behar has found evidence that about 40 % of Ashkenazi Jews originate maternally from just four female founders , who were of Middle Eastern origin .
The populations of Sephardi and Mizrahi Jewish communities `` showed no evidence for a narrow founder effect . ''
Subsequent studies carried out by Feder et al. confirmed the large portion of non-local maternal origin among Ashkenazi Jews .
Reflecting on their findings related to the maternal origin of Ashkenazi Jews , the authors conclude `` Clearly , the differences between Jews and non-Jews are far larger than those observed among the Jewish communities .
Hence , differences between the Jewish communities can be overlooked when non-Jews are included in the comparisons . ''
They show that Jewish populations have tended to form relatively closely related groups in independent communities , with most in a community sharing significant ancestry in common .
For Jewish populations of the diaspora , the genetic composition of Ashkenazi , Sephardi , and Mizrahi Jewish populations show a predominant amount of shared Middle Eastern ancestry .
According to Behar , the most parsimonious explanation for this shared Middle Eastern ancestry is that it is `` consistent with the historical formulation of the Jewish people as descending from ancient Hebrew and Israelite residents of the Levant '' and `` the dispersion of the people of ancient Israel throughout the Old World '' .
North African , Italian and others of Iberian origin show variable frequencies of admixture with non-Jewish historical host populations among the maternal lines .
Behar et al. have remarked on an especially close relationship of Ashkenazi Jews and modern Italians .
The early years of the State of Israel were marked by the mass immigration of Holocaust survivors in the aftermath of the Holocaust and Jews fleeing Arab lands .
Israel also has a large population of Ethiopian Jews , many of whom were airlifted to Israel in the late 1980s and early 1990s .
This period also saw an increase in immigration to Israel from Western Europe , Latin America , and North America .
Currently , the largest Jewish community outside Israel , and either the largest or second-largest Jewish community in the world , is located in the United States , with 5.2 million to 6.4 million Jews by various estimates .
Demographers disagree on whether the United States has a larger Jewish population than Israel , with many maintaining that Israel surpassed the United States in Jewish population during the 2000s , while others maintain that the United States still has the largest Jewish population in the world .
Currently , a major national Jewish population survey is planned to ascertain whether or not Israel has overtaken the United States in Jewish population .
In Eastern Europe , there are anywhere from 350,000 to one million Jews living in the former Soviet Union , but exact figures are difficult to establish .
In Germany , the 102,000 Jews registered with the Jewish community are a slowly declining population , despite the immigration of tens of thousands of Jews from the former Soviet Union since the fall of the Berlin Wall .
Thousands of Israelis also live in Germany , either permanently or temporarily , for economic reasons .
Of these , just under two-thirds lived in the French-controlled Maghreb region , 15 -- 20 % in the Kingdom of Iraq , approximately 10 % in the Kingdom of Egypt and approximately 7 % in the Kingdom of Yemen .
A further 200,000 lived in Pahlavi Iran and the Republic of Turkey .
Today , around 26,000 Jews live in Arab countries and around 30,000 in Iran and Turkey .
The exodus from Arab and Muslim countries took place primarily from 1948 .
The first large-scale exoduses took place in the late 1940s and early 1950s , primarily in Iraq , Yemen and Libya , with up to 90 % of these communities leaving within a few years .
The peak of the exodus from Egypt occurred in 1956 .
The exodus in the Maghreb countries peaked in the 1960s .
Lebanon was the only Arab country to see a temporary increase in its Jewish population during this period , due to an influx of refugees from other Arab countries , although by the mid-1970s the Jewish community of Lebanon had also dwindled .
In the aftermath of the exodus wave from Arab states , an additional migration of Iranian Jews peaked in the 1980s when around 80 % of Iranian Jews left the country .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Since at least the time of the Ancient Greeks , a proportion of Jews have assimilated into the wider non-Jewish society around them , by either choice or force , ceasing to practice Judaism and losing their Jewish identity .
In the United States , only about a third of children from intermarriages affiliate with Jewish religious practice .
The result is that most countries in the Diaspora have steady or slightly declining religiously Jewish populations as Jews continue to assimilate into the countries in which they live .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The `` bad '' kind promoted hatred of Jews because of their descent .
This was considered un-Christian because the Christian message was intended for all of humanity regardless of ethnicity ; anyone could become a Christian .
The `` good '' kind criticized alleged Jewish conspiracies to control newspapers , banks , and other institutions , to care only about accumulation of wealth , etc. .
Islam and Judaism have a complex relationship .
They had several social and legal disabilities such as prohibitions against bearing arms or giving testimony in courts in cases involving Muslims .
Many of the disabilities were highly symbolic .
On the other hand , Jews rarely faced martyrdom or exile , or forced compulsion to change their religion , and they were mostly free in their choice of residence and profession .
In modern times , it has become commonplace for standard antisemitic themes to be conflated with anti-Zionist publications and pronouncements of Islamic movements such as Hezbollah and Hamas , in the pronouncements of various agencies of the Islamic Republic of Iran , and even in the newspapers and other publications of Turkish Refah Partisi . ''
Throughout history , many rulers , empires and nations have oppressed their Jewish populations or sought to eliminate them entirely .
The persecution and genocide were accomplished in stages .
Legislation to remove the Jews from civil society was enacted years before the outbreak of World War II .
Concentration camps were established in which inmates were used as slave labour until they died of exhaustion or disease .
Where the Third Reich conquered new territory in Eastern Europe , specialized units called Einsatzgruppen murdered Jews and political opponents in mass shootings .
Jews and Roma were crammed into ghettos before being transported hundreds of miles by freight train to extermination camps where , if they survived the journey , the majority of them were killed in gas chambers .
Virtually every arm of Germany 's bureaucracy was involved in the logistics of the mass murder , turning the country into what one Holocaust scholar has called `` a genocidal nation . ''
Additionally , there is also a growing rate of conversion to Jews by Choice of gentiles who make the decision to head in the direction of becoming Jews .
The fiber is most often spun into yarn or thread and used to make a soft , breathable textile .
For example , it has been found at the site of Hallus in Karnataka dating from around 1000 BC .
The planting of cotton was common in Merv , Ray and Pars of Iran .
This aspect is retained in the name for cotton in several Germanic languages , such as German Baumwolle , which translates as `` tree wool '' -LRB- Baum means `` tree '' ; Wolle means `` wool '' -RRB- .
These branches were so pliable that they bent down to allow the lambs to feed when they are hungrie -LSB- sic -RSB- . ''
-LRB- See Vegetable Lamb of Tartary . -RRB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
By the late 1700s a number of crude ginning machines had been developed .
However , to produce a bale of cotton required over 600 hours of human labor , making large-scale production uneconomical in the United States , even with the use of humans as slave labor .
The gin that Whitney manufactured -LRB- the Holmes design -RRB- reduced the hours down to just a dozen or so per bale .
Although Whitney patented his own design for a cotton gin , he manufactured a prior design from Henry Odgen Holmes , for which Holmes filed a patent in 1796 .
In the United States , cultivating and harvesting cotton became the leading occupation of slaves .
British and French traders invested heavily in cotton plantations .
The Egyptian government of Viceroy Isma'il took out substantial loans from European bankers and stock exchanges .
Cotton remained a key crop in the Southern economy after emancipation and the end of the Civil War in 1865 .
Some farmers rented the land and bore the production costs themselves .
Picking cotton was a source of income for families across the South .
In general , these conditions are met within the seasonally dry tropics and subtropics in the Northern and Southern hemispheres , but a large proportion of the cotton grown today is cultivated in areas with less rainfall that obtain the water from irrigation .
Production of the crop for a given year usually starts soon after harvesting the preceding autumn .
Planting time in spring in the Northern hemisphere varies from the beginning of February to the beginning of June .
While dryland -LRB- non-irrigated -RRB- cotton is successfully grown in this region , consistent yields are only produced with heavy reliance on irrigation water drawn from the Ogallala Aquifer .
As water resources get tighter around the world , economies that rely on it face difficulties and conflict , as well as potential environmental problems .
For example , improper cropping and irrigation practices have led to desertification in areas of Uzbekistan , where cotton is a major export .
In the days of the Soviet Union , the Aral Sea was tapped for agricultural irrigation , largely of cotton , and now salination is widespread .
The gene coding for Bt toxin has been inserted into cotton , causing cotton , called Bt cotton , to produce this natural insecticide in its tissues .
In many regions , the main pests in commercial cotton are lepidopteran larvae , which are killed by the Bt protein in the transgenic cotton they eat .
This eliminates the need to use large amounts of broad-spectrum insecticides to kill lepidopteran pests -LRB- some of which have developed pyrethroid resistance -RRB- .
But Bt cotton is ineffective against many cotton pests , however , such as plant bugs , stink bugs , and aphids ; depending on circumstances it may still be desirable to use insecticides against these .
However , a 2009 study by the Chinese Academy of Sciences , Stanford University and Rutgers University refuted this .
They concluded that the GM cotton effectively controlled bollworm .
Moreover , the increase in insecticide use for the control of these secondary insects was far smaller than the reduction in total insecticide use due to Bt cotton adoption .
The International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-biotech Applications -LRB- ISAAA -RRB- said that , worldwide , GM cotton was planted on an area of 25 million hectares in 2011 .
A long-term study on the economic impacts of Bt cotton in India , published in the Journal PNAS in 2012 , showed that Bt cotton has increased yields , profits , and living standards of smallholder farmers .
The initial introduction of GM cotton proved to be a success in Australia -- the yields were equivalent to the non-transgenic varieties and the crop used much less pesticide to produce -LRB- 85 % reduction -RRB- .
Other GM cotton growing countries in 2011 were Argentina , Myanmar , Burkina Faso , Brazil , Mexico , Colombia , South Africa and Costa Rica .
Its production also promotes and enhances biodiversity and biological cycles .
This institution determines the allowed practices for pest control , growing , fertilizing , and handling of organic crops .
Rayon is derived from a natural cellulose and can not be considered synthetic , but requires extensive processing in a manufacturing process , and led the less expensive replacement of more naturally derived materials .
Acetate in fiber form was developed in 1924 .
Some garments were created from fabrics based on these fibers , such as women 's hosiery from nylon , but it was not until the introduction of polyester into the fiber marketplace in the early 1950s that the market for cotton came under threat .
The rapid uptake of polyester garments in the 1960s caused economic hardship in cotton-exporting economies , especially in Central American countries , such as Nicaragua , where cotton production had boomed tenfold between 1950 and 1965 with the advent of cheap chemical pesticides .
Cotton production recovered in the 1970s , but crashed to pre-1960 levels in the early 1990s .
At that time , producers voted to set up a per-bale assessment system to fund the program , with built-in safeguards to protect their investments .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
These include terrycloth for highly absorbent bath towels and robes ; denim for blue jeans ; cambric , popularly used in the manufacture of blue work shirts -LRB- from which we get the term `` blue-collar '' -RRB- ; and corduroy , seersucker , and cotton twill .
Socks , underwear , and most T-shirts are made from cotton .
Bed sheets often are made from cotton .
During the American slavery period , cotton root bark was used in folk remedies as an abortifacient , that is , to induce a miscarriage .
It also appears to inhibit the development of sperm or even restrict the mobility of the sperm .
Also , it is thought to interfere with the menstrual cycle by restricting the release of certain hormones .
These curly fibers typically are less than 1⁄8 inch -LRB- 3.2 mm -RRB- long .
The term also may apply to the longer textile fiber staple lint as well as the shorter fuzzy fibers from some upland species .
Linters are traditionally used in the manufacture of paper and as a raw material in the manufacture of cellulose .
The yarn is spun so that it is compact and solid .
This cotton is used mainly for underwear , stockings , and gloves .
Africa 's share of the cotton trade has doubled since 1980 .
Neither area has a significant domestic textile industry , textile manufacturing having moved to developing nations in Eastern and South Asia such as India and China .
In Africa , cotton is grown by numerous small holders .
It operates cotton gins in Uganda , Mozambique , and Zambia .
In Zambia , it often offers loans for seed and expenses to the 180,000 small farmers who grow cotton for it , as well as advice on farming methods .
Cargill also purchases cotton in Africa for export .
The future of these subsidies is uncertain and has led to anticipatory expansion of cotton brokers ' operations in Africa .
Dunavant expanded in Africa by buying out local operations .
The four introduced a `` Sectoral Initiative in Favour of Cotton '' , presented by Burkina Faso 's President Blaise Compaoré during the Trade Negotiations Committee on 10 June 2003 .
The international production and trade situation has led to `` fair trade '' cotton clothing and footwear , joining a rapidly growing market for organic clothing , fair fashion or `` ethical fashion '' .
The sequencing consortium first agreed to sequence the D-genome relative of cultivated cotton -LRB- G. raimondii , a wild Central American cotton species -RRB- because of its small size and limited number of repetitive elements .
It is nearly one-third the number of bases of tetraploid cotton -LRB- AD -RRB- , and each chromosome is only present once .
-LSB- clarification needed -RSB- The A genome of G. arboreum would be sequenced next .
Its genome is roughly twice the size of G. raimondii 's .
Part of the difference in size between the two genomes is the amplification of retrotransposons -LRB- GORGE -RRB- .
This strategy is out of necessity ; if one were to sequence the tetraploid genome without model diploid genomes , the euchromatic DNA sequences of the AD genomes would co-assemble and the repetitive elements of AD genomes would assembly independently into A and D sequences respectively .
The public sector effort continues with the goal to create a high-quality , draft genome sequence from reads generated by all sources .
The public-sector effort has generated Sanger reads of BACs , fosmids , and plasmids as well as 454 reads .
These later types of reads will be instrumental in assembling an initial draft of the D genome .
No information is lost in lossless compression .
Lossy compression reduces bits by identifying unnecessary information and removing it .
For instance , a compression scheme for video may require expensive hardware for the video to be decompressed fast enough to be viewed as it is being decompressed , and the option to decompress the video in full before watching it may be inconvenient or require additional storage .
This is a basic example of run-length encoding ; there are many schemes to reduce file size by eliminating redundancy .
DEFLATE is a variation on LZ optimized for decompression speed and compression ratio , but compression can be slow .
LZW -LRB- Lempel -- Ziv -- Welch -RRB- is used in GIF images .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- LZ methods use a table-based compression model where table entries are substituted for repeated strings of data .
For most LZ methods , this table is generated dynamically from earlier data in the input .
The table itself is often Huffman encoded -LRB- e.g. SHRI , LZX -RRB- .
It uses an internal memory state to avoid the need to perform a one-to-one mapping of individual input symbols to distinct representations that use an integer number of bits , and it clears out the internal memory only after encoding the entire string of data symbols .
Arithmetic coding applies especially well to adaptive data compression tasks where the statistics vary and are context-dependent , as it can be easily coupled with an adaptive model of the probability distribution of the input data .
An early example of the use of arithmetic coding was its use as an optional -LRB- but not widely used -RRB- feature of the JPEG image coding standard .
It has since been applied in various other designs including H. 264/MPEG -4 AVC and HEVC for video coding .
In these schemes , some loss of information is acceptable .
Lossy data compression schemes are designed by research on how people perceive the data in question .
For example , the human eye is more sensitive to subtle variations in luminance than it is to the variations in color .
There is a corresponding trade-off between preserving information and reducing size .
A number of popular compression formats exploit these perceptual differences , including those used in music files , images , and video .
Different audio and speech compression standards are listed under audio coding formats .
This is the same as considering absolute entropy -LRB- corresponding to data compression -RRB- as a special case of relative entropy -LRB- corresponding to data differencing -RRB- with no initial data .
These algorithms almost all rely on psychoacoustics to eliminate less audible or meaningful sounds , thereby reducing the space required to store or transmit them .
Codecs like FLAC , Shorten and TTA use linear prediction to estimate the spectrum of the signal .
Many of these algorithms use convolution with the filter -LSB- -1 1 -RSB- to slightly whiten or flatten the spectrum , thereby allowing traditional lossless compression to work more efficiently .
The process is reversed upon decompression .
To determine what information in an audio signal is perceptually irrelevant , most lossy compression algorithms use transforms such as the modified discrete cosine transform -LRB- MDCT -RRB- to convert time domain sampled waveforms into a transform domain .
Once transformed , typically into the frequency domain , component frequencies can be allocated bits according to how audible they are .
These coders use a model of the sound 's generator -LRB- such as the human vocal tract with LPC -RRB- to whiten the audio signal -LRB- i.e. , flatten its spectrum -RRB- before quantization .
LPC may be thought of as a basic perceptual coding technique : reconstruction of an audio signal using a linear predictor shapes the coder 's quantization noise into the spectrum of the target signal , partially masking it .
The inherent latency of the coding algorithm can be critical ; for example , when there is a two-way transmission of data , such as with a telephone conversation , significant delays may seriously degrade the perceived quality .
In algorithms such as MP3 , however , a large number of samples have to be analyzed to implement a psychoacoustic model in the frequency domain , and latency is on the order of 23 ms -LRB- 46 ms for two-way communication -RRB- -RRB- .
If the integers generated by quantization are 8 bits each , then the entire range of the analog signal is divided into 256 intervals and all the signal values within an interval are quantized to the same number .
If 16-bit integers are generated , then the range of the analog signal is divided into 65,536 intervals .
Several of these papers remarked on the difficulty of obtaining good , clean digital audio for research purposes .
Twenty years later , almost all the radio stations in the world were using similar technology manufactured by a number of companies .
Although lossless video compression codecs perform at a compression factor of 5-12 , a typical MPEG-4 lossy compression video has a compression factor between 20 and 200 .
As in all lossy compression , there is a trade-off between video quality , cost of processing the compression and decompression , and system requirements .
These pixel groups or blocks of pixels are compared from one frame to the next , and the video compression codec sends only the differences within those blocks .
In areas of video with more motion , the compression must encode more data to keep up with the larger number of pixels that are changing .
The sequence of frames contains spatial and temporal redundancy that video compression algorithms attempt to eliminate or code in a smaller size .
Similarities can be encoded by only storing differences between frames , or by using perceptual features of human vision .
For example , small differences in color are more difficult to perceive than are changes in brightness .
Some of these methods are inherently lossy while others may preserve all relevant information from the original , uncompressed video .
The most powerful used method works by comparing each frame in the video with the previous one .
If sections of the frame move in a simple manner , the compressor emits a -LRB- slightly longer -RRB- command that tells the decompressor to shift , rotate , lighten , or darken the copy .
Another difference between intraframe and interframe compression is that , with intraframe systems , each frame uses a similar amount of data .
In most interframe systems , certain frames -LRB- such as `` I frames '' in MPEG-2 -RRB- are n't allowed to copy data from other frames , so they require much more data than other frames nearby .
The DCT that is widely used in this regard was introduced by N. Ahmed , T. Natarajan and K. R. Rao in 1974 .
Interest in fractal compression seems to be waning , due to recent theoretical analysis showing a comparative lack of effectiveness of such methods .
In 2012 , a team of scientists from Johns Hopkins University published a genetic compression algorithm that does not use a reference genome for compression .
HAPZIPPER was tailored for HapMap data and achieves over 20-fold compression -LRB- 95 % reduction in file size -RRB- , providing 2 - to 4-fold better compression and in much faster time than the leading general-purpose compression utilities .
Regional editions of the newspaper for Scotland , Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland are published in Glasgow -LRB- The Scottish Sun -RRB- , Belfast -LRB- The Sun -RRB- and Dublin -LRB- The Irish Sun -RRB- respectively .
He would later remark : `` I am constantly amazed at the ease with which I entered British newspapers . ''
A topless Page 3 model gradually became a regular fixture , and with increasingly risqué poses .
Both feminists and many cultural conservatives saw the pictures as pornographic and misogynistic .
Lamb expressed some regret at introducing the feature , although denied it was sexist .
The paper explained that it was ` sponsoring ' the missile by contributing to the eventual victory party on HMS Invincible when the war ended .
The print workers at The Sun refused to print it .
Several civilians were killed during the bombing .
Their leader was `` Right Ron , Right Maggie '' .
This conclusion is disputed by critics .
She contacted an acquaintance who worked for The Sun in Manchester .
In November , the Daily Mirror found their rival 's only source for the rent boy story and he admitted it was a totally fictitious concoction created for money .
The inaccurate story about his dogs , actually Alsatians , put pressure on The Sun , and John received # 1 million in an out of court settlement , then the largest damages payment in British history .
The Sun ran a front-page apology on 12 December 1988 , under the banner headline `` SORRY , ELTON '' .
Gay Church of England clergymen were described in one headline in November 1987 as `` Pulpit poofs '' .
The Sun also ran an editorial further arguing that `` At last the truth can be told ... the risk of catching AIDS if you are heterosexual is `` statistically invisible '' .
In other words , impossible .
So now we know -- everything else is homosexual propaganda . ''
The Sun later ran an apology , which they ran on Page 28 .
It is unavailable in many parts of the city , as many newsagents refuse to stock it .
It was a terrible , insensitive , horrible article , with a dreadful headline ; but what we 'd also say is : we have apologised for it , and the entire senior team here now is completely different from the team that put the paper out in 1989 . ''
The paper rebutted the claim , believing that it was not racist to suggest that a `` tide '' of unchecked illegal immigrants was increasing the risk of terrorist attacks and infectious diseases .
It later proved to have no basis in fact .
Subsequently The Sun published a follow-up headlined `` Now they 're after our fish ! ''
.
Following a Press Complaints Commission adjudication a `` clarification '' was eventually printed , on page 41 .
The photographs caused outrage across the world and Clarence House was forced to issue a statement in response apologising for any offence or embarrassment caused .
Despite being a persistent critic of some of the government 's policies , the paper supported Labour in both subsequent elections the party won .
It was claimed that `` Those listed -LSB- on the forum -RSB- should treat it very seriously .
Expect a hate campaign and intimidation by 20 or 30 thugs . ''
The paper cited unnamed sources , claiming `` cops are throwing a ring of steel around tonight 's live episode of Coronation Street over fears it has been targeted by Al-Qaeda . ''
The Sun published a small correction on 28 December , admitting `` that while cast and crew were subject to full body searches , there was no specific threat from Al-Qaeda as we reported . ''
For the day following the 2011 Norway attacks The Sun produced an early edition blaming the massacre on al-Qaeda .
The site also produces The Times and Sunday Times , Daily Telegraph and Sunday Telegraph , Wall Street Journal Europe -LRB- also now a Murdoch newspaper -RRB- , London 's Evening Standard and local papers .
The Waltham Cross plant is capable of producing one million copies an hour of a 120-page tabloid newspaper .
Miliband 's decision to pose with a copy of The Sun received a strong response .
After these events , The Sun released a statement saying that the newspaper `` takes the Judge 's remarks very seriously .
In October 2014 , the trial of six senior staff and journalists at The Sun newspaper began .
They included The Sun 's head of news Chris Pharo , who faced six charges , while ex-managing editor Graham Dudman and ex-Sun deputy news editor Ben O'Driscoll were accused of four charges each .
Thames Valley district reporter Jamie Pyatt and picture editor John Edwards were charged with three counts each , while ex-reporter John Troup was accused of two counts .
They all denied the charges .
On 16 January 2015 , Troup and Edwards were cleared by the jury of all charges against them .
The jury also partially cleared O'Driscoll and Dudman but continued deliberating over other counts faced by them , as well as the charges against Pharo and Pyatt .
Shortly afterwards , one of the jurors sent a note to the judge and was discharged .
The judge told the remaining 11 jurors that their colleague had been `` feeling unwell and feeling under a great deal of pressure and stress from the situation you are in '' , and that under the circumstances he was prepared to accept majority verdicts of `` 11 to zero or 10 to 1 '' .
The Crown Prosecution Service -LRB- CPS -RRB- announced that it would seek a retrial .
Two days earlier , Marks had emailed counsel for the defendants telling them : `` It has been decided -LRB- not by me but by my elders and betters -RRB- that I am not going to be doing the retrial '' .
The journalist , who can not be named for legal reasons , is appealing the verdict '' .
The police officer had already pleaded guilty to misconduct in a public office and given a two-year gaol sentence in 2014 , but the jury in France 's trial was not informed of this .
As a result of the change in the CPS ' policy , charges against several journalists who had made payments to other types of public officials -- including civil servants , health workers and prison staff - had been dropped .
In July 2015 , Private Eye magazine reported that at a costs hearing at the Old Bailey The Sun 's parent company had refused to pay for the prosecution costs relating to France 's trial , leading the presiding judge to express his `` considerable disappointment '' at this state of affairs .
He suspected that if any other contributor had written the piece it would not have been published and questioned her continued employment by the newspaper .
We are not ` giving her what she wants ' when we make manifest our disgust .
It is not a free speech issue .
This dates back to celebrations before the Advent season or with harvest celebrations of St. Martin 's Day .
Other common features of carnival include mock battles such as food fights ; social satire and mockery of authorities ; the grotesque body displaying exaggerated features especially large noses , bellies , mouths , and phalli or elements of animal bodies ; abusive language and degrading acts ; depictions of disease and gleeful death ; and a general reversal of everyday rules and norms .
Unlike today , carnival in the Middle Ages took not just a few days , but it covered almost the entire period between Christmas and the beginning of Lent .
Also from the same period dates the phrase : `` Whoever in February by a variety of less honorable acts tries to drive out winter is not a Christian , but a pagan . ''
While medieval pageants and festivals such as Corpus Christi were church-sanctioned , Carnival was also a manifestation of medieval folk culture .
Many local Carnival customs are claimed to derive from local pre-Christian rituals , such as elaborate rites involving masked figures in the Swabian -- Alemannic Fastnacht .
These similarities may represent a reservoir of cultural resources that can embody multiple meanings and functions .
For example , Easter begins with the resurrection of Jesus , followed by a liminal period and ends with rebirth .
Carnival reverses this as King Carnival comes to life , a liminal period follows before his death .
Both feasts are calculated by the lunar calendar .
Besides Christian anti-Judaism , the commonalities between church and Carnival rituals and imagery suggest a common root .
Christ 's passion is itself grotesque : Since early Christianity Christ is figured as the victim of summary judgement , is tortured and executed by Romans before a Jewish mob -LRB- `` His blood is on us and on our children ! ''
Matthew 27:24 -- 25 -RRB- .
Holy Week processions in Spain include crowds who vociferously insult the figure of Jesus .
Irreverence , parody , degradation and laughter at a tragicomic effigy God can be seen as intensifications of the sacred order .
`` Before they were to run , the Jews were richly fed , so as to make the race more difficult for them and at the same time more amusing for spectators .
They ran ... amid Rome 's taunting shrieks and peals of laughter , while the Holy Father stood upon a richly ornamented balcony and laughed heartily '' , an eyewitness reports .
From Spain and Portugal it spread with colonization to the Caribbean and Latin America .
In the early 19th century in the German Rhineland and Southern Netherlands , the weakened medieval tradition also revive .
It has imported various Brazilian carnival traditions .
The celebration in SãoNicolau is more traditional , where established groups parade through the Ribeira Brava , gathering in the town square , although it has adopted drums , floats and costumes from Brazil .
The tradition was introduced by the Portuguese who ruled Goa for over four centuries .
The crepes are filled with freshly grated coconut and heat condensed coconut sap that sequentially converts it into a brown sweet molasses and additional heat concentration solidifies it to jaggery .
The celebrations of Carnival peak for three days and nights and precede Ash Wednesday .
All-night parades occur throughout the state with bands , dances and floats and grand balls are held in the evenings .
The Cwarmê Sunday is the most important and insteresting to see .
The Cwarmê is a `` street carnival '' and is not only a parade .
The famous traditional costumes at the Cwarmê of Malmedy are the Haguète , the Longuès-Brèsses and the Long-Né .
This festival can also be called Poklade .
The celebration originally involved dressing in costumes and holding masked balls or visiting friends .
The following year , Svendsens Festpolonaise was written for the opening procession .
Edvard Grieg attended and wrote `` aus dem Karneval '' -LRB- folkelivsbilleder Op. 19 -RRB- .
The Carnival season also includes Fastelavens søndag -LRB- with cream buns -RRB- and fastelavensris with decorated branches .
Some cities are more famous for celebrations such as parades and costume balls .
Other cities have their own , often less well-known celebrations , parades and parties such as Worms am Rhein , Speyer , Kaiserslautern , Frankfurt , Darmstadt , Mannheim , Ludwigshafen , Stuttgart , Augsburg and München -LSB- Munich -RSB- Nürnberg .
The following week , the last before Lent , is called Tyrinē -LRB- Greek : Τυρινή , `` cheese -LSB- week -RSB- '' -RRB- because meat is forbidden , although dairy products are not .
Lent begins on `` Clean Monday '' , the day after `` Cheese Sunday '' .
Other regions host festivities of smaller extent , focused on the reenactment of traditional carnevalic customs , such as Tyrnavos -LRB- Thessaly -RRB- , Kozani -LRB- West Macedonia -RRB- , Rethymno -LRB- Crete -RRB- and in Xanthi -LRB- East Macedonia and Thrace -RRB- .
Every year , from 1 to 8 January , mostly in regions of Western Macedonia , Carnival fiestas and festivals erupt .
The best known is the Kastorian Carnival or `` Ragoutsaria '' -LRB- Gr . ''
Ραγκουτσάρια '' -RRB- -LSB- tags : Kastoria , Kastorian Carnival , Ragoutsaria , Ραγκουτσαρια , Καστοριά -RSB- .
It takes place from 6 to 8 January with mass participation serenaded by brass bands , pipises , Macedonian and grand casa drums .
The Carnival took an organized form in 1991 ; in 1994 , Strumica became a member of FECC and in 1998 hosted the XVIII International Congress of Carnival Cities .
The origin of the Kurent is a mystery , and not much is known of the times , beliefs , or purposes connected with its first appearance .
The origin of the name itself is obscure .
Their signature piece is the `` Carnival Tango '' , alternating comical and serious repertory .
They have a more elaborated polyphony that is easily recognizable by the typical countertenor voice .
Rues of masked revelers dance alongside .
The women protect their faces with Mantons de Manila -LRB- Manila shawls -RRB- but eye-patches and slings for broken arms are common the following week .
Vilanovins organize an elaborate ritual for the arrival of King Carnival called l'Arrivo that changes every year .
Finally , amid rockets and explosions , the King 's body is burned in a massive pyre .
This event is the most important and takes place on Saturday night .
Originally signaling the end of the yearly cane harvest , it evolved into a national festival .
In the late 20th century , Crop Over began to closely mirror the Trinidad Carnival .
It offers a medium in which to satirise local politics , amidst the general bacchanal .
The Cohobblopot Festival blends dance , drama and music with the crowning of the King and Queen of costume bands .
Every evening the `` Pic-o-de-Crop '' Show is performed after the King of Calypso is finally crowned .
`` On the last day of Carnival painters flood the street to paint each other .
The Port-au-Prince Carnival is one of the largest in North America .
It starts in January , known as `` Pre-Kanaval '' , while the main carnival activities begin in February .
In July 2012 , Haiti had another carnival called Kanaval de Fleur .
It means '' `` opening of the day '' .
Full costume is worn , complete with make-up and body paint/adornment .
The street parade and band costume competition take place .
The largest is in Mazatlán and the city of Veracruz with others in Baja California and Yucatán .
That country has one of the largest Caribbean Carnivals .
In the mid twentieth century , West Indians moved the event from the beginning of Lent to the Labor Day weekend .
It adopts a musical background similar to Brazilian or Uruguayan Carnival .
Participants dress up as demons , devils , angels , Incas and Spanish conquistadors .
Dances include caporales and tinkus .
It was declared the 2001 `` Masterpieces of Oral Heritage and Intangible Heritage of Humanity '' for UNESCO .
Throughout the country celebrations are held involving traditional rhythms and water parties .
In Rio Carnival , samba schoolsparade in the Sambadrome -LRB- `` sambódromo '' in Portuguese -RRB- .
Some of the most famous include GRES Estação Primeira de Mangueira , GRES Portela , GRES Imperatriz Leopoldinense , GRES Beija-Flor de Nilópolis , GRES Mocidade Independente de Padre Miguel , and recently , Unidos da Tijuca and GRES União da Ilha do Governador .
More than 440 blocos operate in Rio .
Bandas are samba musical bands , also called `` street carnival bands '' , usually formed within a single neighborhood or musical back-ground .
Other celebrations occur in villages along the lower Magdalena River in northern Colombia , and in Pasto , Nariño -LRB- see Blacks and Whites ' Carnival -RRB- in the south of the country .
The Bogotá Carnival was renewed in the 21st century .
Other cities have revived Carnival traditions with colorful parades , such as in Azogues -LRB- Cañar Province -RRB- .
In Azogues and the Southern Andes in general , Taita Carnival is always an indigenous Cañari .
These women wear decorative gowns , gloves , masks and headdresses that cover them completely , making them unrecognisable , even to the colour of their skin .
On Friday and Saturday nights of Carnival , touloulou balls are held in so-called universities ; in reality , large dance halls that open only at Carnival time .
The setup is designed to make it easy for a woman to create a temporary liaison with a man in total anonymity .
Undisguised women are not welcomed .
By tradition , if such a woman gets up to dance , the orchestra stops playing .
It was already violent during the 19th century , but the government limited the practice .
It was banned , first from the streets in 1958 and altogether in 1959 by the Prado government .
It has become an excuse for criminal gangs to rob people while pretending to celebrate .
Celebrations in Montevideo are the largest .
Revelers wear their festival clothing .
Each group has its own theme .
They are a class of biocide .
According to the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants , 9 of the 12 most dangerous and persistent organic chemicals are organochlorine pesticides .
These include the pyrethroids , rotenoids , nicotinoids , and a fourth group that includes strychnine and scilliroside. :15
Many pesticides can be grouped into chemical families .
Prominent insecticide families include organochlorines , organophosphates , and carbamates .
Organochlorine hydrocarbons -LRB- e.g. , DDT -RRB- could be separated into dichlorodiphenylethanes , cyclodiene compounds , and other related compounds .
Organophosphates are quite toxic to vertebrates , and have in some cases been replaced by less toxic carbamates. :136 -- 137 Thiocarbamate and dithiocarbamates are subclasses of carbamates .
Prominent families of herbicides include phenoxy and benzoic acid herbicides -LRB- e.g. 2,4-D -RRB- , triazines -LRB- e.g. , atrazine -RRB- , ureas -LRB- e.g. , diuron -RRB- , and Chloroacetanilides -LRB- e.g. , alachlor -RRB- .
A systemic pesticide moves inside a plant following absorption by the plant .
Increased efficiency may be a result .
Pesticides are used to control organisms that are considered to be harmful .
They can also kill bees , wasps or ants that can cause allergic reactions .
Insecticides can protect animals from illnesses that can be caused by parasites such as fleas .
Pesticides can prevent sickness in humans that could be caused by moldy food or diseased produce .
Herbicides can be used to clear roadside weeds , trees and brush .
They can also kill invasive weeds that may cause environmental damage .
Uncontrolled pests such as termites and mold can damage structures such as houses .
Pesticides are used in grocery stores and food storage facilities to manage rodents and insects that infest food such as grain .
Each use of a pesticide carries some associated risk .
Recent policy statements by the World Health Organization have given stronger support to this approach .
Every dollar -LRB- $ 1 -RRB- that is spent on pesticides for crops yields four dollars -LRB- $ 4 -RRB- in crops saved .
In general , farmers benefit from having an increase in crop yield and from being able to grow a variety of crops throughout the year .
A 2007 systematic review found that `` most studies on non-Hodgkin lymphoma and leukemia showed positive associations with pesticide exposure '' and thus concluded that cosmetic use of pesticides should be decreased .
Limited evidence also exists for other negative outcomes from pesticide exposure including neurological , birth defects , fetal death ,
Pesticide use raises a number of environmental concerns .
Among marine animals , pesticide concentrations are higher in carnivorous fishes , and even more so in the fish-eating birds and mammals at the top of the ecological pyramid .
Such loss of activity or toxicity of pesticides is due to both innate chemical properties of the compounds and environmental processes or conditions .
`` Push '' means the insects are repelled or deterred away from whatever resource that is being protected .
Some evidence shows that alternatives to pesticides can be equally effective as the use of chemicals .
-LSB- unreliable source ? -RSB-
-LSB- unreliable source ? -RSB-
Another way to think about pesticides is to consider those that are chemical pesticides or are derived from a common source or production method .
The FAO claims that the code has raised awareness about pesticide hazards and decreased the number of countries without restrictions on pesticide use .
IPM attempts to recognize the more widespread impacts of an action on an ecosystem , so that natural balances are not upset .
In the United States , the Environmental Protection Agency -LRB- EPA -RRB- is responsible for regulating pesticides under the Federal Insecticide , Fungicide , and Rodenticide Act -LRB- FIFRA -RRB- and the Food Quality Protection Act -LRB- FQPA -RRB- .
The label contains directions for proper use of the material in addition to safety restrictions .
Based on acute toxicity , pesticides are assigned to a Toxicity Class .
The first known pesticide was elemental sulfur dusting used in ancient Sumer about 4,500 years ago in ancient Mesopotamia .
The Rig Veda , which is about 4,000 years old , mentions the use of poisonous plants for pest control .
By the 15th century , toxic chemicals such as arsenic , mercury , and lead were being applied to crops to kill pests .
The 19th century saw the introduction of two more natural pesticides , pyrethrum , which is derived from chrysanthemums , and rotenone , which is derived from the roots of tropical vegetables .
Until the 1950s , arsenic-based pesticides were dominant .
Organochlorines such as DDT were dominant , but they were replaced in the U.S. by organophosphates and carbamates by 1975 .
Since then , pyrethrin compounds have become the dominant insecticide .
used each year .
By AD 600 they had established control over much of what is now England , but Somerset was still in native British hands .
After the Norman Conquest , the county was divided into 700 fiefs , and large areas were owned by the crown , with fortifications such as Dunster Castle used for control and defence .
In the English Civil War Somerset was largely Parliamentarian , with key engagements being the Sieges of Taunton and the Battle of Langport .
The rebels landed at Lyme Regis and travelled north , hoping to capture Bristol and Bath , but they were defeated in the Battle of Sedgemoor at Westonzoyland , the last pitched battle fought in England .
Arthur Wellesley took his title , Duke of Wellington from the town of Wellington ; he is commemorated on a nearby hill by a large , spotlit obelisk , known as the Wellington Monument .
Despite this , 20 years later John Billingsley conducted a survey of the county 's agriculture in 1795 and found that agricultural methods could still be improved .
The Somerset Coalfield reached its peak production by the 1920s , but all the pits have now been closed , the last in 1973 .
Most of the surface buildings have been removed , and apart from a winding wheel outside Radstock Museum , little evidence of their former existence remains .
Some of the hospitals which were built for the casualties of the war remain in use .
The remains of its pill boxes can still be seen along the coast , and south through Ilminster and Chard .
One , on the radio beam flight path to Bristol , was constructed on Beacon Batch .
It was laid out by Shepperton Studios , based on aerial photographs of the city 's railway marshalling yards .
The decoys were fitted with dim red lights , simulating activities like the stoking of steam locomotives .
Burning bales of straw soaked in creosote were used to simulate the effects of incendiary bombs dropped by the first wave of Pathfinder night bombers ; meanwhile , incendiary bombs dropped on the correct location were quickly smothered , wherever possible .
Drums of oil were also ignited to simulate the effect of a blazing city or town , with the aim of fooling subsequent waves of bombers into dropping their bombs on the wrong location .
The following night the Uphill decoy town , protecting Weston-super-Mare 's airfield , was bombed ; a herd of dairy cows was hit , killing some and severely injuring others .
Bristol began as a town on the Gloucestershire side of the Avon , however as it grew it extended across the river into Somerset .
Examples include Axbridge on the River Axe , Castle Cary on the River Cary , North Petherton on the River Parrett , and Ilminster , where there was a crossing point on the River Isle .
Midsomer Norton lies on the River Somer ; while the Wellow Brook and the Fosse Way Roman road run through Radstock .
The central and western Mendip Hills was designated an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty in 1972 and covers 198 km2 -LRB- 76 sq mi -RRB- .
The main habitat on these hills is calcareous grassland , with some arable agriculture .
These both feed and drain the flat levels and moors of mid and west Somerset .
In the north of the county the River Chew flows into the Bristol Avon .
The Parrett is tidal almost to Langport , where there is evidence of two Roman wharfs .
Approximately 70 % of the area is grassland and 30 % is arable .
Stretching about 32 kilometres -LRB- 20 mi -RRB- inland , this expanse of flat land barely rises above sea level .
Before it was drained , much of the land was under a shallow brackish sea in winter and was marsh land in summer .
Pumping and management of water levels still continues .
North of that , the coast forms Weston Bay and Sand Bay whose northern tip , Sand Point , marks the lower limit of the Severn Estuary .
In the mid and north of the county the coastline is low as the level wetlands of the levels meet the sea .
The annual mean temperature is approximately 10 °C -LRB- 50.0 °F -RRB- .
Seasonal temperature variation is less extreme than most of the United Kingdom because of the adjacent sea temperatures .
The summer months of July and August are the warmest with mean daily maxima of approximately 21 °C -LRB- 69.8 °F -RRB- .
In winter mean minimum temperatures of 1 °C -LRB- 33.8 °F -RRB- or 2 °C -LRB- 35.6 °F -RRB- are common .
In the summer the Azores high pressure affects the south-west of England , but convective cloud sometimes forms inland , reducing the number of hours of sunshine .
In December 1998 there were 20 days without sun recorded at Yeovilton .
Most the rainfall in the south-west is caused by Atlantic depressions or by convection .
Most of the rainfall in autumn and winter is caused by the Atlantic depressions , which is when they are most active .
In summer , a large proportion of the rainfall is caused by sun heating the ground leading to convection and to showers and thunderstorms .
November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , and June to August the lightest winds .
The predominant wind direction is from the south-west .
The River Parrett was navigable by large ships as far as Bridgwater .
Cargoes were then loaded onto smaller boats at Langport Quay , next to the Bridgwater Bridge , to be carried further up river to Langport ; or they could turn off at Burrowbridge and then travel via the River Tone to Taunton .
The Parrett is now only navigable as far as Dunball Wharf .
The site was decommissioned and closed in July 2008 .
Templecombe has Thales Underwater Systems , and Taunton presently has the United Kingdom Hydrographic Office and Avimo , which became part of Thales Optics .
It has been announced twice , in 2006 and 2007 , that manufacturing is to end at Thales Optics ' Taunton site , but the trade unions and Taunton Deane District Council are working to reverse or mitigate these decisions .
Around 1,675 service and 2,000 civilian personnel are stationed at Yeovilton and key activities include training of aircrew and engineers and the Royal Navy 's Fighter Controllers and surface-based aircraft controllers .
The towns of Taunton and Shepton Mallet are involved with the production of cider , especially Blackthorn Cider , which is sold nationwide , and there are specialist producers such as Burrow Hill Cider Farm and Thatchers Cider .
Fragments of willow basket were found near the Glastonbury Lake Village , and it was also used in the construction of several Iron Age causeways .
During the 1930s more than 3,600 hectares -LRB- 8,900 acres -RRB- of willow were being grown commercially on the Levels .
By the end of the 20th century only about 140 hectares -LRB- 350 acres -RRB- were grown commercially , near the villages of Burrowbridge , Westonzoyland and North Curry .
Street developed as a centre for the production of woollen slippers and , later , boots and shoes , with C. & J. Clark establishing its headquarters in the town .
Instead , in 1993 , redundant factory buildings were converted to form Clarks Village , the first purpose-built factory outlet in the UK .
C&J Clark also had shoe factories , at one time at Bridgwater , Minehead , Westfield and Weston super Mare to provide employment outside the main summer tourist season , but those satellite sites were closed in the late 1980s , before the main site at Street .
Quarries at Doulting supplied freestone used in the construction of Wells Cathedral .
Bath stone is also widely used .
It was mined underground at Combe Down and Bathampton Down Mines , and as a result of cutting the Box Tunnel , at locations in Wiltshire such as Box .
Bath stone is still used on a reduced scale today , but more often as a cladding rather than a structural material .
Further south , Hamstone is the colloquial name given to stone from Ham Hill , which is also widely used in the construction industry .
Until the 1960s , Puriton had Blue Lias stone quarries , as did several other Polden villages .
Its quarries also supplied a cement factory at Dunball , adjacent to the King 's Sedgemoor Drain .
Its derelict , early 20th century remains , was removed when the M5 motorway was constructed in the mid-1970s .
Since the 1920s , the county has supplied aggregates .
Foster Yeoman is Europe 's large supplier of limestone aggregates , with quarries at Merehead Quarry .
It has a dedicated railway operation , Mendip Rail , which is used to transport aggregates by rail from a group of Mendip quarries .
On 18 October 2010 , the British government announced that Hinkley Point -- already the site of the disused Hinkley Point A and the still operational Hinkley Point B power stations -- was one of the eight sites it considered suitable for future nuclear power stations .
NNB Generation Company , a subsidiary of EDF , submitted an application for development consent to the Infrastructure Planning Commission on 31 October 2011 .
The population density is 1.4 persons per hectare , which can be compared to 2.07 persons per hectare for the South West region .
Within the county , population density ranges 0.5 in West Somerset to 2.2 persons per hectare in Taunton Deane .
The rest of the county is rural and sparsely populated .
The unitary districts of North Somerset and Bath & North East Somerset are instead covered by the Avon Fire and Rescue Service , a service which also covers Bristol and South Gloucestershire .
The Big Green Gathering which grew out of the Green fields at the Glastonbury Festival is held in the Mendip Hills between Charterhouse and Compton Martin each summer .
The claim is based on dating the founding of the community of monks at AD 63 , the year of the legendary visit of Joseph of Arimathea , who was supposed to have brought the Holy Grail .
During the Middle Ages there were also important religious sites at Woodspring Priory and Muchelney Abbey .
The present Diocese of Bath and Wells covers Somerset -- with the exception of the Parish of Abbots Leigh with Leigh Woods in North Somerset -- and a small area of Dorset .
Before the English Reformation , it was a Roman Catholic diocese ; the county now falls within the Roman Catholic Diocese of Clifton .
Jenkins writes , `` These structures , with their buttresses , bell-opening tracery and crowns , rank with Nottinghamshire alabaster as England 's finest contribution to medieval art . ''
They had achieved numerous FA Cup victories over football League sides in the past 50 years , and since joining the elite they have won promotion again -- as League Two champions in 2005 .
They came close to yet another promotion in 2007 , when they reached the League One playoff final , but lost to Blackpool at the newly reopened Wembley Stadium .
The former lines of the Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway closed completely , as has the branch of the Midland Railway to Bath Green Park -LRB- and to Bristol St Philips -RRB- ; however , the L&SWR survived as a part of the present West of England Main Line .
Two branch lines , the West and East Somerset Railways , were rescued and transferred back to private ownership as `` heritage '' lines .
The fifth railway was a short-lived light railway , the Weston , Clevedon and Portishead Light Railway .
The West Somerset Mineral Railway carried the iron ore from the Brendon Hills to Watchet .
All state schools are comprehensive .
In some areas primary , infant and junior schools cater for ages four to eleven , after which the pupils move on to secondary schools .
Some of the county 's secondary schools have specialist school status .
Some schools have sixth forms and others transfer their sixth formers to colleges .
Many others were established and built since the Second World War .
There is also a range of independent or public schools .
Many of these are for pupils between 11 and 18 years , such as King 's College , Taunton and Taunton School .
Millfield is the largest co-educational boarding school .
Chilton Cantelo School offers places both to day pupils and boarders aged 7 to 16 .
It has a purpose-built campus at Claverton on the outskirts of Bath , and has 15,000 students .
It has several campuses and 5,500 students .
Yale University is an American private Ivy League research university in New Haven , Connecticut .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Through the persuasion of Jeremiah Dummer , Yale , who had made a fortune through trade while living in Madras as a representative of the East India Company , donated nine bales of goods , which were sold for more than # 560 , a substantial sum at the time .
Meanwhile , a Harvard graduate working in England convinced some 180 prominent intellectuals that they should donate books to Yale .
It had a profound effect on intellectuals at Yale .
Undergraduate Jonathan Edwards discovered John Locke 's works and developed his original theology known as the `` new divinity . ''
In 1722 the Rector and six of his friends , who had a study group to discuss the new ideas , announced that they had given up Calvinism , become Arminians , and joined the Church of England .
They were ordained in England and returned to the colonies as missionaries for the Anglican faith .
Thomas Clapp became president in 1745 , and struggled to return the college to Calvinist orthodoxy ; but he did not close the library .
Other students found Deist books in the library .
Serious American students of theology and divinity , particularly in New England , regarded Hebrew as a classical language , along with Greek and Latin , and essential for study of the Old Testament in the original words .
The Yale Report of 1828 was a dogmatic defense of the Latin and Greek curriculum against critics who wanted more courses in modern languages , mathematics , and science .
Unlike higher education in Europe , there was no national curriculum for colleges and universities in the United States .
In the competition for students and financial support , college leaders strove to keep current with demands for innovation .
At the same time , they realized that a significant portion of their students and prospective students demanded a classical background .
All institutions experimented with changes in the curriculum , often resulting in a dual track .
In the decentralized environment of higher education in the United States , balancing change with tradition was a common challenge because no one could afford to be completely modern or completely classical .
He bested President Noah Porter , who disliked social science and wanted Yale to lock into its traditions of classical education .
Porter objected to Sumner 's use of a textbook by Herbert Spencer that espoused agnostic materialism because it might harm students .
There even were rallies sending off the debating teams to matches .
Yet , the debates never attained the broad appeal that athletics enjoyed .
In addition , with late 19th-century concerns about the impact of modern life on the human body , athletics offered hope that neither the individual nor the society was coming apart .
In 1909 -- 10 , football faced a crisis resulting from the failure of the previous reforms of 1905 -- 06 to solve the problem of serious injuries .
The big three had tried to operate independently of the majority , but changes did reduce injuries .
In 1887 , as the college continued to grow under the presidency of Timothy Dwight V , Yale College was renamed Yale University .
The university would later add the Yale School of Music -LRB- 1894 -RRB- , the Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies -LRB- founded by Gifford Pinchot in 1900 -RRB- , the Yale School of Public Health -LRB- 1915 -RRB- , the Yale School of Nursing -LRB- 1923 -RRB- , the Yale School of Drama -LRB- 1955 -RRB- , the Yale Physician Associate Program -LRB- 1973 -RRB- , and the Yale School of Management -LRB- 1976 -RRB- .
It would also reorganize its relationship with the Sheffield Scientific School .
Many of Porter 's contemporaries criticized his administration , and historians since have disparaged his leadership .
He did not endorse everything old or reject everything new ; rather , he sought to apply long-established ethical and pedagogical principles to a rapidly changing culture .
He may have misunderstood some of the challenges of his time , but he correctly anticipated the enduring tensions that have accompanied the emergence and growth of the modern university .
Ultimately , the behavioral-science results disappointed foundation officers , who shifted their human-engineering funds toward biological sciences .
Slack -LRB- 2003 -RRB- compares three groups that conducted biological research at Yale during overlapping periods between 1910 and 1970 .
Yale proved important as a site for this research .
The leaders of these groups were Ross Granville Harrison , Grace E. Pickford , and G. Evelyn Hutchinson , and their members included both graduate students and more experienced scientists .
All produced innovative research , including the opening of new subfields in embryology , endocrinology , and ecology , respectively , over a long period of time .
Progress toward his plans for an Institute of Human Relations , envisioned as a refuge where social scientists would collaborate with biological scientists in a holistic study of humankind , unfortunately lasted for only a few years before the opposition of resentful anti-Semitic colleagues drove him to resign .
The American studies program reflected the worldwide anti-Communist ideological struggle .
Vassar , then all-female and part of the Seven Sisters -- elite higher education schools that historically served as sister institutions to the Ivy League when the Ivy League still only admitted men -- tentatively accepted , but then declined the invitation .
Both schools introduced coeducation independently in 1969 .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
While unsuccessful in the courts , the legal reasoning behind the case changed the landscape of sex discrimination law and resulted in the establishment of Yale 's Grievance Board and the Yale Women 's Center .
Evidence suggests that the town and gown relationships are mutually beneficial .
Several explanations have been offered for Yale 's representation in national elections since the end of the Vietnam War .
Various sources note the spirit of campus activism that has existed at Yale since the 1960s , and the intellectual influence of Reverend William Sloane Coffin on many of the future candidates .
Camille Paglia points to a history of networking and elitism : `` It has to do with a web of friendships and affiliations built up in school . ''
In 2004 Howard Dean stated , `` In some ways , I consider myself separate from the other three -LRB- Yale -RRB- candidates of 2004 .
Yale changed so much between the class of '68 and the class of ' 71 .
It was an extraordinary time , and in that span of time is the change of an entire generation '' .
President Richard Levin noted that Yale has hundreds of other partnerships across the world , but `` no existing collaboration matches the scale of the new partnership with UCL '' .
The Yale Provost 's Office has launched several women into prominent university presidencies .
In 2007 Deputy Provost Kim Bottomly was named President of Wellesley College .
In 2003 , the Dean of the Divinity School , Rebecca Chopp , was appointed president of Colgate University and now heads Swarthmore College .
Much of Yale University 's staff , including most maintenance staff , dining hall employees , and administrative staff , are unionized .
Also included in FHUE are the dietary workers at Yale-New Haven Hospital , who are members of 1199 SEIU .
Yale has a history of difficult and prolonged labor negotiations , often culminating in strikes .
Moreover , Yale has been accused of failing to treat workers with respect .
In a 2003 strike , however , the university claimed that more union employees were working than striking .
Yale 's central campus in downtown New Haven covers 260 acres -LRB- 1.1 km2 -RRB- and comprises its main , historic campus and a medical campus adjacent to the Yale-New Haven Hospital .
In fact , the buildings merely simulate Middle Ages architecture , for though they appear to be constructed of solid stone blocks in the authentic manner , most actually have steel framing as was commonly used in 1930 .
One exception is Harkness Tower , 216 feet -LRB- 66 m -RRB- tall , which was originally a free-standing stone structure .
It was reinforced in 1964 to allow the installation of the Yale Memorial Carillon .
These tower forms at Yale act in counterpoint to the college 's many Gothic spires and Georgian cupolas .
As part of this commitment , the university allocates renewable energy credits to offset some of the energy used by residential colleges .
A diversity of architectural styles is represented : Berzelius , Donn Barber in an austere cube with classical detailing -LRB- erected in 1908 or 1910 -RRB- ; Book and Snake , Louis R. Metcalfe in a Greek Ionic style -LRB- erected in 1901 -RRB- ; Elihu , architect unknown but built in a Colonial style -LRB- constructed on an early 17th-century foundation although the building is from the 18th century -RRB- ; Mace and Chain , in a late colonial , early Victorian style -LRB- built in 1823 -RRB- .
Current location , brick colonial ; Shabtai , 1882 , the Anderson Mansion built in the Second Empire architectural style ; and Wolf 's Head , Bertram Grosvenor Goodhue -LRB- erected 1923-4 -RRB- .
Several campus safety strategies have been pioneered at Yale .
Rare books are found in several Yale collections .
Yale 's museum collections are also of international stature .
Yale 's English and Comparative Literature departments were part of the New Criticism movement .
Later , the Yale Comparative literature department became a center of American deconstruction .
Several other Yale faculty members were also associated with deconstruction , forming the so-called `` Yale School '' .
These included Paul de Man who taught in the Departments of Comparative Literature and French , J. Hillis Miller , Geoffrey Hartman -LRB- both taught in the Departments of English and Comparative Literature -RRB- , and Harold Bloom -LRB- English -RRB- , whose theoretical position was always somewhat specific , and who ultimately took a very different path from the rest of this group .
Yale 's history department has also originated important intellectual trends .
Yale 's Music School and Department fostered the growth of Music Theory in the latter half of the 20th century .
Though Yale 's colleges resemble their English precursors organizationally and architecturally , they are dependent entities of Yale College and have limited autonomy .
In July 2015 students signed a petition calling for the name change .
They argued in the petition that -- while Calhoun was respected in the 19th century as an `` extraordinary American statesman '' -- he was `` one of the most prolific defenders of slavery and white supremacy '' in the history of the United States .
In August 2015 Yale President Peter Salovey addressed the Freshman Class of 2019 in which he responded to the racial tensions but explained why the college would not be renamed .
He described Calhoun as a `` a notable political theorist , a vice president to two different U.S. presidents , a secretary of war and of state , and a congressman and senator representing South Carolina . ''
He acknowledged that Calhoun also `` believed that the highest forms of civilization depend on involuntary servitude .
Not only that , but he also believed that the races he thought to be inferior , black people in particular , ought to be subjected to it for the sake of their own best interests . ''
In April 2016 Salovey announced that `` despite decades of vigorous alumni and student protests , '' Calhoun 's name will remain on the Yale residential college explaining that it is preferable for Yale students to live in Calhoun 's `` shadow '' so they will be `` better prepared to rise to the challenges of the present and the future . ''
`` Yale is part of that history '' and `` We can not erase American history , but we can confront it , teach it and learn from it . ''
The university hosts a variety of student journals , magazines , and newspapers .
Dwight Hall , an independent , non-profit community service organization , oversees more than 2,000 Yale undergraduates working on more than 70 community service initiatives in New Haven .
The Yale College Council runs several agencies that oversee campus wide activities and student services .
The Yale Dramatic Association and Bulldog Productions cater to the theater and film communities , respectively .
In addition , the Yale Drama Coalition serves to coordinate between and provide resources for the various Sudler Fund sponsored theater productions which run each weekend .
While students used to broadcast on AM & FM frequencies , they now have an Internet-only stream .
-LRB- `` Bright College Years , '' the University 's alma mater , was penned in 1881 by Henry Durand , Class of 1881 , to the tune of Die Wacht am Rhein . -RRB-
Actual students rarely do so .
In spite of administration opposition , students revived the game in 2009 , 2011 , and 2014 , but its future remains uncertain .
Yale also maintains the Gales Ferry site where the heavyweight men 's team trains for the Yale-Harvard Boat Race .
Yale has had many financial supporters , but some stand out by the magnitude or timeliness of their contributions .
Among those who have made large donations commemorated at the university are : Elihu Yale ; Jeremiah Dummer ; the Harkness family -LRB- Edward , Anna , and William -RRB- ; the Beinecke family -LRB- Edwin , Frederick , and Walter -RRB- ; John William Sterling ; Payne Whitney ; Joseph E. Sheffield , Paul Mellon , Charles B. G. Murphy and William K. Lanman .
Yale has produced alumni distinguished in their respective fields .
Yale University , one of the oldest universities in the United States , is a cultural referent as an institution that produces some of the most elite members of society and its grounds , alumni , and students have been prominently portrayed in fiction and U.S. popular culture .
Around 1300 , centuries of prosperity and growth in Europe came to a halt .
Along with depopulation came social unrest and endemic warfare .
Despite these crises , the 14th century was also a time of great progress in the arts and sciences .
These two things would later lead to the Protestant Reformation .
Toward the end of the period , an era of discovery began -LRB- Age of Discovery -RRB- .
Their discoveries strengthened the economy and power of European nations .
Modern historiography on the period has reached a consensus between the two extremes of innovation and crisis .
The Swedes were reluctant members of the Danish-dominated union from the start .
Yet in spite of the extensive territories held by the Habsburgs , the Empire itself remained fragmented , and much real power and influence lay with the individual principalities .
Both palaces were rebuilt and improved , and were considered the richest of the time in Europe .
Inheriting the throne of Bohemia and the Holy Roman Empire , Sigismund continued conducting his politics from Hungary , but he was kept busy fighting the Hussites and the Ottoman Empire , which was becoming a menace to Europe in the beginning of the 15th century .
By 1346 , the Serbian king Stefan Dušan had been proclaimed emperor .
By the end of the medieval period , the entire Balkan peninsula was annexed by , or became vassal to , the Ottomans .
Florence grew to prominence amongst the Italian city-states through financial business , and the dominant Medici family became important promoters of the Renaissance through their patronage of the arts .
Other city states in northern Italy also expanded their territories and consolidated their power , primarily Milan and Venice .
The demographic consequences of this famine , however , were not as severe as the plagues that occurred later in the century , particularly the Black Death .
By around 1420 , the accumulated effect of recurring plagues and famines had reduced the population of Europe to perhaps no more than a third of what it was a century earlier .
As the European population was severely reduced , land became more plentiful for the survivors , and labour consequently more expensive .
In Eastern Europe , on the other hand , landowners were able to exploit the situation to force the peasantry into even more repressive bondage .
Up until the mid-14th century , Europe had experienced steadily increasing urbanisation .
Changes also took place within the recruitment and composition of armies .
At the same time , the period also saw the emergence of the first permanent armies .
Parallel to the military developments emerged also a constantly more elaborate chivalric code of conduct for the warrior class .
This new-found ethos can be seen as a response to the diminishing military role of the aristocracy , and gradually it became almost entirely detached from its military origin .
The Catholic Church had long fought against heretic movements , but during the Late Middle Ages , it started to experience demands for reform from within .
Hus gained a great following in Bohemia , and in 1414 , he was requested to appear at the Council of Constance to defend his cause .
The immediate provocation spurring this act was Pope Leo X 's renewal of the indulgence for the building of the new St. Peter 's Basilica in 1514 .
Luther was challenged to recant his heresy at the Diet of Worms in 1521 .
With the financial expansion , trading rights became more jealously guarded by the commercial elite .
The beneficiaries of these developments would accumulate immense wealth .
Certain technological inventions of the period -- whether of Arab or Chinese origin , or unique European innovations -- were to have great influence on political and social developments , in particular gunpowder , the printing press and the compass .
The ideas of the Italian Renaissance were slow to cross the Alps into northern Europe , but important artistic innovations were made also in the Low Countries .
Many of these had fallen victim to the 13th-century Albigensian Crusade , but their influence reached the papal court at Avignon .
At the end of the Late Middle Ages , professional actors began to appear in England and Europe .
The abandonment of these plays destroyed the international theatre that had thereto existed and forced each country to develop its own form of drama .
After the end of the late Middle Ages period , the Renaissance would spread unevenly over continental Europe from the southern European region .
Europeans would later begin an era of world discovery .
These two things would lead to the Protestant Reformation .
Hungary was the last bastion of the Latin Christian world in the East , and fought to keep its rule over a period of two centuries .
The effect that it created in that time was one of the main factors that helped in achieving the victory .
For the first time , a member of an aristocratic family -LRB- and not from a royal family -RRB- was crowned .
Also , in resolving political hostilities with the German emperor Frederick III of Habsburg , he invaded his western domains .
Matthew organized the Black Army of mercenary soldiers ; it was considered as the biggest army of its time .
Using this powerful tool , the Hungarian king led wars against the Turkish armies and stopped the Ottomans during his reign .
After the death of Matthew , and with end of the Black Army , the Ottoman Empire grew in strength and Central Europe was defenseless .
This is considered to be one of the final battles of Medieval times .
However , the division is somewhat artificial , since ancient learning was never entirely absent from European society .
Ann Arbor became a focal point for political activism and served as a hub for the civil-rights movement and anti-Vietnam War movement , as well as various student movements .
On 25 May 1824 , the town plat was registered with Wayne County as `` Annarbour ; '' this represents the earliest known use of the town 's name .
Throughout the 1840s and the 1850s settlers continued to come to Ann Arbor .
It was not until the early 1880s that Ann Arbor again saw robust growth , with new immigrants coming from Greece , Italy , Russia , and Poland .
Ann Arbor saw increased growth in manufacturing , particularly in milling .
During the 1960s and 1970s , the city gained a reputation as an important center for liberal politics .
Ann Arbor also became a locus for left-wing activism and served as a hub for the civil-rights movement and anti-Vietnam War movement , as well as the student movement .
The first major meetings of the national left-wing campus group Students for a Democratic Society took place in Ann Arbor in 1960 ; in 1965 , the city was home to the first U.S. teach-in against the Vietnam War .
During the ensuing 15 years , many countercultural and New Left enterprises sprang up and developed large constituencies within the city .
During their time on the council , HRP representatives fought for measures including pioneering antidiscrimination ordinances , measures decriminalizing marijuana possession , and a rent-control ordinance ; many of these remain in effect in modified form .
Alongside these liberal and left-wing efforts , a small group of conservative institutions were born in Ann Arbor .
Since then , a vociferous local debate has hinged on how and whether to accommodate and guide development within city limits .
Ann Arbor consistently ranks in the `` top places to live '' lists published by various mainstream media outlets every year .
In 2008 , it was ranked by CNNMoney.com 27th out of 100 `` America 's best small cities '' .
According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 28.70 square miles -LRB- 74.33 km2 -RRB- , of which , 27.83 square miles -LRB- 72.08 km2 -RRB- of it is land and 0.87 square miles -LRB- 2.25 km2 -RRB- is water , much of which is part of the Huron River .
Ann Arbor is about 35 miles -LRB- 56 km -RRB- west of Detroit .
Ann Arbor Charter Township adjoins the city 's north and east sides .
Ann Arbor is situated on the Huron River in a productive agricultural and fruit-growing region .
The elevation ranges from about 750 feet -LRB- 230 m -RRB- along the Huron River to 1,015 feet -LRB- 309 m -RRB- on the city 's west side , near the intersection of Maple Road and Pauline Blvd. .
Generally , the west-central and northwestern parts of the city and U-M 's North Campus are the highest parts of the city ; the lowest parts are along the Huron River and in the southeast .
The city contains more than 50,000 trees along its streets and an equal number in parks .
In recent years , the emerald ash borer has destroyed many of the city 's approximately 10,500 ash trees .
Several large city parks and a university park border sections of the Huron River .
Fuller Recreation Area , near the University Hospital complex , contains sports fields , pedestrian and bike paths , and swimming pools .
It is on the city 's east side , near the university 's Central Campus .
The Kerrytown Shops , Main Street Business District , the State Street Business District , and the South University Business District are commercial areas in downtown Ann Arbor .
Three commercial areas south of downtown include the areas near I-94 and Ann Arbor-Saline Road , Briarwood Mall , and the South Industrial area .
Other commercial areas include the Arborland/Washtenaw Avenue and Packard Road merchants on the east side , the Plymouth Road area in the northeast , and the Westgate/West Stadium areas on the west side .
Ann Arbor 's residential neighborhoods contain architectural styles ranging from classic 19th-century and early-20th-century designs to ranch-style houses .
Contemporary-style houses are farther from the downtown district .
Ann Arbor has a typically Midwestern humid continental climate -LRB- Köppen Dfa -RRB- , which is influenced by the Great Lakes .
The area experiences lake effect weather , primarily in the form of increased cloudiness during late fall and early winter .
The monthly daily average temperature in July is 72.6 °F -LRB- 22.6 °C -RRB- , while the same figure for January is 24.5 °F -LRB- − 4.2 °C -RRB- .
Temperatures reach or exceed 90 °F -LRB- 32 °C -RRB- on 10 days , and drop to or below 0 °F -LRB- − 18 °C -RRB- on 4.6 nights .
The lowest recorded temperature was − 23 °F -LRB- − 31 °C -RRB- on 11 February 1885 and the highest recorded temperature was 105 °F -LRB- 41 °C -RRB- on 24 July 1934 .
As of the 2010 U.S. Census , there were 113,394 people , 45,634 households , and 21,704 families residing in the city .
Hispanic or Latino residents of any race were 4.1 % of the population .
In 2000 , out of 45,693 households , 23.0 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 37.8 % were married couples living together , 7.5 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 52.5 % were nonfamilies .
35.5 % of households were made up of individuals and 6.6 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older .
The age distribution was 16.8 % under 18 , 26.8 % from 18 to 24 , 31.2 % from 25 to 44 , 17.3 % from 45 to 64 , and 7.9 % were 65 or older .
For every 100 females there were 97.7 males ; while for every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 96.4 males .
The University of Michigan shapes Ann Arbor 's economy significantly .
Other employers are drawn to the area by the university 's research and development money , and by its graduates .
Current firms include Arbor Networks -LRB- provider of Internet traffic engineering and security systems -RRB- , Arbortext -LRB- provider of XML-based publishing software -RRB- , JSTOR -LRB- the digital scholarly journal archive -RRB- , MediaSpan -LRB- provider of software and online services for the media industries -RRB- , Truven Health Analytics , and ProQuest , which includes UMI .
Ann Arbor Terminals manufactured a video-display terminal called the Ann Arbor Ambassador during the 1980s .
Both are located in the South State Commons 2 building on South State Street , which once housed the Michigan Information Technology Center Foundation .
The recent surge in companies operating in Ann Arbor has led to a decrease in its office and flex space vacancy rates .
As of 31 December 2012 , the total market vacancy rate for office and flex space is 11.80 % , a 1.40 % decrease in vacancy from one year previous , and the lowest overall vacancy level since 2003 .
The office vacancy rate decreased to 10.65 % in 2012 from 12.08 % in 2011 , while the flex vacancy rate decreased slightly more , with a drop from 16.50 % to 15.02 % .
On 22 January 2007 , Pfizer announced it would close operations in Ann Arbor by the end of 2008 .
The facility was previously operated by Warner-Lambert and , before that , Parke-Davis .
The city is the home of other research and engineering centers , including those of Lotus Engineering , General Dynamics and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration -LRB- NOAA -RRB- .
Other research centers sited in the city are the United States Environmental Protection Agency 's National Vehicle and Fuel Emissions Laboratory and the Toyota Technical Center .
The Borders chain was based in the city , as was its flagship store until it closed in September 2011 .
Another Ann Arbor-based company is Zingerman 's Delicatessen , which serves sandwiches and has developed businesses under a variety of brand names .
Zingerman 's has grown into a family of companies which offers a variety of products -LRB- bake shop , mail order , creamery , coffee -RRB- and services -LRB- business education -RRB- .
Aastrom Biosciences , a publicly traded company that develops stem cell treatments for cardiovascular diseases , is headquartered in Ann Arbor .
Several performing arts groups and facilities are on the University of Michigan 's campus , as are museums dedicated to art , archaeology , and natural history and sciences .
Since 2001 Shakespeare in the Arb has presented one play by Shakespeare each June , in a large park near downtown .
Another unique piece of artistic expression in Ann Arbor is the fairy doors .
These small portals are examples of installation art and can be found throughout the downtown area .
Multiple art galleries exist in the city , notably in the downtown area and around the University of Michigan campus .
The Ann Arbor District Library maintains four branch outlets in addition to its main downtown building .
Several annual events -- many of them centered on performing and visual arts -- draw visitors to Ann Arbor .
Scheduled on Wednesday through Saturday of the third week of July , the fairs draw upward of half a million visitors .
Until -LRB- at least -RRB- the successful passage of Michigan 's medical marijuana law , the event had arguably strayed from its initial intent , although for years , a number of attendees have received serious legal responses due to marijuana use on University of Michigan property , which does not fall under the City 's progressive and compassionate ticketing program .
The stadium was completed in 1927 and cost more than $ 950,000 to build .
It has a 109,901 seating capacity after multiple renovations were made .
Crisler Center and Yost Ice Arena play host to the school 's basketball -LRB- both men 's and women 's -RRB- and ice hockey teams , respectively .
Concordia University , a member of the NAIA , also fields sports teams .
The city itself is often called `` A ² '' -LRB- `` A-squared '' -RRB- or `` A2 '' -LRB- `` A two '' -RRB- or `` AA '' , `` The Deuce '' -LRB- mainly by Chicagoans -RRB- , and `` Tree Town '' .
In A Prairie Home Companion broadcast from Ann Arbor , Garrison Keillor described Ann Arbor as `` a city where people discuss socialism , but only in the fanciest restaurants . ''
Ann Arbor sometimes appears on citation indexes as an author , instead of a location , often with the academic degree MI , a misunderstanding of the abbreviation for Michigan .
The mayor is elected citywide .
The mayor is the presiding officer of the City Council and has the power to appoint all Council committee members as well as board and commission members , with the approval of the City Council .
The current mayor of Ann Arbor is Christopher Taylor , a Democrat who was elected as mayor in 2014 .
Day-to-day city operations are managed by a city administrator chosen by the city council .
In the Michigan House of Representatives , representation is split between the 55th district -LRB- northern Ann Arbor , part of Ann Arbor Township , and other surrounding areas , represented by Democrat Adam Zemke -RRB- , the 53rd district -LRB- most of downtown and the southern half of the city , represented by Democrat Jeff Irwin -RRB- and the 52nd district -LRB- southwestern areas outside Ann Arbor proper and western Washtenaw County , represented by Democrat Gretchen Driskell -RRB- .
In 1974 , Kathy Kozachenko 's victory in an Ann Arbor city-council race made her the country 's first openly homosexual candidate to win public office .
Adopted through a ballot initiative sponsored by the local Human Rights Party , which feared a splintering of the liberal vote , the process was repealed in 1976 after use in only one election .
As of August 2009 , Democrats hold the mayorship and all council seats .
The left tilt of politics in the city has earned it the nickname `` The People 's Republic of Ann Arbor '' .
Nationally , Ann Arbor is located in Michigan 's 12th congressional district , represented by Democrat Debbie Dingell .
Washtenaw Community College is located in neighboring Ann Arbor Township .
Public schools are part of the Ann Arbor Public Schools -LRB- AAPS -RRB- district .
There were 21 elementary schools , five middle schools -LRB- Forsythe , Slauson , Tappan , Scarlett , and Clague -RRB- three traditional high schools -LRB- Pioneer , Huron , and Skyline -RRB- , and three alternative high schools -LRB- Community High , Stone School , and Roberto Clemente -RRB- in the district .
This program is open to all families who live within the district .
Ann Arbor Public Schools also operates a preschool and family center , with programs for at-risk infants and children before kindergarten .
The district has a preschool center with both free and tuition-based programs for preschoolers in the district .
It was replaced by AnnArbor.com , but returned to a limited print publication under its former name in 2013 .
Another Ann Arbor-based publication that has ceased production was the Ann Arbor Paper , a free monthly .
The Ann Arbor Chronicle , an online newspaper , covered local news , including meetings of the library board , county commission , and DDA until September 3 , 2014 .
Current publications in the city include the Ann Arbor Journal -LRB- A2 Journal -RRB- , a weekly community newspaper ; the Ann Arbor Observer , a free monthly local magazine ; the Ann Arbor Independent , a locally owned , independent weekly ; and Current , a free entertainment-focused alt-weekly .
The city is also served by public and commercial radio broadcasters in Ypsilanti , the Lansing/Jackson area , Detroit , Windsor , and Toledo .
WHTV channel 18 , a MyNetworkTV-affiliated station for the Lansing market , broadcasts from a transmitter in Lyndon Township , west of Ann Arbor .
Detroit and Toledo-area radio and television stations also serve Ann Arbor , and stations from Lansing and Windsor , Ontario , can be heard in parts of the area .
Its characteristics include the pointed arch , the ribbed vault and the flying buttress .
Gothic architecture is most familiar as the architecture of many of the great cathedrals , abbeys and churches of Europe .
For this reason a study of Gothic architecture is largely a study of cathedrals and churches .
These range from tiny chapels to large cathedrals , and although many have been extended and altered in different styles , a large number remain either substantially intact or sympathetically restored , demonstrating the form , character and decoration of Gothic architecture .
A part of their influence was that towns developed around them and they became centers of culture , learning and commerce .
The same wide geographic area was then affected by the development of Gothic architecture , but the acceptance of the Gothic style and methods of construction differed from place to place , as did the expressions of Gothic taste .
In Italy , stone was used for fortifications , but brick was preferred for other buildings .
The technological change permitted a stylistic change which broke the tradition of massive masonry and solid walls penetrated by small openings , replacing it with a style where light appears to triumph over substance .
With its use came the development of many other architectural devices , previously put to the test in scattered buildings and then called into service to meet the structural , aesthetic and ideological needs of the new style .
Another early example is the nave and apse area of the Cathedral of Cefalù in 1131 .
The architect entirely dispensed with the round arch in favour of the pointed arch and with cylindrical columns in favour of piers composed of clusters of shafts which lead into the mouldings of the arches .
The character of the building is entirely Gothic .
The rose window is the earliest-known example above the West portal in France .
He designed a choir that would be suffused with light .
These cathedrals were the skyscrapers of that day and would have been the largest buildings by far that Europeans would ever have seen .
It is in the architecture of these Gothic churches that a unique combination of existing technologies established the emergence of a new building style .
In England it is generally long and may have two distinct sections , both choir and presbytery .
In England , Germany and Scandinavia this is often the arrangement , but an English cathedral may also be surmounted by an enormous tower at the crossing .
The metaphysics of light in the Middle Ages led to clerical belief in its divinity and the importance of its display in holy settings .
Each French cathedral tends to be stylistically unified in appearance when compared with an English cathedral where there is great diversity in almost every building .
They are compact , with slight or no projection of the transepts and subsidiary chapels .
Sometimes there are additional towers on the transept ends .
Each English cathedral -LRB- with the exception of Salisbury -RRB- has an extraordinary degree of stylistic diversity , when compared with most French , German and Italian cathedrals .
It is not unusual for every part of the building to have been built in a different century and in a different style , with no attempt at creating a stylistic unity .
In the west front , the doors are not as significant as in France , the usual congregational entrance being through a side porch .
The west front may have two towers like a French Cathedral , or none .
The distinctive English east end is square , but it may take a completely different form .
Both internally and externally , the stonework is often richly decorated with carvings , particularly the capitals .
This is expressed in the Gothic architecture of Central Europe in the huge size of the towers and spires , often projected , but not always completed .
Because of the size of the towers , the section of the façade between them may appear narrow and compressed .
This is the case even when , as at Cologne , they have been modelled upon a French cathedral .
German cathedrals , like the French , tend not to have strongly projecting transepts .
Many of the cathedrals are completely surrounded by chapels .
Like English cathedrals , each is often stylistically diverse .
This expresses itself both in the addition of chapels and in the application of decorative details drawn from different sources .
The roofline often has pierced parapets with comparatively few pinnacles .
There are often towers and domes of a great variety of shapes and structural invention rising above the roof .
The plan is usually regular and symmetrical , Italian cathedrals have few and widely spaced columns .
Colours and moldings define the architectural units rather than blending them .
Italian cathedral façades are often polychrome and may include mosaics in the lunettes over the doors .
The crossing is usually surmounted by a dome .
There is often a free-standing tower and baptistry .
The eastern end usually has an apse of comparatively low projection .
Secular Gothic architecture can also be found in a number of public buildings such as town halls , universities , markets or hospitals .
The country-houses of the nobility were slow to abandon the appearance of being a castle , even in parts of Europe , like England , where defence had ceased to be a real concern .
It is not easy to decide whether these instances were Gothic survival or early appearances of Gothic revival .
From the second half of the 19th century onwards it became more common in Britain for neo-Gothic to be used in the design of non-ecclesiastical and non-governmental buildings types .
Gothic details even began to appear in working-class housing schemes subsidised by philanthropy , though given the expense , less frequently than in the design of upper and middle-class housing .
Viollet-le-Duc compiled and coordinated an Encyclopédie médiévale that was a rich repertory his contemporaries mined for architectural details .
Other common threads between these disparate movements include the faceting or simplification of geometric forms , and the association of mechanization and modern life .
Pablo Picasso 's 1907 painting Les Demoiselles d'Avignon has often been considered a proto-Cubist work .
Georges Braque 's 1908 Houses at L'Estaque -LRB- and related works -RRB- prompted the critic Louis Vauxcelles to refer to bizarreries cubiques -LRB- cubic oddities -RRB- .
Historians have divided the history of Cubism into phases .
English art historian Douglas Cooper proposed another scheme , describing three phases of Cubism in his book , The Cubist Epoch .
Douglas Cooper 's restrictive use of these terms to distinguish the work of Braque , Picasso , Gris -LRB- from 1911 -RRB- and Léger -LRB- to a lesser extent -RRB- implied an intentional value judgement .
Contemporary views of Cubism are complex , formed to some extent in response to the `` Salle 41 '' Cubists , whose methods were too distinct from those of Picasso and Braque to be considered merely secondary to them .
Alternative interpretations of Cubism have therefore developed .
Wider views of Cubism include artists who were later associated with the `` Salle 41 '' artists , e.g. , Francis Picabia ; the brothers Jacques Villon , Raymond Duchamp-Villon and Marcel Duchamp , who beginning in late 1911 formed the core of the Section d'Or -LRB- or the Puteaux Group -RRB- ; the sculptors Alexander Archipenko , Joseph Csaky and Ossip Zadkine as well as Jacques Lipchitz and Henri Laurens ; and painters such as Louis Marcoussis , Roger de La Fresnaye , František Kupka , Diego Rivera , Léopold Survage , Auguste Herbin , André Lhote , Gino Severini -LRB- after 1916 -RRB- , María Blanchard -LRB- after 1916 -RRB- and Georges Valmier -LRB- after 1918 -RRB- .
During the late 19th and early 20th centuries , Europeans were discovering African , Polynesian , Micronesian and Native American art .
They became friendly rivals and competed with each other throughout their careers , perhaps leading to Picasso entering a new period in his work by 1907 , marked by the influence of Greek , Iberian and African art .
The disruptive , expressionist element in it is even contrary to the spirit of Cubism , which looked at the world in a detached , realistic spirit .
Nevertheless , the Demoiselles is the logical picture to take as the starting point for Cubism , because it marks the birth of a new pictorial idiom , because in it Picasso violently overturned established conventions and because all that followed grew out of it . ''
This familiar explanation `` fails to give adequate consideration to the complexities of a flourishing art that existed just before and during the period when Picasso 's new painting developed . ''
Neo-Impressionist structure and subject matter , most notably to be seen in the works of Georges Seurat -LRB- e.g. , Parade de Cirque , Le Chahut and Le Cirque -RRB- , was another important influence .
There were also parallels in the development of literature and social thought .
This new kind of depiction revolutionized the way objects could be visualized in painting and art .
The terms `` analytical '' and `` synthetic '' which subsequently emerged have been widely accepted since the mid-1930s .
Both terms are historical impositions that occurred after the facts they identify .
Neither phase was designated as such at the time corresponding works were created .
`` If Kahnweiler considers Cubism as Picasso and Braque , '' wrote Daniel Robbins , `` our only fault is in subjecting other Cubists ' works to the rigors of that limited definition . ''
The following year , in preparation for the Salon de la Section d'Or , Metzinger and Gleizes wrote and published Du `` Cubisme '' in an effort to dispel the confusion raging around the word , and as a major defence of Cubism -LRB- which had caused a public scandal following the 1911 Salon des Indépendants and the 1912 Salon d'Automne in Paris -RRB- .
Clarifying their aims as artists , this work was the first theoretical treatise on Cubism and it still remains the clearest and most intelligible .
The result , not solely a collaboration between its two authors , reflected discussions by the circle of artists who met in Puteaux and Courbevoie .
The concept developed in Du `` Cubisme '' of observing a subject from different points in space and time simultaneously , i.e. , the act of moving around an object to seize it from several successive angles fused into a single image -LRB- multiple viewpoints , mobile perspective , simultaneity or multiplicity -RRB- , is a generally recognized device used by the Cubists .
There was a distinct difference between Kahnweiler 's Cubists and the Salon Cubists .
Prior to 1914 , Picasso , Braque , Gris and Léger -LRB- to a lesser extent -RRB- gained the support of a single committed art dealer in Paris , Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler , who guaranteed them an annual income for the exclusive right to buy their works .
Kahnweiler sold only to a small circle of connoisseurs .
His support gave his artists the freedom to experiment in relative privacy .
In contrast , the Salon Cubists built their reputation primarily by exhibiting regularly at the Salon d'Automne and the Salon des Indépendants , both major non-academic Salons in Paris .
They were inevitably more aware of public response and the need to communicate .
These soirées often included writers such as Guillaume Apollinaire and André Salmon .
This article was published a year after Gelett Burgess ' The Wild Men of Paris , and two years prior to the Armory Show , which introduced astonished Americans , accustomed to realistic art , to the experimental styles of the European avant garde , including Fauvism , Cubism , and Futurism .
The 1911 New York Times article portrayed works by Picasso , Matisse , Derain , Metzinger and others dated before 1909 ; not exhibited at the 1911 Salon .
It was in fact rejected by the hanging committee , which included his brothers and other Cubists .
Although the work was shown in the Salon de la Section d'Or in October 1912 and the 1913 Armory Show in New York , Duchamp never forgave his brothers and former colleagues for censoring his work .
Delaunay 's monumental La Ville de Paris -LRB- Musée d'art moderne de la Ville de Paris -RRB- and Léger 's La Noce , The Wedding -LRB- Musée National d'Art Moderne , Paris -RRB- were also exhibited .
The controversy spread to the Municipal Council of Paris , leading to a debate in the Chambre des Députés about the use of public funds to provide the venue for such art .
Among the works exhibited were Le Fauconnier 's vast composition Les Montagnards attaqués par des ours -LRB- Mountaineers Attacked by Bears -RRB- now at Rhode Island School of Design Museum , Joseph Csaky 's Deux Femme , Two Women -LRB- a sculpture now lost -RRB- , in addition to the highly abstract paintings by Kupka , Amorpha -LRB- The National Gallery , Prague -RRB- , and Picabia , La Source , The Spring -LRB- Museum of Modern Art , New York -RRB- .
The most extreme forms of Cubism were not those practiced by Picasso and Braque , who resisted total abstraction .
Other Cubists , by contrast , especially František Kupka , and those considered Orphists by Apollinaire -LRB- Delaunay , Léger , Picabia and Duchamp -RRB- , accepted abstraction by removing visible subject matter entirely .
Both Duchamp in 1912 and Picabia from 1912 to 1914 developed an expressive and allusive abstraction dedicated to complex emotional and sexual themes .
His Cubism , despite its abstract qualities , was associated with themes of mechanization and modern life .
Apollinaire supported these early developments of abstract Cubism in Les Peintres cubistes -LRB- 1913 -RRB- , writing of a new `` pure '' painting in which the subject was vacated .
But in spite of his use of the term Orphism these works were so different that they defy attempts to place them in a single category .
The ready-made arose from a joint consideration that the work itself is considered an object -LRB- just as a painting -RRB- , and that it uses the material detritus of the world -LRB- as collage and papier collé in the Cubist construction and Assemblage -RRB- .
The next logical step , for Duchamp , was to present an ordinary object as a self-sufficient work of art representing only itself .
The Section d'Or , also known as Groupe de Puteaux , founded by some of the most conspicuous Cubists , was a collective of painters , sculptors and critics associated with Cubism and Orphism , active from 1911 through about 1914 , coming to prominence in the wake of their controversial showing at the 1911 Salon des Indépendants .
The Salon de la Section d'Or at the Galerie La Boétie in Paris , October 1912 , was arguably the most important pre-World War I Cubist exhibition ; exposing Cubism to a wide audience .
Undoubtedly , due to the great success of the exhibition , Cubism became recognized as a tendency , genre or style in art with a specific common philosophy or goal : a new avant-garde movement .
The Cubism of Picasso , Braque and Gris had more than a technical or formal significance , and the distinct attitudes and intentions of the Salon Cubists produced different kinds of Cubism , rather than a derivative of their work .
The works exhibited by these Cubists at the 1911 and 1912 Salons extended beyond the conventional Cézanne-like subjects -- the posed model , still-life and landscape -- favored by Picasso and Braque to include large-scale modern-life subjects .
One of the major theoretical innovations made by the Salon Cubists , independently of Picasso and Braque , was that of simultaneity , drawing to greater or lesser extent on theories of Henri Poincaré , Ernst Mach , Charles Henry , Maurice Princet , and Henri Bergson .
With simultaneity , the concept of separate spatial and temporal dimensions was comprehensively challenged .
Linear perspective developed during the Renaissance was vacated .
The subject matter was no longer considered from a specific point of view at a moment in time , but built following a selection of successive viewpoints , i.e. , as if viewed simultaneously from numerous angles -LRB- and in multiple dimensions -RRB- with the eye free to roam from one to the other .
These ambitious works are some of the largest paintings in the history of Cubism .
The conjunction of such subject matter with simultaneity aligns Salon Cubism with early Futurist paintings by Umberto Boccioni , Gino Severini and Carlo Carrà ; themselves made in response to early Cubism .
Jacques Villon exhibited seven important and large drypoints , his brother Marcel Duchamp shocked the American public with his painting Nude Descending a Staircase , No. 2 -LRB- 1912 -RRB- .
Francis Picabia exhibited his abstractions La Danse à la source and La Procession , Seville -LRB- both of 1912 -RRB- .
Georges Braque , Fernand Léger , Raymond Duchamp-Villon , Roger de La Fresnaye and Alexander Archipenko also contributed examples of their cubist works .
Cubist sculpture developed in parallel to Cubist painting .
Joseph Csaky , after Archipenko , was the first sculptor in Paris to join the Cubists , with whom he exhibited from 1911 onwards .
They were followed by Raymond Duchamp-Villon and then in 1914 by Jacques Lipchitz , Henri Laurens and Ossip Zadkine .
Many Cubists , including Picasso , Braque , Gris , Léger , Gleizes , and Metzinger , while developing other styles , returned periodically to Cubism , even well after 1925 .
Cubism reemerged during the 1920s and the 1930s in the work of the American Stuart Davis and the Englishman Ben Nicholson .
In France , however , Cubism experienced a decline beginning in about 1925 .
Léonce Rosenberg exhibited not only the artists stranded by Kahnweiler 's exile but others including Laurens , Lipchitz , Metzinger , Gleizes , Csaky , Herbin and Severini .
Attempts were made by Louis Vauxcelles to claim that Cubism was dead , but these exhibitions , along with a well-organized Cubist show at the 1920 Salon des Indépendants and a revival of the Salon de la Section d'Or in the same year , demonstrated it was still alive .
The occasional return to classicism -- figurative work either exclusively or alongside Cubist work -- experienced by many artists during this period -LRB- called Neoclassicism -RRB- has been linked to the tendency to evade the realities of the war and also to the cultural dominance of a classical or Latin image of France during and immediately following the war .
Yet , Cubism itself remained evolutionary both within the oeuvre of individual artists , such as Gris and Metzinger , and across the work of artists as different from each other as Braque , Léger and Gleizes .
Cubism as a publicly debated movement became relatively unified and open to definition .
Its theoretical purity made it a gauge against which such diverse tendencies as Realism or Naturalism , Dada , Surrealism and abstraction could be compared .
Though there are many points of intersection between Cubism and architecture , only a few direct links between them can be drawn .
Diverse elements could be superimposed , made transparent or penetrate one another , while retaining their spatial relationships .
Cubism was relevant to an architecture seeking a style that needed not refer to the past .
Thus , what had become a revolution in both painting and sculpture was applied as part of `` a profound reorientation towards a changed world '' .
However , the linking of basic geometric forms with inherent beauty and ease of industrial application -- which had been prefigured by Marcel Duchamp from 1914 -- was left to the founders of Purism , Amédée Ozenfant and Charles-Édouard Jeanneret -LRB- better known as Le Corbusier , -RRB- who exhibited paintings together in Paris and published Après le cubisme in 1918 .
Le Corbusier 's ambition had been to translate the properties of his own style of Cubism to architecture .
Between 1918 and 1922 , Le Corbusier concentrated his efforts on Purist theory and painting .
His theoretical studies soon advanced into many different architectural projects .
At the 1912 Salon d'Automne an architectural installation was exhibited that quickly became known as Maison Cubiste -LRB- Cubist House -RRB- , signed Raymond Duchamp-Villon and André Mare along with a group of collaborators .
Metzinger and Gleizes in Du `` Cubisme '' , written during the assemblage of the `` Maison Cubiste '' , wrote about the autonomous nature of art , stressing the point that decorative considerations should not govern the spirit of art .
Decorative work , to them , was the `` antithesis of the picture '' .
`` The true picture '' wrote Metzinger and Gleizes , `` bears its raison d'être within itself .
It can be moved from a church to a drawing-room , from a museum to a study .
Essentially independent , necessarily complete , it need not immediately satisfy the mind : on the contrary , it should lead it , little by little , towards the fictitious depths in which the coordinative light resides .
It does not harmonize with this or that ensemble ; it harmonizes with things in general , with the universe : it is an organism ... '' .
`` Mare 's ensembles were accepted as frames for Cubist works because they allowed paintings and sculptures their independence '' , writes Christopher Green , `` creating a play of contrasts , hence the involvement not only of Gleizes and Metzinger themselves , but of Marie Laurencin , the Duchamp brothers -LRB- Raymond Duchamp-Villon designed the facade -RRB- and Mare 's old friends Léger and Roger La Fresnaye '' .
It was an example of L'art décoratif , a home within which Cubist art could be displayed in the comfort and style of modern , bourgeois life .
This architectural installation was subsequently exhibited at the 1913 Armory Show , New York , Chicago and Boston , listed in the catalogue of the New York exhibit as Raymond Duchamp-Villon , number 609 , and entitled `` Facade architectural , plaster '' -LRB- Façade architecturale -RRB- .
Czech architects were the first and only ones in the world to ever design original Cubist buildings .
Cubist architecture flourished for the most part between 1910 -- 1914 , but the Cubist or Cubism-influenced buildings were also built after the World War I .
This should be achieved by shapes derived from pyramids , cubes and prisms , by arrangements and compositions of oblique surfaces , mainly triangular , sculpted facades in protruding crystal-like units , reminiscent of the so-called diamond cut , or even cavernous that are reminiscent of the late Gothic architecture .
In this way , the entire surfaces of the facades including even the gables and dormers are sculpted .
The grilles as well as other architectural ornaments attain a three-dimensional form .
Czech Cubist architects also designed Cubist furniture .
A Cubist streetlamp has also been preserved near the Wenceslas Square , designed by Emil Králíček in 1912 , who also built the Diamond House in the New Town of Prague around 1913 .
Picasso in turn was an important influence on Stein 's writing .
This is quite different from the free association of the Surrealists and the combination of unconscious utterance and political nihilism of Dada . ''
Nonetheless , the Cubist poets ' influence on both Cubism and the later movements of Dada and Surrealism was profound ; Louis Aragon , founding member of Surrealism , said that for Breton , Soupault , Éluard and himself , Reverdy was `` our immediate elder , the exemplary poet . ''
The major philosophies during the period , Confucianism , Legalism , Mohism , Agrarianism and Taoism , each had a political aspect to their philosophical schools .
Philosophers such as Confucius , Mencius , and Mozi , focused on political unity and political stability as the basis of their political philosophies .
Confucianism advocated a hierarchical , meritocratic government based on empathy , loyalty , and interpersonal relationships .
Legalism advocated a highly authoritarian government based on draconian punishments and laws .
The Agrarians advocated a peasant utopian communalism and egalitarianism .
Taoism advocated a proto-anarchism .
Legalism was the dominant political philosophy of the Qin Dynasty , but was replaced by State Confucianism in the Han Dynasty .
Prior to China 's adoption of communism , State Confucianism remained the dominant political philosophy of China up to the 20th century .
One of the first , extremely important classical works of political philosophy is Plato 's Republic , which was followed by Aristotle 's Nichomachean Ethics and Politics .
Roman political philosophy was influenced by the Stoics , including the Roman statesman Cicero .
The constitutions of Hindu states evolved over time and were based on political and legal treatises and prevalent social institutions .
The Prime Minister headed the committee of ministers along with head of executive -LRB- Maha Amatya -RRB- .
Chanakya quotes several authorities including Bruhaspati , Ushanas , Prachetasa Manu , Parasara , and Ambi , and described himself as a descendant of a lineage of political philosophers , with his father Chanaka being his immediate predecessor .
Another influential extant Indian treatise on political philosophy is the Sukra Neeti .
Augustine 's City of God is an influential work of this period that attacked the thesis , held by many Christian Romans , that the Christian view could be realized on Earth .
By the late ancient period , however , the `` traditionalist '' Asharite view of Islam had in general triumphed .
According to the Asharites , reason must be subordinate to the Quran and the Sunna .
However , in the Western thought , it is generally supposed that it was a specific area peculiar merely to the great philosophers of Islam : al-Kindi -LRB- Alkindus -RRB- , al-Farabi -LRB- Abunaser -RRB- , İbn Sina -LRB- Avicenna -RRB- , Ibn Bajjah -LRB- Avempace -RRB- , Ibn Rushd -LRB- Averroes -RRB- , and Ibn Khaldun .
Hence , not only the ideas of the Muslim political philosophers but also many other jurists and ulama posed political ideas and theories .
For example , the ideas of the Khawarij in the very early years of Islamic history on Khilafa and Ummah , or that of Shia Islam on the concept of Imamah are considered proofs of political thought .
The Scholastics by combining the philosophy of Aristotle with the Christianity of St. Augustine emphasized the potential harmony inherent in reason and revelation .
Aquinas 's use of them set the agenda , for scholastic political philosophy dominated European thought for centuries even unto the Renaissance .
That work , as well as The Discourses , a rigorous analysis of the classical period , did much to influence modern political thought in the West .
A minority -LRB- including Jean-Jacques Rousseau -RRB- interpreted The Prince as a satire meant to be given to the Medici after their recapture of Florence and their subsequent expulsion of Machiavelli from Florence .
Though the work was written for the di Medici family in order to perhaps influence them to free him from exile , Machiavelli supported the Republic of Florence rather than the oligarchy of the di Medici family .
At any rate , Machiavelli presents a pragmatic and somewhat consequentialist view of politics , whereby good and evil are mere means used to bring about an end -- i.e. , the secure and powerful state .
Although neither Machiavelli nor Hobbes believed in the divine right of kings , they both believed in the inherent selfishness of the individual .
It was necessarily this belief that led them to adopt a strong central power as the only means of preventing the disintegration of the social order .
These theorists were driven by two basic questions : one , by what right or need do people form states ; and two , what the best form for a state could be .
These fundamental questions involved a conceptual distinction between the concepts of `` state '' and `` government . ''
This conceptual distinction continues to operate in political science , although some political scientists , philosophers , historians and cultural anthropologists have argued that most political action in any given society occurs outside of its state , and that there are societies that are not organized into states that nevertheless must be considered in political terms .
As long as the concept of natural order was not introduced , the social sciences could not evolve independently of theistic thinking .
After Voltaire , religion would never be the same again in France .
As well , there was no spread of this doctrine within the New World and the advanced civilizations of the Aztec , Maya , Inca , Mohican , Delaware , Huron and especially the Iroquois .
In it Locke proposes a state of nature theory that directly complements his conception of how political development occurs and how it can be founded through contractual obligation .
The theory of the divine right of kings became a passing fancy , exposed to the type of ridicule with which John Locke treated it .
Unlike Machiavelli and Hobbes but like Aquinas , Locke would accept Aristotle 's dictum that man seeks to be happy in a state of social harmony as a social animal .
Unlike Aquinas 's preponderant view on the salvation of the soul from original sin , Locke believes man 's mind comes into this world as tabula rasa .
For Locke , knowledge is neither innate , revealed nor based on authority but subject to uncertainty tempered by reason , tolerance and moderation .
Urbanization and capitalism greatly reshaped society .
During this same period , the socialist movement began to form .
In the mid-19th century , Marxism was developed , and socialism in general gained increasing popular support , mostly from the urban working class .
Without breaking entirely from the past , Marx established principles that would be used by future revolutionaries of the 20th century namely Vladimir Lenin , Mao Zedong , Ho Chi Minh , and Fidel Castro .
Though Hegel 's philosophy of history is similar to Immanuel Kant 's , and Karl Marx 's theory of revolution towards the common good is partly based on Kant 's view of history -- Marx declared that he was turning Hegel 's dialectic , which was `` standing on its head '' , `` the right side up again '' .
Unlike Marx who believed in historical materialism , Hegel believed in the Phenomenology of Spirit .
By the late 19th century , socialism and trade unions were established members of the political landscape .
In addition , the various branches of anarchism , with thinkers such as Mikhail Bakunin , Pierre-Joseph Proudhon or Peter Kropotkin , and syndicalism also gained some prominence .
In the Anglo-American world , anti-imperialism and pluralism began gaining currency at the turn of the 20th century .
At the same time , social democratic parties won elections and formed governments for the first time , often as a result of the introduction of universal suffrage .
A number of continental European émigrés to Britain and the United States -- including Karl Popper , Friedrich Hayek , Leo Strauss , Isaiah Berlin , Eric Voegelin and Judith Shklar -- encouraged continued study in political philosophy in the Anglo-American world , but in the 1950s and 1960s they and their students remained at odds with the analytic establishment .
Colonialism and racism were important issues that arose .
Much academic debate regarded one or both of two pragmatic topics : how -LRB- or whether -RRB- to apply utilitarianism to problems of political policy , or how -LRB- or whether -RRB- to apply economic models -LRB- such as rational choice theory -RRB- to political issues .
The rise of feminism , LGBT social movements and the end of colonial rule and of the political exclusion of such minorities as African Americans and sexual minorities in the developed world has led to feminist , postcolonial , and multicultural thought becoming significant .
Rawls used a thought experiment , the original position , in which representative parties choose principles of justice for the basic structure of society from behind a veil of ignorance .
Rawls also offered a criticism of utilitarian approaches to questions of political justice .
Contemporaneously with the rise of analytic ethics in Anglo-American thought , in Europe several new lines of philosophy directed at critique of existing societies arose between the 1950s and 1980s .
Most of these took elements of Marxist economic analysis , but combined them with a more cultural or ideological emphasis .
Along somewhat different lines , a number of other continental thinkers -- still largely influenced by Marxism -- put new emphases on structuralism and on a `` return to Hegel '' .
Within the -LRB- post - -RRB- structuralist line -LRB- though mostly not taking that label -RRB- are thinkers such as Gilles Deleuze , Michel Foucault , Claude Lefort , and Jean Baudrillard .
Another debate developed around the -LRB- distinct -RRB- criticisms of liberal political theory made by Michael Walzer , Michael Sandel and Charles Taylor .
Unlike liberals who understand liberty as `` non-interference , '' `` non-domination '' entails individuals not being subject to the arbitrary will of anyother person .
To a liberal , a slave who is not interfered with may be free , yet to a republican the mere status as a slave , regardless of how that slave is treated , is objectionable .
Prominent republicans include historian Quentin Skinner , jurist Cass Sunstein , and political philosopher Philip Pettit .
Both the capability approach and republicanism treat choice as something which must be resourced .
In other words , it is not enough to be legally able to do something , but to have the real option of doing it .
Intermetallic compounds are alloys with a defined stoichiometry and crystal structure .
This is usually called the primary metal or the base metal , and the name of this metal may also be the name of the alloy .
Although both metals are very soft and ductile , the resulting aluminium alloy will be much harder and stronger .
Although the elements usually must be soluble in the liquid state , they may not always be soluble in the solid state .
If the mixture cools and the constituents become insoluble , they may separate to form two or more different types of crystals , creating a heterogeneous microstructure of different phases .
However , in other alloys , the insoluble elements may not separate until after crystallization occurs .
Meteorites are sometimes made of naturally occurring alloys of iron and nickel , but are not native to the Earth .
Bronze was an extremely useful alloy to the ancients , because it is much stronger and harder than either of its components .
Steel was another common alloy .
However , in ancient times , it could only be created as an accidental byproduct from the heating of iron ore in fires -LRB- smelting -RRB- during the manufacture of iron .
Other ancient alloys include pewter , brass and pig iron .
In the modern age , steel can be created in many forms .
Carbon steel can be made by varying only the carbon content , producing soft alloys like mild steel or hard alloys like spring steel .
Alloy steels can be made by adding other elements , such as molybdenum , vanadium or nickel , resulting in alloys such as high-speed steel or tool steel .
Small amounts of manganese are usually alloyed with most modern-steels because of its ability to remove unwanted impurities , like phosphorus , sulfur and oxygen , which can have detrimental effects on the alloy .
Some modern superalloys , such as incoloy , inconel , and hastelloy , may consist of a multitude of different components .
The term alloy is used to describe a mixture of atoms in which the primary constituent is a metal .
If there is a mixture of only two types of atoms , not counting impurities , such as a copper-nickel alloy , then it is called a binary alloy .
Because the percentage of each constituent can be varied , with any mixture the entire range of possible variations is called a system .
In this respect , all of the various forms of an alloy containing only two constituents , like iron and carbon , is called a binary system , while all of the alloy combinations possible with a ternary alloy , such as alloys of iron , carbon and chromium , is called a ternary system .
Although an alloy is technically an impure metal , when referring to alloys , the term `` impurities '' usually denotes those elements which are not desired .
These impurities are often found in the base metals or the solutes , but they may also be introduced during the alloying process .
For instance , sulfur is a common impurity in steel .
Oxygen , present in the air , readily combines with most metals to form metal oxides ; especially at higher temperatures encountered during alloying .
The term `` alloy '' is sometimes used in everyday speech as a synonym for a particular alloy .
When made from other materials , they are typically specified as such , -LRB- i.e. : `` bronze wheel , '' `` plastic barrel , '' or `` wood girder '' -RRB- .
For example , steel is stronger than iron , its primary element .
The physical properties , such as density , reactivity , Young 's modulus of an alloy may not differ greatly from those of its elements , but engineering properties such as tensile strength and shear strength may be substantially different from those of the constituent materials .
This is sometimes a result of the sizes of the atoms in the alloy , because larger atoms exert a compressive force on neighboring atoms , and smaller atoms exert a tensile force on their neighbors , helping the alloy resist deformation .
Sometimes alloys may exhibit marked differences in behavior even when small amounts of one element are present .
For example , impurities in semiconducting ferromagnetic alloys lead to different properties , as first predicted by White , Hogan , Suhl , Tian Abrie and Nakamura .
Some alloys are made by melting and mixing two or more metals .
In later times bronze has been used for ornaments , bells , statues , and bearings .
Alloys are often made to alter the mechanical properties of the base metal , to induce hardness , toughness , ductility , or other desired properties .
Most metals and alloys can be work hardened by creating defects in their crystal structure .
These defects are created during plastic deformation , such as hammering or bending , and are permanent unless the metal is recrystallized .
This allows the small carbon atoms to enter the interstices of the iron crystal , diffusing into the iron matrix .
When this happens , the carbon atoms are said to be in solution , or mixed with the iron , forming a single , homogeneous , crystalline phase called austenite .
When this happens the carbon atoms will no longer be soluble with the iron , and will be forced to precipitate out of solution , nucleating into the spaces between the crystals .
This type of heat treatment produces steel that is rather soft and bendable .
However , if the steel is cooled quickly the carbon atoms will not have time to precipitate .
When rapidly cooled , a diffusionless -LRB- martensite -RRB- transformation occurs , in which the carbon atoms become trapped in solution .
The solutes in these alloys will precipitate over time , forming intermetallic phases , which are difficult to discern from the base metal .
Unlike steel , in which the solid solution separates to form different crystal phases , precipitation hardening alloys separate to form different phases within the same crystal .
These intermetallic alloys appear homogeneous in crystal structure , but tend to behave heterogeneous , becoming hard and somewhat brittle .
When a molten metal is mixed with another substance , there are two mechanisms that can cause an alloy to form , called atom exchange and the interstitial mechanism .
The relative size of each element in the mix plays a primary role in determining which mechanism will occur .
When the atoms are relatively similar in size , the atom exchange method usually happens , where some of the atoms composing the metallic crystals are substituted with atoms of the other constituent .
This is called a substitutional alloy .
With the interstitial mechanism , one atom is usually much smaller than the other , so can not successfully replace an atom in the crystals of the base metal .
The smaller atoms become trapped in the spaces between the atoms in the crystal matrix , called the interstices .
This is referred to as an interstitial alloy .
As no metallurgic processes were used to separate iron from nickel , the alloy was used as it was .
In many cultures it was shaped by cold hammering into knives and arrowheads .
They were often used as anvils .
Meteoric iron was very rare and valuable , and difficult for ancient people to work .
Native copper , however , was found worldwide , along with silver , gold and platinum , which were also used to make tools , jewelry , and other objects since Neolithic times .
It became one of the most important metals to the ancients .
Ancient civilizations took into account the mixture and the various properties it produced , such as hardness , toughness and melting point , under various conditions of temperature and work hardening , developing much of the information contained in modern alloy phase diagrams .
Arrowheads from the Chinese Qin dynasty -LRB- around 200 BC -RRB- were often constructed with a hard bronze-head , but a softer bronze-tang , combining the alloys to prevent both dulling and breaking during use .
Mercury has been smelted from cinnabar for thousands of years .
The amalgam was applied as a paste and then heated until the mercury vaporized , leaving the gold , silver , or tin behind .
Gold was often found alloyed with silver or other metals to produce various types of colored gold .
These metals were also used to strengthen each other , for more practical purposes .
Copper was often added to silver to make sterling silver , increasing its strength for use in dishes , silverware , and other practical items .
upon the discovery of Archimedes ' principle .
These solutes sometimes were added individually in varying amounts , or added together , making a wide variety of things , ranging from practical items , like dishes , surgical tools , candlesticks or funnels , to decorative items such as ear rings and hair clips .
Called the bloomery process , it produced very soft but ductile wrought iron .
However , these metals found little practical use until the introduction of crucible steel around 300 BC .
These steels were of poor quality , and the introduction of pattern welding , around the 1st century AD , sought to balance the extreme properties of the alloys by laminating them , to create a tougher metal .
Around 700 AD , the Japanese began folding bloomery-steel and cast-iron in alternating layers to increase the strength of their swords , using clay fluxes to remove slag and impurities .
This method of Japanese swordsmithing produced one of the purest steel-alloys of the early Middle Ages .
While the use of iron started to become more widespread around 1200 BC , mainly because of interruptions in the trade routes for tin , the metal is much softer than bronze .
However , very small amounts of steel , -LRB- an alloy of iron and around 1 % carbon -RRB- , was always a byproduct of the bloomery process .
This method introduced carbon by heating wrought iron in charcoal for long periods of time , but the penetration of carbon was not very deep , so the alloy was not homogeneous .
Huntsman 's process was used for manufacturing tool steel until the early 1900s .
The Bessemer process was able to produce the first large scale manufacture of steel .
Once the Bessemer process began to gain widespread use , other alloys of steel began to follow .
After quenching a ternary alloy of aluminium , copper , and magnesium , Wilm discovered that the alloy increased in hardness when left to age at room temperature .
Because they often exhibit a combination of high strength and low weight , these alloys became widely used in many forms of industry , including the construction of modern aircraft .
The island is part of the Commonwealth of Australia .
Together with two neighbouring islands , it forms one of Australia 's external territories .
Sir John Call argued the advantages of Norfolk Island in that it was uninhabited and that New Zealand flax grew there .
From 15 February 1814 to 6 June 1825 the island was abandoned .
On 8 June 1856 , the next settlement began on Norfolk Island .
On 8 June 194 persons arrived , a baby having been born in transit .
Although some families decided to return to Pitcairn in 1858 and 1863 , the island 's population continued to grow .
They accepted additional settlers , who often arrived with whaling fleets .
N Force relieved a company of the Second Australian Imperial Force .
It has an area of 34.6 square kilometres -LRB- 13.4 sq mi -RRB- , with no large-scale internal bodies of water and 32 km -LRB- 20 mi -RRB- of coastline .
The majority of the terrain is suitable for farming and other agricultural uses .
There are no safe harbour facilities on Norfolk Island , with loading jetties existing at Kingston and Cascade Bay .
The understory was thick with lianas and ferns covering the forest floor .
Some unhappiness with G. H. Nobbs , the more organised and formal ritual of the Church of England service arising from the influence of the Melanesian Mission , decline in spirituality , the influence of visiting American whalers , literature sent by Christians overseas impressed by the Pitcairn story , and the adoption of Seventh-day Adventism by the descendants of the mutineers still on Pitcairn , all contributed to these developments .
The Roman Catholic Church began work in 1957 and in the late 1990s a group left the former Methodist -LRB- then Uniting Church -RRB- and formed a charismatic fellowship .
In 2011 , 34 percent of the ordinary residents identified as Anglican , 13 percent as Uniting Church , 12 percent as Roman Catholic and three percent as Seventh-day Adventist .
Nine percent were from other religions .
Twenty four percent had no religion , and seven percent did not indicate a religion .
The three older denominations have good facilities .
Ministers are usually short-term visitors .
In 2004 an act of the Norfolk Island Assembly made it a co-official language of the island .
The act is long-titled : `` An Act to recognise the Norfolk Island Language -LRB- Norf ` k -RRB- as an official language of Norfolk Island . ''
The act recognises and protects use of the language but does not require it ; in official use , it must be accompanied by an accurate translation into English .
Disagreements over the island 's relationship with Australia were put in sharper relief by a 2006 review undertaken by the Australian government .
A reason given was that the island had never gained self-sufficiency and was being heavily subsidised by the Commonwealth , by $ 12.5 million in 2015 alone .
The Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly decided to hold a referendum on the proposal .
The island is subject to separate immigration controls from the remainder of Australia .
Medicare and the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme do not cover Norfolk Island .
Air charter transport can cost in the order of A$ 30,000 .
The Australian government controls the exclusive economic zone -LRB- EEZ -RRB- and revenue from it extending 200 nautical miles -LRB- 370 km -RRB- around Norfolk Island -LRB- roughly 428,000 km2 -RRB- and territorial sea claims to three nautical miles -LRB- 6 km -RRB- from the island .
There is no irrigated land .
The island uses the Australian dollar as its currency .
Because there is no income tax , the island 's legislative assembly raises money through an import duty , fuel levy , medicare levy , GST of 12 % and local/international phone calls .
It appears that the reforms do extend to companies and trustees and not only individuals .
Satellite communications services are planned .
The Internet country code top-level domain -LRB- ccTLD -RRB- is .
nf .
There are no railways , waterways , ports or harbours on the island .
If the wind changes significantly during unloading/loading , the ship will move around to the other side .
The minutes of the meetings of Burke 's Club remain in the collection of the Historical Society .
Burke 's father wanted him to read Law , and with this in mind he went to London in 1750 , where he entered the Middle Temple , before soon giving up legal study to travel in Continental Europe .
After eschewing the Law , he pursued a livelihood through writing .
Burke claimed that Bolingbroke 's arguments against revealed religion could apply to all social and civil institutions as well .
All the reviews of the work were positive , with critics especially appreciative of Burke 's quality of writing .
It was to be submitted for publication by Christmas 1758 .
G. M. Young did not value Burke 's history and claimed that it was `` demonstrably a translation from the French '' .
Rockingham also introduced Burke as a Freemason .
Britain needed a party with `` an unshaken adherence to principle , and attachment to connexion , against every allurement of interest '' .
Party divisions `` whether operating for good or evil , are things inseparable from free government '' .
Burke resisted their protestations and said : `` If , from this conduct , I shall forfeit their suffrages at an ensuing election , it will stand on record an example to future representatives of the Commons of England , that one man at least had dared to resist the desires of his constituents when his judgment assured him they were wrong '' .
He laid out his objections in an orderly manner , focusing on one before moving to the next .
His first concern was that the use of force would have to be temporary , and that the uprisings and objections to British governance in America would not be .
`` An armament '' , Burke said , `` is not a victory '' .
Third , Burke brought up the issue of impairment ; it would do the British Government no good to engage in a scorched earth war and have the object they desired -LRB- America -RRB- become damaged or even useless .
Not only were all of these concerns reasonable , but some turned out to be prophetic -- the American colonists did not surrender , even when things looked extremely bleak , and the British were ultimately unsuccessful in their attempts to win a war fought on American soil .
He claimed the English national character was being changed by this authoritarianism .
Burke wrote : `` As to the good people of England , they seem to partake every day more and more of the Character of that administration which they have been induced to tolerate .
I am satisfied , that within a few years there has been a great Change in the National Character .
We seem no longer that eager , inquisitive , jealous , fiery people , which we have been formerly '' .
The Treasury would receive monthly statements of the Paymaster 's balance at the Bank .
Burke was a leading sceptic with respect to democracy .
First , government required a degree of intelligence and breadth of knowledge of the sort that occurred rarely among the common people .
His interaction with the British dominion of India began well before Hastings ' impeachment trial .
This trial was the pinnacle of years of unrest and deliberation .
This committee was charged `` to investigate alleged injustices in Bengal , the war with Hyder Ali , and other Indian difficulties '' .
While Burke and the committee focused their attention on these matters , a second ` secret ' committee was formed to assess the same issues .
Both committee reports were written by Burke .
Among other purposes , the reports conveyed to the Indian princes that Britain would not wage war on them , along with demanding that the HEIC recall Hastings .
This was Burke 's first call for substantive change regarding imperial practices .
The impeachment in Westminster Hall , which did not begin until 14 February 1788 , would be the `` first major public discursive event of its kind in England '' , bringing the morality and duty of imperialism to the forefront of public perception .
Burke already was known for his eloquent rhetorical skills and his involvement in the trial only enhanced its popularity and significance .
Initially , Burke did not condemn the French Revolution .
In a letter of 9 August 1789 , Burke wrote : `` England gazing with astonishment at a French struggle for Liberty and not knowing whether to blame or to applaud !
The thing indeed , though I thought I saw something like it in progress for several years , has still something in it paradoxical and Mysterious .
The spirit it is impossible not to admire ; but the old Parisian ferocity has broken out in a shocking manner '' .
Burke replied that any critical language of it by him should be taken `` as no more than the expression of doubt '' but he added : `` You may have subverted Monarchy , but not recover 'd freedom '' .
In the same month he described France as `` a country undone '' .
Price argued that love of our country `` does not imply any conviction of the superior value of it to other countries , or any particular preference of its laws and constitution of government '' .
On 1 November he finally published the Reflections and it was an immediate best-seller .
Why ?
Because when such ideas are brought before our minds , it is natural to be so affected '' .
Burke defended this prejudice on the grounds that it is `` the general bank and capital of nations , and of ages '' and superior to individual reason , which is small in comparison .
`` Prejudice '' , Burke claimed , `` is of ready application in the emergency ; it previously engages the mind in a steady course of wisdom and virtue , and does not leave the man hesitating in the moment of decision , skeptical , puzzled , and unresolved .
Prejudice renders a man 's virtue his habit '' .
Burke criticised social contract theory by claiming that society is indeed , a contract , but `` a partnership not only between those who are living , but between those who are living , those who are dead , and those who are to be born '' .
Burke 's account differs little from modern historians who have used primary sources .
His use of flowery language to describe it , however , provoked both praise and criticism .
Price had rejoiced that the French king had been `` led in triumph '' during the October Days , but to Burke this symbolised the opposing revolutionary sentiment of the Jacobins and the natural sentiments of those who shared his own view with horror -- that the ungallant assault on Marie-Antoinette -- was a cowardly attack on a defenceless woman .
Fox thought the Reflections to be `` in very bad taste '' and `` favouring Tory principles '' .
Burke wrote on 29 November 1790 : `` I have received from the Duke of Portland , Lord Fitzwilliam , the Duke of Devonshire , Lord John Cavendish , Montagu -LRB- Frederick Montagu MP -RRB- , and a long et cetera of the old Stamina of the Whiggs a most full approbation of the principles of that work and a kind indulgence to the execution '' .
The Duke of Portland said in 1791 that when anyone criticised the Reflections to him , he informed them that he had recommended the book to his sons as containing the true Whig creed .
Burke 's Reflections sparked a pamphlet war .
Mackintosh was the first to see the Reflections as `` the manifesto of a Counter Revolution '' .
Mackintosh later agreed with Burke 's views , remarking in December 1796 after meeting him , that Burke was `` minutely and accurately informed , to a wonderful exactness , with respect to every fact relating to the French Revolution '' .
Mackintosh later said : `` Burke was one of the first thinkers as well as one of the greatest orators of his time .
Although Burke conceded that Rousseau sometimes showed `` a considerable insight into human nature '' he mostly was critical .
Burke said Rousseau `` entertained no principle either to influence of his heart , or to guide his understanding -- but vanity '' -- which he `` was possessed to a degree little short of madness '' .
He also cited Rousseau 's Confessions as evidence that Rousseau had a life of `` obscure and vulgar vices '' that was not `` chequered , or spotted here and there , with virtues , or even distinguished by a single good action '' .
Burke contrasted Rousseau 's theory of universal benevolence and his having sent his children to a foundling hospital : `` a lover of his kind , but a hater of his kindred '' .
These events and the disagreements that arose from them within the Whig Party , led to its break-up and to the rupture of Burke 's friendship with Fox .
Burke asserted that those ideas were the antithesis of both the British and the American constitutions .
Burke was interrupted , and Fox intervened , saying that Burke should be allowed to carry on with his speech .
A vote of censure was moved against Burke , however , for noticing the affairs of France , which was moved by Lord Sheffield and seconded by Fox .
Pitt made a speech praising Burke , and Fox made a speech -- both rebuking and complimenting Burke .
This provoked a reply from Fox , yet he was unable to give his speech for some time since he was overcome with tears and emotion , he appealed to Burke to remember their inalienable friendship , but also repeated his criticisms of Burke and uttered `` unusually bitter sarcasms '' .
This only aggravated the rupture between the two men .
Burke wrote that he wanted to represent the whole Whig party `` as tolerating , and by a toleration , countenancing those proceedings '' so that he could `` stimulate them to a public declaration of what every one of their acquaintance privately knows to be ... their sentiments '' .
Fitzwilliam saw the Appeal as containing `` the doctrines I have sworn by , long and long since '' .
Burke sent a copy of the Appeal to the king and the king requested a friend to communicate to Burke that he had read it `` with great Satisfaction '' .
Burke wrote of its reception : `` Not one word from one of our party .
They agree with me to a title ; but they dare not speak out for fear of hurting Fox .
... They leave me to myself ; they see that I can do myself justice '' .
Dundas did not follow Burke 's advice , however .
Burke was forced to reply on 6 November : `` I am not in His Majesty 's Service ; or at all consulted in his Affairs '' .
He argued that he was rewarded on merit , but the Duke of Bedford received his rewards from inheritance alone , his ancestor being the original pensioner : `` Mine was from a mild and benevolent sovereign ; his from Henry the Eighth '' .
Burke also hinted at what would happen to such people if their revolutionary ideas were implemented , and included a description of the British constitution :
Burke regarded this as appeasement , injurious to national dignity and honour .
The State is all in all .
Everything is referred to the production of force ; afterwards , everything is trusted to the use of it .
It is military in its principle , in its maxims , in its spirit , and in all its movements .
This is held to be the first explanation of the modern concept of totalitarian state .
In it , Burke expounded `` some of the doctrines of political economists bearing upon agriculture as a trade '' .
Burke criticised policies such as maximum prices and state regulation of wages , and set out what the limits of government should be :
The last is the greatest evil '' .
In some Cases they act separately , in some they act in conjunction : But of this I am sure ; that the first is the worst by far , and the hardest to deal with ; and for this amongst other reasons , that it weakens discredits , and ruins that force , which ought to be employed with the greatest Credit and Energy against the other ; and that it furnishes Jacobinism with its strongest arms against all formal Government '' .
He viewed the social changes brought on by property as the natural order of events , which should be taking place as the human race progressed .
With the division of property and the class system , he also believed that it kept the monarch in check to the needs of the classes beneath the monarch .
Concern for property is not Burke 's only influence .
In the nineteenth century Burke was praised by both liberals and conservatives .
William Hazlitt , a political opponent of Burke , regarded him as amongst his three favourite writers -LRB- the others being Junius and Rousseau -RRB- , and made it `` a test of the sense and candour of any one belonging to the opposite party , whether he allowed Burke to be a great man '' .
In his Two Addresses to the Freeholders of Westmorland Wordsworth called Burke `` the most sagacious Politician of his age '' whose predictions `` time has verified '' .
He later revised his poem The Prelude to include praise of Burke -LRB- `` Genius of Burke !
forgive the pen seduced/By specious wonders '' -RRB- and portrayed him as an old oak .
Samuel Taylor Coleridge came to have a similar conversion : he had criticised Burke in The Watchman , but in his Friend -LRB- 1809 -- 10 -RRB- Coleridge defended Burke from charges of inconsistency .
Later , in his Biographia Literaria -LRB- 1817 -RRB- Coleridge hails Burke as a prophet and praises Burke for referring `` habitually to principles .
He was a scientific statesman ; and therefore a seer '' .
Henry Brougham wrote of Burke : '' ... all his predictions , save one momentary expression , had been more than fulfilled : anarchy and bloodshed had borne sway in France ; conquest and convulsion had desolated Europe ... the providence of mortals is not often able to penetrate so far as this into futurity '' .
George Canning believed that Burke 's Reflections `` has been justified by the course of subsequent events ; and almost every prophecy has been strictly fulfilled '' .
In 1823 Canning wrote that he took Burke 's `` last works and words -LSB- as -RSB- the manual of my politics '' .
The Conservative Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli `` was deeply penetrated with the spirit and sentiment of Burke 's later writings '' .
The Liberal historian Lord Acton considered Burke one of the three greatest Liberals , along with William Gladstone and Thomas Babington Macaulay .
Lord Macaulay recorded in his diary : `` I have now finished reading again most of Burke 's works .
Admirable !
The Gladstonian Liberal MP John Morley published two books on Burke -LRB- including a biography -RRB- and was influenced by Burke , including his views on prejudice .
In politics he resembled the modern architect who would restore an old house instead of pulling it down to construct a new one on the site '' .
Burke 's Reflections on the Revolution in France was controversial at the time of its publication , but after his death , it was to become his best known and most influential work , and a manifesto for Conservative thinking .
This was Edmund Burke 's paternalistic doctrine that colonial government was a trust .
It was to be so exercised for the benefit of subject people that they would eventually attain their birthright -- freedom '' .
Burke 's religious writing comprises published works and commentary on the subject of religion .
He sharply criticised deism and atheism , and emphasised Christianity as a vehicle of social progress .
They developed a unique language and cultural identity .
There followed a series of New Zealand administrators who were responsible for two major incidents .
However , Samoans greatly resented New Zealand 's colonial rule , and blamed inflation and the catastrophic 1918 flu epidemic on its misrule .
Nelson was eventually exiled during the late 1920s and early 1930s , but he continued to assist the organisation financially and politically .
The New Zealand police attempted to arrest one of the leaders in the demonstration .
When he resisted , a struggle developed between the police and the Mau .
The Mau grew , remaining steadfastly non-violent , and expanded to include a highly influential women 's branch .
Samoa also signed a friendship treaty with New Zealand .
The next Head of State , Tuiatua Tupua Tamasese Efi , was elected by the legislature on 17 June 2007 for a fixed five-year term , and was re-elected unopposed in July 2012 .
Universal suffrage was adopted in 1990 , but only chiefs -LRB- matai -RRB- may stand for election to the Samoan seats .
The prime minister 's choices for the 12 cabinet positions are appointed by the head of state , subject to the continuing confidence of the Fono .
The capital village of each district administers and coordinates the affairs of the district and confers each district 's paramount title , amongst other responsibilities .
This is also the same for the other districts .
In modern times , development aid , private family remittances from overseas , and agricultural exports have become key factors in the nation 's economy .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Most are Criollo-Forastero hybrids .
Coffee grows well , but production has been uneven .
Rubber has been produced in Samoa for many years , but its export value has little impact on the economy .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
As such , ancient beliefs continue to co-exist side-by-side with Christianity , particularly in regard to the traditional customs and rituals of fa'a Samoa .
When Christianity was introduced in Samoa , most Samoan people converted .
The late John Kneubuhl , born in American Samoa , was an accomplished playwright and screenwriter and writer .
Momoe Von Reiche is an internationally recognised poet and artist .
Tusiata Avia is a performance poet .
Dan Taulapapa McMullin is an artist and writer .
Other Samoan poets and writers include Sapa'u Ruperake Petaia , Eti Sa'aga and Savea Sano Malifa , the editor of the Samoa Observer .
The music video for Reverse Resistance was filmed in Savai'i at his villages .
Like very many other countries , hip hop music is popular .
In addition , the integration of hip hop elements into Samoan tradition also `` testifies to the transferability of the dance forms themselves , '' and to the `` circuits through which people and all their embodied knowledge travel . ''
Urale 's short film O Tamaiti won the prestigious Best Short Film at the Venice Film Festival in 1996 .
The feature film Siones Wedding , co-written by Oscar Kightley , was financially successful following premieres in Auckland and Apia .
Many Samoans and New Zealanders or Australians of Samoan descent play in the Super League and National Leagues in Britain .
Other noteworthy players from NZ and Australia have represented the Samoan National team .
Montini served in the Vatican 's Secretariat of State from 1922 to 1954 .
While in the Secretariat of State , Montini and Domenico Tardini were considered as the closest and most influential colleagues of Pope Pius XII , who in 1954 named him Archbishop of Milan , the largest Italian diocese .
Montini automatically became the Secretary of the Italian Bishops Conference .
John XXIII elevated him to the College of Cardinals in 1958 , and after the death of John XXIII , Montini was considered one of his most likely successors .
After the council had concluded its work , Paul VI took charge of the interpretation and implementation of its mandates , often walking a thin line between the conflicting expectations of various groups within Catholicism .
The magnitude and depth of the reforms affecting all fields of Church life during his pontificate exceeded similar reform policies of his predecessors and successors .
Following his famous predecessor Saint Ambrose of Milan , he named Mary as the Mother of the Church during the Second Vatican Council .
Paul VI sought dialogue with the world , with other Christians , other religions , and atheists , excluding nobody .
He saw himself as a humble servant for a suffering humanity and demanded significant changes of the rich in North America and Europe in favour of the poor in the Third World .
On 30 September 1897 , he was baptized in the name of Giovanni Battista Enrico Antonio Maria Montini .
He attended Cesare Arici , a school run by the Jesuits , and in 1916 , he received a diploma from Arnaldo da Brescia , a public school in Brescia .
His education was often interrupted by bouts of illness .
He was ordained priest on 29 May 1920 in Brescia and celebrated his first Holy Mass in Brescia in the Basilica of Santa Maria delle Grazie .
Consequently , he spent not a day as a parish priest .
In 1925 he helped found the publishing house Morcelliana in Brescia , focused on promoting a ` Christian inspired culture ' .
The only foreign diplomatic experience Montini underwent was his time in the nunciature in Warsaw , Poland in 1923 .
Then one seeks the expansion of one 's own country at the expense of the immediate neighbours .
People grow up with a feeling of being hemmed in .
From Pius XI , whom he viewed with awe , he adopted the view , that learning is a life long process , and that history was the magister vitae teacher of life His immediate supervisor in the Vatican was Domenico Tardini , with whom he got along well .
He met the pope every morning until 1954 and thus developed a rather close relationship :
Pius XII did not have a personal secretary .
As did several popes before him , he delegated the secretarial functions to the State Secretariat .
Montini was tasked to formulate the replies in the name of Pius XII , expressing his empathy , and understanding and providing help , where possible .
In 1944 , Luigi Maglione died , and Pius XII appointed Tardini and Montini together as heads of the State Department .
As Secretary of State Montini coordinated the activities of assistance to the persecuted hidden in convents , parishes , seminaries , and in ecclesiastical schools .
In Rome alone this organization distributed almost two million portions of free food in the year 1944 .
After the war and later as pope , Montini turned the Pontificia Commissione di Assistenza , into the major charity , Caritas Italiana .
-LSB- b -RSB-
Both Montini and the pope had tears in their eyes when Montini parted for his dioceses with 1,000 churches , 2,500 priests and 3,500,000 souls .
He enjoyed meetings with intellectuals , artists and writers .
His goal was the re-introduction of faith to a city without much religion .
`` If only we can say Our Father and know what this means , then we would understand the Christian faith . ''
We will love all , but especially those , who need help ... We will love our time , our technology , our art , our sports , our world . ''
On 17 November 1958 , L'Osservatore Romano announced a consistory for the creation of new cardinals .
Montini 's name led the list .
Silvestro e Martino ai Monti .
He appointed him simultaneously to several Vatican congregations which resulted in many visits by Montini to Rome in the coming years .
After his journey , John XXIII gave him a private audience on his trip which lasted for several hours .
His rhetoric seems to have had a note of over-optimism , a confidence in progress , which was characteristic of the 1960s . ''
Bea also was strongly involved in the passage of Nostra aetate , which regulates the Church 's relations with the Jewish faith and members of other religions .
-LSB- d -RSB-
After his election as Bishop of Rome , Paul VI first met with the priests in his new dioceses .
In a radio address to the world , Paul VI recalled the uniqueness of his predecessors , the strength of Pius XI , the wisdom and intelligence of Pius XII and the love of John XXIII .
The Unity of Christianity would be central to his activities .
Several texts proposed for his approval had to be changed .
But all texts were finally agreed upon .
He implemented his reforms in stages , rather than in one fell swoop .
This requirement was extended to all Cardinals of the Catholic Church on 21 November 1970 .
With these two stipulations , the Pope filled several positions with younger bishops and cardinals , and further internationalized the Roman Curia in light of several resignations due to age .
Reform of the liturgy had been a part of the liturgical movements in the 20th century mainly in France , and Germany which were officially recognized by Pius XII in his encyclical Mediator Dei .
The Second Vatican Council made no changes to the Roman Missal , but in the document Sacrosanctum Concilium mandated that a general revision of it take place .
There had been other instructions issued by the Pope in 1964 , 1967 , 1968 , 1969 and 1970 which centered on the reform of all liturgies of the Roman Church .
These major reforms were not welcomed by all and in all countries .
In 1971 , Paul VI created a papal office for economic development and catastrophic assistance .
The situation of the Church in Hungary , Poland and Romania , improved during his pontificate .
Peyrefitte had previously published the accusation in two books , but the interview -LRB- previously published in a French gay magazine -RRB- brought the rumors to a wider public and caused an uproar .
Special prayers for Montini were said in all Italian Roman Catholic churches in `` a day of consolation '' .
In 1984 a New York Times correspondent repeated the allegations .
With his travels he opened new avenues for the papacy , which were continued by his successors John Paul II and Benedict XVI .
In 1966 , however , he was twice denied permission to visit Poland for the 1,000 th anniversary of the baptism of Poland .
In 1967 , however , fifty years after the first apparition , he visited Fátima in Portugal .
He undertook a pastoral visit to Africa in 1969 .
As a gesture of goodwill , the pope gave to the UN two pieces of papal jewelry , a diamond cross and ring , with the hopes that the proceeds from their sale at auction would contribute to the UN 's efforts to end human suffering .
It is considered an important document , identifying the Catholic Church with the Body of Christ .
Paul VI appealed to `` all people of good will '' and discussed necessary dialogues within the Church and between the Churches and with atheism .
This encyclical was written in the wake of Vatican II , when the Catholic Church was questioning and revising many long-held practices .
Priestly celibacy is considered a discipline rather than dogma , and some had expected that it might be relaxed .
In response to these questions , the Pope reaffirms the discipline as a long-held practice with special importance in the Catholic Church .
The encyclical Sacerdotalis caelibatus from 24 June 1967 , confirms the traditional Church teaching , that celibacy is an ideal state and continues to be mandatory for Roman Catholic priests .
The priestly celibacy is closely linked to the sacramental priesthood .
which were noted by the Pope in his encyclical The expressed views of Paul VI reflected the teachings of his predecessors , especially Pius XI , Pius XII and John XXIII and never changed , as he repeatedly stated them in the first few years of his Pontificate
For this reason , Paul VI teaches in the first sentence of Humanae vitae that the transmission of human life is a most serious role in which married people collaborate freely and responsibly with God the Creator .
This divine partnership , according to Paul VI , does not allow for arbitrary human decisions , which may limit divine providence .
The Pope does not paint an overly romantic picture of marriage : marital relations are a source of great joy , but also of difficulties and hardships .
The question of human procreation exceeds in the view of Paul VI specific disciplines such as biology , psychology , demography or sociology .
From this basic dignity , he defines his position :
The reaction to the encyclical 's continued prohibitions of artificial birth control was very mixed .
In Italy , Spain , Portugal and Poland , the encyclical was welcomed .
In Latin America , much support developed for the Pope and his encyclical .
The Senate of Bolivia passed a resolution stating that Humanae vitae could be discussed in its implications for individual consciences , but was of greatest significance because the papal document defended the rights of developing nations to determine their own population policies .
The Jesuit Journal Sic dedicated one edition to the encyclical with supportive contributions .
Paul VI was concerned but not surprised by the negative reaction in Western Europe and the United States .
His biography on the Vatican 's website notes of his reaffirmations of priestly celibacy and the traditional teaching on contraception that '' -LSB- t -RSB- he controversies over these two pronouncements tended to overshadow the last years of his pontificate '' .
The separated brothers and sisters , as he called them , were not able to contribute to the Council as invited observers .
But the Catholic Church itself recognized from the many previous ecumenical encounters , that much needed to be done within , to be an open partner for ecumenism .
To those who are entrusted the highest and deepest truth and therefore , so Paul VI , believed that he had the most difficult part to communicate .
Paul VI , like Pius XII before him , was reluctant to give in on a lowest possible point .
These words meant to Paul VI love without limits , and they underscore the Church 's fundamental approach to ecumenism .
This was a significant step towards restoring communion between Rome and Constantinople .
The declaration did not end the schism , but showed a desire for greater reconciliation between the two churches .
A common declaration and a joint Creed issued after the visit demonstrated that there are virtually no more -LSB- additional citation needed -RSB- theological discrepancies between the Coptic and Roman Catholic Churches .
He praised Paul VI -LSB- e -RSB- and his contributions in the service of unity .
Paul replied that `` by entering into our house , you are entering your own house , we are happy to open our door and heart to you . ''
The two Church leaders signed a common declaration , which put an end to the disputes of the past and outlined a common agenda for the future .
God wants it .
Humanity is waiting for it . ''
This resulted in a joint Malta declaration , the first joint agreement on the Creed since the Reformation .
This description was unique to Paul and not used by later popes .
In the following three years , eight sessions were held which resulted in many joint proposals .
It was proposed to work closely together in areas of social justice and development and Third World Issues such as hunger and poverty .
On the religious side , it was agreed to share together in the Week of Prayer for Christian Unity , to be held every year .
The joint working group was to prepare texts which were to be used by all Christians .
He sent his blessing in an ecumenical manner : `` May the Lord bless everything you do for the case of Christian Unity . ''
It resulted in joint study groups of several issues .
The Reformed Churches entered four years later into a dialogue with the Catholic Church .
He welcomed the announcement of Pope Paul VI to celebrate the 1900th anniversary of the death of the Apostle Peter and Apostle Paul , and promised the participation and cooperation in the festivities .
Pope Paul was asked towards the end of his papacy whether he would retire at age 80 , he replied `` Kings can abdicate , Popes can not . ''
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
He had breathing problems and needed oxygen .
On Sunday , at the Feast of the Transfiguration , he was tired , but wanted to say the Angelus .
He was neither able nor permitted to do so and instead stayed in bed , his temperature rising .
On 20 December 2012 , Pope Benedict XVI , in an audience with the Cardinal Prefect of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints , declared that the late pontiff had lived a life of heroic virtue , which means that he could be called `` Venerable '' .
On basic Church teachings , the pope was unwavering .
In his style and methodology , he was a disciple of Pius XII , whom he deeply revered .
In doing so , Paul VI saw himself following in the footsteps of the Apostle Paul , torn to several directions as Saint Paul , who said , `` I am attracted to two sides at once , because the Cross always divides . ''
He admonished but did not punish those with other views .
Conservatives complained , that `` women wanted to be priests , priests wanted to get married , bishops became regional popes and theologians claimed absolute teaching authority .
Protestants claimed equality , homosexuals and divorced called for full acceptance . ''
According to his will , he was buried in the grottos of the Vatican not in an ornate tomb , but in a grave in the ground .
He is buried beneath the floor of Saint Peter 's Basilica with other popes .
In his will , he requested to be buried in the `` true earth '' and therefore , he does not have an ornate sarcophagus but an in-ground grave .
With the six consistories , Paul VI continued the internationalization policies started by Pius XII in 1946 and continued by John XXIII .
There were voices within the Church at the time saying that the European period of the Church was coming to a close , a view shared by Britain 's Cardinal Basil Hume .
The increased number of Cardinals from the Third World and the papal emphasis on related issues was nevertheless welcomed by many in Western Europe .
He became the first pope to visit five continents .
Until then , only Cardinals could be leading members of the Curia .
The parliament of the Irish Free State removed direct mention of the monarch from the country 's constitution on the day of his accession .
From 1939 , the Empire and Commonwealth , except Ireland , was at war with Nazi Germany .
War with Italy and Japan followed in 1940 and 1941 , respectively .
George adopted the new title of Head of the Commonwealth .
He was beset by health problems in the later years of his reign .
Uncertain of how the Prince Consort 's widow , Queen Victoria , would take the news of the birth , the Prince of Wales wrote to the Duke of York that the Queen had been `` rather distressed '' .
Two days later , he wrote again : `` I really think it would gratify her if you yourself proposed the name Albert to her '' .
Queen Victoria was mollified by the proposal to name the new baby Albert , and wrote to the Duchess of York : `` I am all impatience to see the new one , born on such a sad day but rather more dear to me , especially as he will be called by that dear name which is a byword for all that is great and good '' .
His maternal grandmother , the Duchess of Teck , did not like the first name the baby had been given , and she wrote prophetically that she hoped the last name `` may supplant the less favoured one '' .
He was mentioned in despatches for his action as a turret officer aboard Collingwood in the Battle of Jutland -LRB- 31 May -- 1 June 1916 -RRB- , an indecisive engagement with the German navy that was the largest naval action of the war .
With the establishment of the Royal Air Force two months later and the transfer of Cranwell from Navy to Air Force control , he transferred from the Royal Navy to the Royal Air Force .
He was the first member of the royal family to be certified as a fully qualified pilot .
During the closing weeks of the war , he served on the staff of the RAF 's Independent Air Force at its headquarters in Nancy , France .
Following the disbanding of the Independent Air Force in November 1918 , he remained on the Continent for two months as a staff officer with the Royal Air Force until posted back to Britain .
On 4 June 1920 , he was created Duke of York , Earl of Inverness and Baron Killarney .
He began to take on more royal duties .
He represented his father , and toured coal mines , factories , and railyards .
He played at Wimbledon in the Men 's Doubles with Louis Greig in 1926 , losing in the first round .
His series of annual summer camps for boys between 1921 and 1939 brought together boys from different social backgrounds .
He became determined to marry her .
In the words of Lady Elizabeth 's mother , Albert would be `` made or marred '' by his choice of wife .
After a protracted courtship , Elizabeth agreed to marry him .
The Duke and Logue practised breathing exercises , and the Duchess rehearsed with him patiently .
Subsequently , he was able to speak with less hesitation .
They were a close and loving family .
Less than a year later , on 11 December 1936 , Edward VIII abdicated in order to marry his mistress , Wallis Simpson , who was divorced from her first husband and divorcing her second .
Thus Albert became king , a position he was reluctant to accept .
The two acts made the Irish Free State a republic in essence without removing its links to the Commonwealth .
The beginning of George VI 's reign was taken up by questions surrounding his predecessor and brother , whose titles , style and position were uncertain .
He had been introduced as `` His Royal Highness Prince Edward '' for the abdication broadcast , but George VI felt that by abdicating and renouncing the succession Edward had lost the right to bear royal titles , including `` Royal Highness '' .
Rising Indian nationalism made the welcome that the royal couple would have received likely to be muted at best , and a prolonged absence from Britain would have been undesirable in the tense period before the Second World War .
The growing likelihood of war in Europe dominated the early reign of George VI .
This public association of the monarchy with a politician was exceptional , as balcony appearances were traditionally restricted to the royal family .
George was the first reigning monarch of Canada to visit North America , although he had been to Canada previously as Prince Albert and as Duke of York .
The official royal tour historian , Gustave Lanctot , wrote `` the Statute of Westminster had assumed full reality '' and George gave a speech emphasising `` the free and equal association of the nations of the Commonwealth '' .
Although the aim of the tour was mainly political , to shore up Atlantic support for the United Kingdom in any future war , the King and Queen were enthusiastically received by the public .
A strong bond of friendship was forged between the King and Queen and the President during the tour , which had major significance in the relations between the United States and the United Kingdom through the ensuing war years .
They officially stayed in Buckingham Palace throughout the war , although they usually spent nights at Windsor Castle .
On 13 September , the King and Queen narrowly avoided death when two German bombs exploded in a courtyard at Buckingham Palace while they were there .
In defiance , the Queen famously declared : `` I am glad we have been bombed .
It makes me feel we can look the East End in the face '' .
The royal family were portrayed as sharing the same dangers and deprivations as the rest of the country .
They were subject to rationing restrictions , and U.S. First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt remarked on the rationed food served and the limited bathwater that was permitted during a stay at the unheated and boarded-up Palace .
Their high public profile and apparently indefatigable determination secured their place as symbols of national resistance .
At a social function in 1944 , Chief of the Imperial General Staff Sir Alan Brooke , revealed that every time he met Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery he thought he was after his job .
The King replied : `` You should worry , when I meet him , I always think he 's after mine ! ''
George VI 's reign saw the acceleration of the dissolution of the British Empire .
The Statute of Westminster 1931 had already acknowledged the evolution of the Dominions into separate sovereign states .
George relinquished the title of Emperor of India , and became King of India and King of Pakistan instead .
In 1950 he ceased to be King of India when it became a republic within the Commonwealth of Nations , but he remained King of Pakistan until his death and India recognised his new title of Head of the Commonwealth .
In 1947 , the King and his family toured Southern Africa .
Despite the tour , Smuts lost the election the following year , and the new government instituted a strict policy of racial segregation .
The King was well enough to open the Festival of Britain in May 1951 , but on 23 September 1951 , his left lung was removed by Clement Price Thomas after a malignant tumour was found .
In October 1951 , Princess Elizabeth and the Duke of Edinburgh went on a month-long tour of Canada ; the trip had been delayed for a week due to the King 's illness .
At the State Opening of Parliament in November , the King 's speech from the throne was read for him by the Lord Chancellor , Lord Simonds .
His Christmas broadcast of 1951 was recorded in sections , and then edited together .
From 9 February for two days his coffin rested in St. Mary Magdalene Church , Sandringham , before lying in state at Westminster Hall from 11 February .
During his reign his people endured the hardships of war , and imperial power was eroded .
However , as a dutiful family man and by showing personal courage , he succeeded in restoring the popularity of the monarchy .
General-purpose motors with highly standardized dimensions and characteristics provide convenient mechanical power for industrial use .
Electric motors may be classified by electric power source type , internal construction , application , type of motion output , and so on .
A free-hanging wire was dipped into a pool of mercury , on which a permanent magnet -LRB- PM -RRB- was placed .
When a current was passed through the wire , the wire rotated around the magnet , showing that the current gave rise to a close circular magnetic field around the wire .
Though Barlow 's wheel was an early refinement to this Faraday demonstration , these and similar homopolar motors were to remain unsuited to practical application until late in the century .
Several inventors followed Sturgeon in the development of DC motors but all encountered the same battery power cost issues .
Like Sturgeon 's motor , there was no practical commercial market for these motors .
-LRB- See also 1873 : l'expérience décisive -LSB- Decisive Workaround -RSB- . -RRB-
Sprague 's motor and related inventions led to an explosion of interest and use in electric motors for industry , while almost simultaneously another great inventor was developing its primary competitor , which would become much more widespread .
The development of electric motors of acceptable efficiency was delayed for several decades by failure to recognize the extreme importance of a relatively small air gap between rotor and stator .
-LSB- a -RSB- The St. Louis motor , long used in classrooms to illustrate motor principles , is extremely inefficient for the same reason , as well as appearing nothing like a modern motor .
Application of electric motors revolutionized industry .
Instead every machine could be equipped with its own electric motor , providing easy control at the point of use , and improving power transmission efficiency .
The first alternating-current commutatorless induction motors were independently invented by Galileo Ferraris and Nikola Tesla , a working motor model having been demonstrated by the former in 1885 and by the latter in 1887 .
In 1888 , the Royal Academy of Science of Turin published Ferraris ' research detailing the foundations of motor operation while however concluding that `` the apparatus based on that principle could not be of any commercial importance as motor . ''
In 1888 , Tesla presented his paper A New System for Alternating Current Motors and Transformers to the AIEE that described three patented two-phase four-stator-pole motor types : one with a four-pole rotor forming a non-self-starting reluctance motor , another with a wound rotor forming a self-starting induction motor , and the third a true synchronous motor with separately excited DC supply to rotor winding .
One of the patents Tesla filed in 1887 , however , also described a shorted-winding-rotor induction motor .
Steadfast in his promotion of three-phase development , Mikhail Dolivo-Dobrovolsky invented the three-phase cage-rotor induction motor in 1889 and the three-limb transformer in 1890 .
This type of motor is now used for the vast majority of commercial applications .
However , he claimed that Tesla 's motor was not practical because of two-phase pulsations , which prompted him to persist in his three-phase work .
Although Westinghouse achieved its first practical induction motor in 1892 and developed a line of polyphase 60 hertz induction motors in 1893 , these early Westinghouse motors were two-phase motors with wound rotors until B. G. Lamme developed a rotating bar winding rotor .
The General Electric Company began developing three-phase induction motors in 1891 .
Induction motor improvements flowing from these inventions and innovations were such that a 100 horsepower -LRB- HP -RRB- induction motor currently has the same mounting dimensions as a 7.5 HP motor in 1897 .
A commutated DC motor has a set of rotating windings wound on an armature mounted on a rotating shaft .
The rotating armature consists of one or more coils of wire wound around a laminated , magnetically `` soft '' ferromagnetic core .
The magnetic field produced by the armature interacts with a stationary magnetic field produced by either PMs or another winding a field coil , as part of the motor frame .
Sparks are created by the brushes making and breaking circuits through the rotor coils as the brushes cross the insulating gaps between commutator sections .
Depending on the commutator design , this may include the brushes shorting together adjacent sections -- and hence coil ends -- momentarily while crossing the gaps .
Furthermore , the inductance of the rotor coils causes the voltage across each to rise when its circuit is opened , increasing the sparking of the brushes .
The current density per unit area of the brushes , in combination with their resistivity , limits the output of the motor .
The commutator assembly on a large motor is a costly element , requiring precision assembly of many parts .
On small motors , the commutator is usually permanently integrated into the rotor , so replacing it usually requires replacing the whole rotor .
-LRB- Small brushes are also desirable for lower cost . -RRB-
Compensating windings in series with the armature may be used on large motors to improve commutation under load .
Most larger DC motors are of the `` dynamo '' type , which have stator windings .
However , large PMs are costly , as well as dangerous and difficult to assemble ; this favors wound fields for large machines .
Universal motors also formed the basis of the traditional railway traction motor in electric railways .
Household blenders that advertise many speeds frequently combine a field coil with several taps and a diode that can be inserted in series with the motor -LRB- causing the motor to run on half-wave rectified AC -RRB- .
Universal motors also lend themselves to electronic speed control and , as such , are an ideal choice for devices like domestic washing machines .
They are also commonly used in portable power tools , such as drills , sanders , circular and jig saws , where the motor 's characteristics work well .
Currents induced into this winding provide the rotor magnetic field .
At low speeds , the current induced in the squirrel cage is nearly at line frequency and tends to be in the outer parts of the rotor cage .
However , the majority of such motors have uniform bars .
In a WRIM , the rotor winding is made of many turns of insulated wire and is connected to slip rings on the motor shaft .
When used with a load that has a torque curve that increases with speed , the motor will operate at the speed where the torque developed by the motor is equal to the load torque .
A common application of a torque motor would be the supply - and take-up reel motors in a tape drive .
Another common application is the control of the throttle of an internal combustion engine in conjunction with an electronic governor .
In this usage , the motor works against a return spring to move the throttle in accordance with the output of the governor .
If the engine starts to slow down relative to the desired speed , the current will be increased , the motor will develop more torque , pulling against the return spring and opening the throttle .
A synchronous electric motor is an AC motor distinguished by a rotor spinning with coils passing magnets at the same rate as the AC and resulting magnetic field which drives it .
The rotor poles connect to each other and move at the same speed hence the name synchronous motor .
Another type , for low load torque , has flats ground onto a conventional squirrel-cage rotor to create discrete poles .
Yet another , such as made by Hammond for its pre-World War II clocks , and in the older Hammond organs , has no rotor windings and discrete poles .
It is not self-starting .
Finally , hysteresis synchronous motors typically are -LRB- essentially -RRB- two-phase motors with a phase-shifting capacitor for one phase .
The rotor material , like that of a common nail , will stay magnetized , but can also be demagnetized with little difficulty .
Two independent multiphase winding sets -LRB- i.e. , dual armature -RRB- are the maximum provided in a single package without topology duplication .
Doubly-fed electric motors are machines with an effective constant torque speed range that is twice synchronous speed for a given frequency of excitation .
Nothing in the principle of any of the motors described above requires that the iron -LRB- steel -RRB- portions of the rotor actually rotate .
If the soft magnetic material of the rotor is made in the form of a cylinder , then -LRB- except for the effect of hysteresis -RRB- torque is exerted only on the windings of the electromagnets .
Taking advantage of this fact is the coreless or ironless DC motor , a specialized form of a PM DC motor .
The rotor can fit inside the stator magnets ; a magnetically soft stationary cylinder inside the rotor provides a return path for the stator magnetic flux .
A second arrangement has the rotor winding basket surrounding the stator magnets .
In that design , the rotor fits inside a magnetically soft cylinder that can serve as the housing for the motor , and likewise provides a return path for the flux .
A servomotor is a motor , very often sold as a complete module , which is used within a position-control or speed-control feedback control system mainly control valves , such as motor-operated control valves .
The speed vs. torque curve is quite important and is high ratio for a servo motor .
AC motors ' superior power density and acceleration characteristics compared to that of DC motors tends to favor PM synchronous , BLDC , induction , and SRM drive applications .
In a stepper motor an internal rotor containing PMs or a magnetically soft rotor with salient poles is controlled by a set of external magnets that are switched electronically .
Stepper motors can be rotated to a specific angle in discrete steps with ease , and hence stepper motors are used for read/write head positioning in computer floppy diskette drives .
They were used for the same purpose in pre-gigabyte era computer disk drives , where the precision and speed they offered was adequate for the correct positioning of the read/write head of a hard disk drive .
This structure was used for a while to position the heads .
Modern drives have a pivoted coil mount ; the coil swings back and forth , something like a blade of a rotating fan .
Since the armature windings of a direct-current or universal motor are moving through a magnetic field , they have a voltage induced in them .
This provides the fundamental mechanism of speed regulation in a DC motor .
This increased current provides the additional torque to balance the new load .
The current flowing in the winding is producing the fields and for a motor using a magnetic material the field is not linearly proportional to the current .
This makes the calculation difficult but a computer can do the many calculations needed .
Some applications require bursts of torque beyond the maximum operating torque , such as short bursts of torque to accelerate an electric vehicle from standstill .
If a precision means were available to instantaneously control torque angle and slip for synchronous operation during motoring or generating while simultaneously providing brushless power to the rotor winding set , the active current of the BWRSDF machine would be independent of the reactive impedance of the transformer circuit and bursts of torque significantly higher than the maximum operating torque and far beyond the practical capability of any other type of electric machine would be realizable .
Conventional electric motors instead employ magnetic attraction and repulsion , and require high current at low voltages .
Also , the molecular machinery which runs living cells is often based on linear and rotary electrostatic motors .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- note 3 -RSB- The country is situated in Western and Central Europe , -LSB- note 4 -RSB- and is bordered by Italy to the south , France to the west , Germany to the north , and Austria and Liechtenstein to the east .
Nevertheless , it pursues an active foreign policy and is frequently involved in peace-building processes around the world .
On the European level , it is a founding member of the European Free Trade Association , but notably it is not part of the European Union , nor the European Economic Area .
However the country does participate in the Schengen Area and the EU 's single market through a number of bilateral treaties .
-LSB- note 6 -RSB-
The name originates as an exonym , applied pars pro toto to the troops of the Confederacy .
The Swiss began to adopt the name for themselves after the Swabian War of 1499 , used alongside the term for `` Confederates '' , Eidgenossen -LRB- literally : comrades by oath -RRB- , used since the 14th century .
One of the most important tribal groups in the Swiss region was the Helvetii .
The area occupied by the Helvetii -- the namesakes of the later Confoederatio Helvetica -- first became part of Rome 's Gallia Belgica province and then of its Germania Superior province , while the eastern portion of modern Switzerland was integrated into the Roman province of Raetia .
This ended the so-called `` heroic '' epoch of Swiss history .
It had been imposed by a foreign invading army and destroyed centuries of tradition , making Switzerland nothing more than a French satellite state .
The fierce French suppression of the Nidwalden Revolt in September 1798 was an example of the oppressive presence of the French Army and the local population 's resistance to the occupation .
In 1803 Napoleon organised a meeting of the leading Swiss politicians from both sides in Paris .
Henceforth , much of Swiss politics would concern balancing the cantons ' tradition of self-rule with the need for a central government .
The restoration of power to the patriciate was only temporary .
Referenda were made mandatory for any amendment of this constitution .
Switzerland was able to remain independent through a combination of military deterrence , concessions to Germany , and good fortune as larger events during the war delayed an invasion .
Switzerland was an important base for espionage by both sides in the conflict and often mediated communications between the Axis and Allied powers .
Economic cooperation and extension of credit to the Third Reich varied according to the perceived likelihood of invasion and the availability of other trading partners .
An application for membership in the European Union was sent in May 1992 , but not advanced since the EEA was rejected in December 1992 when Switzerland was the only country to launch a referendum on the EEA .
There have since been several referenda on the EU issue ; due to a mixed reaction from the population the membership application has been frozen .
Nonetheless , Swiss law is gradually being adjusted to conform with that of the EU , and the government has signed a number of bilateral agreements with the European Union .
Switzerland lies between latitudes 45 ° and 48 ° N , and longitudes 5 ° and 11 ° E .
Among the high valleys of the Swiss Alps many glaciers are found , totalling an area of 1,063 square kilometres -LRB- 410 sq mi -RRB- .
From these originate the headwaters of several major rivers , such as the Rhine , Inn , Ticino and Rhône , which flow in the four cardinal directions into the whole of Europe .
The hydrographic network includes several of the largest bodies of freshwater in Central and Western Europe , among which are included Lake Geneva -LRB- also called le Lac Léman in French -RRB- , Lake Constance -LRB- known as Bodensee in German -RRB- and Lake Maggiore .
Switzerland has more than 1500 lakes , and contains 6 % of Europe 's stock of fresh water .
Lakes and glaciers cover about 6 % of the national territory .
The largest lake is Lake Geneva , in western Switzerland shared with France .
The Rhône is both the main source and outflow of Lake Geneva .
While the Rhône flows into the Mediterranean Sea at the French Camarque region and the Rhine flows into the North Sea at Rotterdam in the Netherlands , about 1000 km apart , both springs are only about 22 km apart from each other in the Swiss Alps .
The section of the Bernese Alps above the deep glacial Lauterbrunnen valley , containing 72 waterfalls , is well known for the Jungfrau -LRB- 4,158 m or 13,642 ft -RRB- Eiger and Mönch , and the many picturesque valleys in the region .
In the southeast the long Engadin Valley , encompassing the St. Moritz area in canton of Graubünden , is also well known ; the highest peak in the neighbouring Bernina Alps is Piz Bernina -LRB- 4,049 m or 13,284 ft -RRB- .
There are some valley areas in the southern part of Switzerland where some cold-hardy palm trees are found .
Valleys running south to north trigger the best effect .
Switzerland 's ecosystems can be particularly fragile , because the many delicate valleys separated by high mountains often form unique ecologies .
It is among the oldest constitutions in the world .
It outlines basic and political rights of individuals and citizen participation in public affairs , divides the powers between the Confederation and the cantons and defines federal jurisdiction and authority .
However , the president is a primus inter pares with no additional powers , and remains the head of a department within the administration .
-LSB- note 9 -RSB-
The cantons have a permanent constitutional status and , in comparison with the situation in other countries , a high degree of independence .
Each canton has its own constitution , and its own parliament , government and courts .
The Cantons comprise a total of 2,485 municipalities .
Within Switzerland there are two enclaves : Büsingen belongs to Germany , Campione d'Italia belongs to Italy .
Switzerland maintains diplomatic relations with almost all countries and historically has served as an intermediary between other states .
However , Switzerland does participate in the Schengen Area .
A large number of international institutions have their seats in Switzerland , in part because of its policy of neutrality .
Some organizations and political parties find this practice controversial but mainstream Swiss opinion is in favour of the system .
Men usually receive military conscription orders for training at the age of 18 .
About two thirds of the young Swiss are found suited for service ; for those found unsuited , various forms of alternative service exist .
Annually , approximately 20,000 persons are trained in recruit centres for a duration from 18 to 21 weeks .
Switzerland has a stable , prosperous and high-tech economy and enjoys great wealth , being ranked as the wealthiest country in the world per capita in multiple rankings .
In 2011 it was ranked as the wealthiest country in the world in per capita terms -LRB- with `` wealth '' being defined to include both financial and non-financial assets -RRB- , while the 2013 Credit Suisse Global Wealth Report showed that Switzerland was the country with the highest average wealth per adult in 2013 .
It is the twentieth largest exporter , despite its small size .
The nominal per capita GDP is higher than those of the larger Western and Central European economies and Japan .
For much of the 20th century , Switzerland was the wealthiest country in Europe by a considerable margin -LRB- by GDP -- per capita -RRB- .
Switzerland also has one of the world 's largest account balances as a percentage of GDP .
Manufacturing consists largely of the production of specialist chemicals , health and pharmaceutical goods , scientific and precision measuring instruments and musical instruments .
The service sector -- especially banking and insurance , tourism , and international organisations -- is another important industry for Switzerland .
Switzerland has a more flexible job market than neighbouring countries and the unemployment rate is very low .
Population growth from net immigration is quite high , at 0.52 % of population in 2004 .
GDP per hour worked is the world 's 16th highest , at 49.46 international dollars in 2012 .
The slow growth Switzerland experienced in the 1990s and the early 2000s has brought greater support for economic reforms and harmonization with the European Union .
Housing and food price levels were 171 % and 145 % of the EU-25 index in 2007 , compared to 113 % and 104 % in Germany .
The expenditures of the Swiss Confederation have been growing from 7 % of GDP in 1960 to 9.7 % in 1990 and to 10.7 % in 2010 .
There are both public and private schools , including many private international schools .
The two institutes sponsored by the federal government are the ETHZ in Zürich -LRB- founded 1855 -RRB- and the EPFL in Lausanne -LRB- founded 1969 as such , formerly an institute associated with the University of Lausanne -RRB- which both have an excellent international reputation .
-LSB- note 10 -RSB-
More recently Vladimir Prelog , Heinrich Rohrer , Richard Ernst , Edmond Fischer , Rolf Zinkernagel and Kurt Wüthrich received Nobel prizes in the sciences .
Another important research center is the Paul Scherrer Institute .
The western French-speaking areas and the urban regions of the rest of the country tend to be more pro-EU , however with far from any significant share of the population .
The government has established an Integration Office under the Department of Foreign Affairs and the Department of Economic Affairs .
These agreements were signed in 1999 and took effect in 2001 .
They continue to discuss further areas for cooperation .
A further referendum will be needed to approve 300 million francs to support Romania and Bulgaria and their recent admission .
Preparatory discussions are being opened in four new areas : opening up the electricity market , participation in the European GNSS project Galileo , cooperating with the European centre for disease prevention and recognising certificates of origin for food products .
`` Fukushima showed that the risk of nuclear power is too high , which in turn has also increased the costs of this energy form . ''
Parliament will discuss the plan in June 2011 , and there could be a referendum as well .
The Swiss autobahn/autoroute network has a total length of 1,638 km -LRB- 1,018 mi -RRB- -LRB- as of 2000 -RRB- and has , by an area of 41,290 km2 -LRB- 15,940 sq mi -RRB- , also one of the highest motorway densities in the world .
The other international airports are Geneva Airport -LRB- 13.9 million passengers in 2012 -RRB- , EuroAirport Basel-Mulhouse-Freiburg which is located in France , Bern Airport , Lugano Airport , St. Gallen-Altenrhein Airport and Sion Airport .
Its main hub is Zürich .
In many places in Switzerland , household rubbish disposal is charged for .
Illegal disposal of garbage is not tolerated but usually the enforcement of such laws is limited to violations that involve the unlawful disposal of larger volumes at traffic intersections and public areas .
Most of these -LRB- 64 % -RRB- were from European Union or EFTA countries .
They were closely followed by Germans -LRB- 15.2 % -RRB- , immigrants from Portugal -LRB- 12.7 % -RRB- , France -LRB- 5.6 % -RRB- , Serbia -LRB- 5.3 % -RRB- , Turkey -LRB- 3.8 % -RRB- , Spain -LRB- 3.7 % -RRB- , and Austria -LRB- 2 % -RRB- .
Immigrants from Sri Lanka , most of them former Tamil refugees , were the largest group among people of Asian origin -LRB- 6.3 % -RRB- .
A third of this population -LRB- 853,000 -RRB- held Swiss citizenship .
In reply to one critical report the Federal Council noted that `` racism unfortunately is present in Switzerland '' , but stated that the high proportion of foreign citizens in the country , as well as the generally unproblematic integration of foreigners '' , underlined Switzerland 's openness .
However , federal laws and other official acts do not need to be decreed in Romansh .
German Helvetisms are , roughly speaking , a large group of words typical of Swiss Standard German , which do not appear either in Standard German , nor in other German dialects .
These include terms from Switzerland 's surrounding language cultures -LRB- German Billette from French -RRB- , from similar term in another language -LRB- Italian azione used not only as act but also as discount from German Aktion -RRB- .
The French spoken in Switzerland has similar terms , which are equally known as Helvetisms .
Duden , one of the prescriptive sources for Standard German , is aware of about 3000 Helvetisms .
While the cost of the system is among the highest it compares well with other European countries in terms of health outcomes ; patients who are citizens have been reported as being , in general , highly satisfied with it .
However , spending on health is particularly high at 11.4 % of GDP -LRB- 2010 -RRB- , on par with Germany and France -LRB- 11.6 % -RRB- and other European countries , and notably less than spending in the USA -LRB- 17.6 % -RRB- .
Since 1935 urban development has claimed as much of the Swiss landscape as it did during the previous 2,000 years .
This urban sprawl does not only affect the plateau but also the Jura and the Alpine foothills and there are growing concerns about land use .
Switzerland has a dense network of cities , where large , medium and small cities are complementary .
In international comparison the importance of these urban areas is stronger than their number of inhabitants suggests .
There has been a recent rise in Evangelicalism .
The country was historically about evenly balanced between Catholic and Protestant , with a complex patchwork of majorities over most of the country .
One canton , Appenzell , was officially divided into Catholic and Protestant sections in 1597 .
The larger cities and their cantons -LRB- Bern , Geneva , Lausanne , Zürich and Basel -RRB- used to be predominantly Protestant .
Central Switzerland , the Valais , the Ticino , Appenzell Innerrhodes , the Jura , and Fribourg are traditionally Catholic .
Some traditionally Protestant cantons and cities nowadays have a slight Catholic majority , not because they were growing in members , quite the contrary , but only because since about 1970 a steadily growing minority became not affiliated with any church or other religious body -LRB- 21.4 % in Switzerland , 2012 -RRB- especially in traditionally Protestant regions , such as Basel-City -LRB- 42 % -RRB- , canton of Neuchâtel -LRB- 38 % -RRB- , canton of Geneva -LRB- 35 % -RRB- , canton of Vaud -LRB- 26 % -RRB- , or Zürich city -LRB- city : > 25 % ; canton : 23 % -RRB- .
Swiss culture is characterised by diversity , which is reflected in a wide range of traditional customs .
A region may be in some ways strongly culturally connected to the neighbouring country that shares its language , the country itself being rooted in western European culture .
Other areas throughout the year have a recreational culture that caters to tourism , yet the quieter seasons are spring and autumn when there are fewer visitors .
Folk art is kept alive in organisations all over the country .
In Switzerland it is mostly expressed in music , dance , poetry , wood carving and embroidery .
SRG SSR studios are distributed throughout the various language regions .
An extensive cable network also allows most Swiss to access the programs from neighboring countries .
The latter town hosted the second Winter Olympic Games in 1928 and the fifth edition in 1948 .
Among the most successful skiers and world champions are Pirmin Zurbriggen and Didier Cuche .
The Swiss Super League is the nation 's professional club league .
For the Brasil 2014 World Cup finals tournament , the country 's German-speaking cantons will be closely monitored by local police forces to prevent celebrations beyond one hour after matches end .
Many Swiss also follow ice hockey and support one of the 12 clubs in the League A , which is the most attended league in Europe .
It also became World Vice-Champion in 2013 .
The numerous lakes make Switzerland an attractive place for sailing .
Tennis has become an increasingly popular sport , and Swiss players such as Martina Hingis , Roger Federer , and most recently , Stanislas Wawrinka have won multiple Grand Slams .
Switzerland also won the A1GP World Cup of Motorsport in 2007 -- 08 with driver Neel Jani .
It is an old tradition from the rural central cantons and considered the national sport by some .
The cuisine of Switzerland is multifaceted .
The Merlot is the main variety produced in Ticino .
Mali -LRB- i / ˈmɑːli / ; French : -LSB- maˈli -RSB- -RRB- , officially the Republic of Mali -LRB- French : République du Mali -RRB- , is a landlocked country in West Africa .
The population of Mali is 14.5 million .
The country 's economy centers on agriculture and fishing .
About half the population lives below the international poverty line of $ 1.25 -LRB- U.S. -RRB- a day .
During its golden age , there was a flourishing of mathematics , astronomy , literature , and art .
At its peak in 1300 , the Mali Empire covered an area about twice the size of modern-day France and stretched to the west coast of Africa .
Shortly thereafter , following Senegal 's withdrawal from the federation , the Sudanese Republic declared itself the independent Republic of Mali .
The conflict was complicated by a military coup that took place in March and later fighting between Tuareg and Islamist rebels .
A month later , Malian and French forces recaptured most of the north .
The fall of the Songhai Empire marked the end of the region 's role as a trading crossroads .
The Traoré regime repressed all dissenters until the late 1980s .
Scattered acts of rioting and vandalism of public buildings followed , but most actions by the dissidents remained nonviolent .
In Bamako , in response to mass demonstrations organized by university students and later joined by trade unionists and others , soldiers opened fire indiscriminately on the nonviolent demonstrators .
Riots broke out briefly following the shootings .
Nowadays , the day is a national holiday in order to remember the tragic events and the people that were killed .
-LSB- unreliable source ? -RSB-
The coup is remembered as Mali 's March Revolution of 1991 .
However , Islamist groups including Ansar Dine and Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb -LRB- AQIM -RRB- , who had helped the MNLA defeat the government , turned on the Tuareg and took control of the North with the goal of implementing sharia in Mali .
The thermal equator , which matches the hottest spots year-round on the planet based on the mean daily annual temperature , crosses the country .
Most of Mali receives negligible rainfall and droughts are very frequent .
The central area has a hot semi-arid climate -LRB- Köppen climate classification -LRB- BSh -RRB- with very high temperatures year-round , a long , intense dry season and a brief , irregular rainy season .
The little southern band possesses a tropical wet and dry climate -LRB- Köppen climate classification -LRB- Aw -RRB- very high temperatures year-round with a dry season and a rainy season .
The system of government can be described as `` semi-presidential '' .
Mali 's constitution provides for an independent judiciary , but the executive continues to exercise influence over the judiciary by virtue of power to appoint judges and oversee both judicial functions and law enforcement .
In 2005 , the Malian government conceded a railroad company to the Savage Corporation .
Two major companies , Societé de Telecommunications du Mali -LRB- SOTELMA -RRB- and the Cotton Ginning Company -LRB- CMDT -RRB- , were expected to be privatized in 2008 .
The median age was 15.9 years .
Slavery in Mali has persisted for centuries .
In 2001 , the general government expenditures on health totalled about US$ 4 per capita at an average exchange rate .
The aim was to boost nutrition and livelihoods by producing a product that women could make and sell , and which would be accepted by the local community because of its local heritage .
Medical facilities in Mali are very limited , and medicines are in short supply .
Malian music is diverse and has several different genres .
The decision to adopt a nonprofit legal structure is one that will often have taxation implications , particularly where the nonprofit seeks income tax exemption , charitable status and so on .
Although charities do comprise an often high profile or visible aspect of the sector , there are many other types of nonprofits .
Member-serving organizations include mutual societies , cooperatives , trade unions , credit unions , industry associations , sports clubs , retired serviceman 's clubs and peak bodies -- organizations that benefit a particular group of people i.e. the members of the organization .
It could be argued many nonprofits sit across both camps , at least in terms of the impact they make .
A board-only organization 's bylaws may even state that the organization does not have any membership , although the organization 's literature may refer to its donors or service recipients as `` members '' ; examples of such organizations are Fairvote and the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws .
The Model Nonprofit Corporation Act imposes many complexities and requirements on membership decision-making .
Accordingly , many organizations , such as Wikimedia , have formed board-only structures .
The National Association of Parliamentarians has generated concerns about the implications of this trend for the future of openness , accountability , and understanding of public concerns in nonprofit organizations .
Specifically , they note that nonprofit organizations , unlike business corporations , are not subject to market discipline for products and shareholder discipline of their capital ; therefore , without membership control of major decisions such as election of the board , there are few inherent safeguards against abuse .
A rebuttal to this might be that as nonprofit organizations grow and seek larger donations , the degree of scrutiny increases , including expectations of audited financial statements .
Beware of board-only organizations - review the board members annual income before donating , such as the Clinton Foundation .
Nonprofits may incorporate either federally , under Part II of the Canada Business Corporations Act or under provincial legislation .
Canada also permits a variety of charities -LRB- including public and private foundations -RRB- .
These must be :
Section 21 Companies are registered under the Company 's Act .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
After a nonprofit organization has been formed at the state level , the organization may seek recognition of tax exempt status with respect to U.S. federal income tax .
The exemption does not apply to other Federal taxes such as employment taxes .
Federal tax-exempt status does not guarantee exemption from state and local taxes , and vice versa .
In these `` board-only '' organizations , board members nominate new members and vote on their fellow directors nominations .
.
Capacity building is an ongoing problem experienced by NPOs for a number of reasons .
For example , a university that sells research to for-profit companies may have tax exemption problems .
In Australia , nonprofit organisations include trade unions , charitable entities , co-operatives , universities and hospitals , mutual societies , grass-root and support groups , political parties , religious groups , incorporated associations , not-for-profit companies , trusts and more .
Furthermore , they operate across a multitude of domains and industries , from health , employment , disability and other human services to local sporting clubs , credit unions and research institutes .
For example , an employee may start a new program without disclosing its complete liabilities .
The employee may be rewarded for improving the NPO 's reputation , making other employees happy , and attracting new donors .
While many established NPO 's are well-funded and comparative to their public sector competetitors , many more are independent and must be creative with which incentives they use to attract and maintain vibrant personalities .
Public and private sector employment has , for the most part , been able to offer more for their employees than most nonprofit agencies throughout history .
Today however , Nonprofit organizations are adopting methods used by their competitors and finding new means to retain their employees and attract the best of the newly minted workforce .
See : List of wealthiest foundations .
Note that this assessment excludes universities , at least a few of which have assets in the tens of billions of dollars .
For example ; List of U.S. colleges and universities by endowment .
In the traditional domain noted in RFC 1591 , .
Currently , no restrictions are enforced on registration of .
com or .
org , so one can find organizations of all sorts in either of these domains , as well as other top-level domains including newer , more specific ones which may apply to particular sorts of organizations such as .
museum for museums or .
coop for cooperatives .
Organizations might also register by the appropriate country code top-level domain for their country .
Advocates argue that these terms describe the sector in its own terms , without relying on terminology used for the government or business sectors .
However , use of terminology by a nonprofit of self-descriptive language that is not legally compliant risks confusing the public about nonprofit abilities , capabilities and limitations .
Raleigh is known as the `` City of Oaks '' for its many oak trees , which line the streets in the heart of the city .
The city covers a land area of 142.8 square miles -LRB- 370 km2 -RRB- .
It is also one of the fastest-growing cities in the country .
The Research Triangle region encompasses the U.S. Census Bureau 's Raleigh-Durham-Chapel Hill Combined Statistical Area -LRB- CSA -RRB- , which had an estimated population of 2,037,430 in 2013 .
The city was originally laid out in a grid pattern with the North Carolina State Capitol in Union Square at the center .
Raleigh is home to numerous cultural , educational , and historic sites .
Museums in Raleigh include the North Carolina Museum of Art in West Raleigh , as well as the North Carolina Museum of History and North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences located next to each other near the State Capitol in Downtown Raleigh .
No known city or town existed previously on the chosen city site .
As the Confederate cavalry retreated west , the Union soldiers followed , leading to the nearby Battle of Morrisville .
It remains Raleigh 's primary daily newspaper .
The city 's Rex Hospital opened in 1889 and included the state 's first nursing school .
George Henry White sought to promote civil rights for blacks and to challenge efforts by white Democrats to reduce black voting by new discriminatory laws .
They were unsuccessful .
Loss of the ability to vote disqualified black men -LRB- and later women -RRB- from sitting on juries and serving in any office , local , state or federal .
The rising black middle-class in Raleigh and other areas was politically silenced and shut out of local governance , and the Republican Party was no longer competitive .
No African American was elected to Congress until 1992 .
The North Carolina Symphony , founded the same year , performed in its new home .
From 1934 to 1937 , the federal Civilian Conservation Corps constructed the area now known as William B. Umstead State Park .
It includes shopping centers such as North Hills and Crabtree Valley Mall .
It also includes North Hills Park and part of the Raleigh Greenway System .
The News & Observer newspaper started using the term for marketing purposes only .
The area is bordered to the west by suburban Cary .
Primary thoroughfares serving West Raleigh , in addition to Hillsborough Street , are Avent Ferry Road , Blue Ridge Road , and Western Boulevard .
The area generally falls North of Millbrook Road .
Winters are short and generally cool , with a January daily average of 41.0 °F -LRB- 5.0 °C -RRB- .
April is the driest month , with an average of 2.91 inches -LRB- 73.9 mm -RRB- of precipitation .
Summers are hot and humid , with a daily average in July of 80.0 °F -LRB- 26.7 °C -RRB- .
There are 48 days per year with highs at or above 90 °F -LRB- 32 °C -RRB- .
Autumn is similar to spring overall but has fewer days of rainfall .
Freezing rain and sleet also occur most winters , and occasionally the area experiences a major damaging ice storm .
Winter storms have caused traffic problems in the past as well .
In 1996 , Hurricane Fran caused severe damage in the Raleigh area , mostly from falling trees .
Tornadoes also have on occasion affected the city of Raleigh most notably the November 28 , 1988 tornado which occurred in the early morning hours and rated an F4 on the Fujita Tornado Scale and affected Northwestern portions of the city .
Unmarried partners were present in 2.2 % of households .
Raleigh is home to a wide variety of religious practitioners .
An additional amphitheater sits on the grounds of the North Carolina Museum of Art , which hosts a summer concert series and outdoor movies .
The museum 's outdoor park is one of the largest such art parks in the country .
The museum facility underwent a major expansion which greatly expanded the exhibit space that was completed in 2010 .
The 127,000 sf new expansion is designed by NYC architect Thomas Phifer and Partners .
The city played host to the 2011 NHL All-Star Game .
The men 's baseball team plays at Doak Field .
Aggravated assault accounted for 984 of the total violent crimes .
Property crimes included burglaries which accounted for 3,021 , larcenies for 9,104 and arson for 63 of the total number of incidents .
There are four early college high schools in Raleigh .
The airport also offers facilities for cargo and general aviation .
They also provide preventive and therapeutic programs at work places , schools and similar institutions .
These Board Certified Nutritionists typically specialize in obesity and chronic disease .
In order to become board certified , potential CNS candidate must pass an examination , much like Registered Dieticians .
This exam covers specific domains within the health sphere including ; Clinical Intervention and Human Health .
Humours developed perhaps first in China alongside qi .
Ho the Physician concluded that diseases are caused by deficiencies of elements -LRB- Wu Xing : fire , water , earth , wood , and metal -RRB- , and he classified diseases as well as prescribed diets .
The king 's chief steward reluctantly agreed to a trial .
Appearing healthier , they were allowed to continue with their diet .
Four elements -LRB- earth , air , fire and water -RRB- combine into `` complexion '' , which combines into states -LRB- the four temperaments : sanguine , phlegmatic , choleric , and melancholic -RRB- .
Galen thought that for a person to have gout , kidney stones , or arthritis was scandalous , which Gratzer likens to Samuel Butler 's Erehwon -LRB- 1872 -RRB- where sickness is a crime .
Leonardo did not publish his works on this subject , but he was not afraid of thinking for himself and he definitely disagreed with Galen .
Ultimately , 16th century works of Andreas Vesalius , sometimes called the father of modern medicine , overturned Galen 's ideas .
He was followed by piercing thought amalgamated with the era 's mysticism and religion sometimes fueled by the mechanics of Newton and Galileo .
Robert Boyle advanced chemistry .
Sanctorius measured body weight .
Physiologist Albrecht von Haller worked out the difference between nerves and muscles .
The essential vitamin C within citrus fruits would not be identified by scientists until 1932 .
Eijkman cured the natives by feeding them brown rice , discovering that food can cure disease .
Lafayette Mendel and Thomas Osborne also performed pioneering work on vitamins A and B .
In 1922 , McCollum destroyed the vitamin A in cod liver oil , but found that it still cured rickets .
Their necessity is not as well established as in the case of , for instance , vitamins .
Protein molecules contain nitrogen atoms in addition to carbon , oxygen , and hydrogen .
Some of the amino acids are convertible -LRB- with the expenditure of energy -RRB- to glucose and can be used for energy production , just as ordinary glucose , in a process known as gluconeogenesis .
By breaking down existing protein , the carbon skeleton of the various amino acids can be metabolized to intermediates in cellular respiration ; the remaining ammonia is discarded primarily as urea in urine .
This occurs normally only during prolonged starvation .
This , however , is not accurate .
However , in most circumstances it accounts for less than that because of its limited absorption and digestibility .
There are two subcategories : soluble and insoluble fiber .
Whole grains , fruits -LRB- especially plums , prunes , and figs -RRB- , and vegetables are good sources of dietary fiber .
There are many health benefits of a high-fiber diet .
Insoluble fiber , found in whole wheat flour , nuts and vegetables , especially stimulates peristalsis -- the rhythmic muscular contractions of the intestines , which move digesta along the digestive tract .
Soluble fiber , found in oats , peas , beans , and many fruits , dissolves in water in the intestinal tract to produce a gel that slows the movement of food through the intestines .
Additionally , fiber , perhaps especially that from whole grains , is thought to possibly help lessen insulin spikes , and therefore reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes .
The link between increased fiber consumption and a decreased risk of colorectal cancer is still uncertain .
Unsaturated fats may be further classified as monounsaturated -LRB- one double-bond -RRB- or polyunsaturated -LRB- many double-bonds -RRB- .
Furthermore , depending on the location of the double-bond in the fatty acid chain , unsaturated fatty acids are classified as omega-3 or omega-6 fatty acids .
There are nine kilocalories in each gram of fat .
Fatty acids such as conjugated linoleic acid , catalpic acid , eleostearic acid and punicic acid , in addition to providing energy , represent potent immune modulatory molecules .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
An appropriate balance of essential fatty acids -- omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids -- seems also important for health , although definitive experimental demonstration has been elusive .
Both of these `` omega '' long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids are substrates for a class of eicosanoids known as prostaglandins , which have roles throughout the human body .
They are hormones , in some respects .
The omega-6 dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid -LRB- DGLA -RRB- serves as a building block for series 1 prostaglandins -LRB- e.g. anti-inflammatory PGE1 -RRB- , whereas arachidonic acid -LRB- AA -RRB- serves as a building block for series 2 prostaglandins -LRB- e.g. pro-inflammatory PGE 2 -RRB- .
An appropriately balanced intake of omega-3 and omega-6 partly determines the relative production of different prostaglandins , which is one reason why a balance between omega-3 and omega-6 is believed important for cardiovascular health .
They also form the enzymes that control chemical reactions throughout the body .
As there is no protein or amino acid storage provision , amino acids must be present in the diet .
For all animals , some amino acids are essential -LRB- an animal can not produce them internally -RRB- and some are non-essential -LRB- the animal can produce them from other nitrogen-containing compounds -RRB- .
A diet that contains adequate amounts of amino acids -LRB- especially those that are essential -RRB- is particularly important in some situations : during early development and maturation , pregnancy , lactation , or injury -LRB- a burn , for instance -RRB- .
A complete protein source contains all the essential amino acids ; an incomplete protein source lacks one or more of the essential amino acids .
However , complementary sources of protein do not need to be eaten at the same meal to be used together by the body .
However the notion that a person should consume eight glasses of water per day can not be traced to a credible scientific source .
Most of this quantity is contained in prepared foods . ''
More recent comparisons of well-known recommendations on fluid intake have revealed large discrepancies in the volumes of water we need to consume for good health .
These specifications were provided by calculating adequate intakes from measured intakes in populations of individuals with `` desirable osmolarity values of urine and desirable water volumes per energy unit consumed . ''
For healthful hydration , the current EFSA guidelines recommend total water intakes of 2.0 L/day for adult females and 2.5 L/day for adult males .
These reference values include water from drinking water , other beverages , and from food .
Water content varies depending on the type of food consumed , with fruit and vegetables containing more than cereals , for example .
These values are estimated using country-specific food balance sheets published by the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations .
Other guidelines for nutrition also have implications for the beverages we consume for healthy hydration - for example , the World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- recommend that added sugars should represent no more than 10 % of total energy intake .
The EFSA panel also determined intakes for different populations .
Some dietitians recommend that these be supplied from foods in which they occur naturally , or at least as complex compounds , or sometimes even from natural inorganic sources -LRB- such as calcium carbonate from ground oyster shells -RRB- .
As with the minerals discussed above , some vitamins are recognized as organic essential nutrients , necessary in the diet for good health .
Recently , some researchers suggested an interesting theory of evolution of dietary antioxidants .
Some are produced by the human body with adequate precursors -LRB- glutathione , Vitamin C -RRB- , and those the body can not produce may only be obtained in the diet via direct sources -LRB- Vitamin C in humans , Vitamin A , Vitamin K -RRB- or produced by the body from other compounds -LRB- Beta-carotene converted to Vitamin A by the body , Vitamin D synthesized from cholesterol by sunlight -RRB- .
Different antioxidants are now known to function in a cooperative network .
For example , Vitamin C can reactivate free radical-containing glutathione or Vitamin E by accepting the free radical itself .
Some antioxidants are more effective than others at neutralizing different free radicals .
Some can not neutralize certain free radicals .
When interacting with a free radical , some antioxidants produce a different free radical compound that is less dangerous or more dangerous than the previous compound .
Having a variety of antioxidants allows any byproducts to be safely dealt with by more efficient antioxidants in neutralizing a free radical 's butterfly effect .
In contrast , diseases of affluence like cancer and heart disease are common throughout the developed world , including the United States .
There are arguments for and against this controversial issue .
In sum , they offer three sets of ` best practices ' to emulate .
The rest is up to you .
All animals ' diets must provide sufficient amounts of the basic building blocks they need , up to the point where their particular biology can synthesize the rest .
These compounds in turn consist of elements such as carbon , hydrogen , oxygen , nitrogen , phosphorus , calcium , iron , zinc , magnesium , manganese , and so on .
All of these chemical compounds and elements occur in various forms and combinations -LRB- e.g. hormones , vitamins , phospholipids , hydroxyapatite -RRB- .
The effects of nutrients may only be discernible over an extended period , during which all food and waste must be analyzed .
Carbon and oxygen are absorbed from the air , while other nutrients are absorbed from the soil .
These hydrogen ions displace cations attached to negatively charged soil particles so that the cations are available for uptake by the root .
The carbon dioxide molecules are used as the carbon source in photosynthesis .
As far as safety of the human health is concerned , then these environmental contaminants can reduce people 's nutritional status and health .
Hence , food-based remedial as well as preventive strategies are essential to address global issues like hunger and malnutrition and to enable the susceptible people to adapt themselves to all these environmental as well as socio-economic alterations .
In California , registered dietitians must abide by the `` Business and Professions Code of Section 2585-2586 .8 '' .
Nutrition is taught in schools in many countries .
Nutrition is offered at many schools , and , if it is not a class of its own , nutrition is included in other FCS or Health classes such as : Life Skills , Independent Living , Single Survival , Freshmen Connection , Health etc. .
In many Nutrition classes , students learn about the food groups , the food pyramid , Daily Recommended Allowances , calories , vitamins , minerals , malnutrition , physical activity , healthful food choices , portion sizes , and how to live a healthy life .
These statistics point to the complexities surrounding the lack of health/nutrition literacy and reveal the degree to which they are embedded in the social structure and interconnected with other problems .
The aim was to boost nutrition and livelihoods by producing a product that women could make and sell , and which would be accepted by the local community because of its local heritage .
Better nutrition has been shown to have an impact on both cognitive and spatial memory performance ; a study showed those with higher blood sugar levels performed better on certain memory tests .
In another study , those who consumed yogurt performed better on thinking tasks when compared to those that consumed caffeine-free diet soda or confections .
Although the association between overweight and insulin resistance is clear , the exact -LRB- likely multifarious -RRB- causes of insulin resistance remain less clear .
In addition , reduced leptin signalling to the brain may reduce leptin 's normal effect to maintain an appropriately high metabolic rate .
Effective fluid replacement techniques include water aid stations during running/cycling races , trainers providing water during team games , such as soccer , and devices such as Camel Baks , which can provide water for a person without making it too hard to drink the water .
Increased consumption of sugar has been tied to these three , among others .
Obesity and diet also happen to be high risk factors for diabetes .
Increased weight , especially in the form of belly fat , and high sugar intake are also high risk factors for heart disease .
Both sugar intake and fatty tissue increase the probability of elevated LDL cholesterol in the bloodstream .
In order to avoid all the dangers of sugar , moderate consumption is paramount .
These latter technologies include pasteurisation , autoclavation , drying , salting , and separation of various components , all of which appearing to alter the original nutritional contents of food .
But some of the -LRB- new -RRB- food processing technologies have downfalls as well .
Heating techniques may also reduce food 's content of many heat-labile nutrients such as certain vitamins and phytochemicals , and possibly other yet-to-be-discovered substances .
Nonetheless , processed foods tend to have an inferior nutritional profile compared to whole , fresh foods , regarding content of both sugar and high GI starches , potassium/sodium , vitamins , fiber , and of intact , unoxidized -LRB- essential -RRB- fatty acids .
It turned out that the vast majority of sufferers were being fed milk that had been heat-treated -LRB- as suggested by Pasteur -RRB- to control bacterial disease .
As mentioned , lifestyle - and obesity-related diseases are becoming increasingly prevalent all around the world .
In general , whole , fresh foods have a relatively short shelf-life and are less profitable to produce and sell than are more processed foods .
The longer-term causes involved the decline of the Ottoman Empire and the unwillingness of the United Kingdom and France to allow Russia to gain territory and power at Ottoman expense .
It has widely been noted that the causes , in one case involving an argument over a key , have never revealed a `` greater confusion of purpose '' , yet led to a war noted for its `` notoriously incompetent international butchery . ''
They then moved north to Varna in June , arriving just in time for the Russians to abandon Silistra .
Aside from a minor skirmish at Constanța there was little for the allies to do .
Karl Marx quipped that `` there they are , the French doing nothing and the British helping them as fast as possible '' .
The front settled into a siege and led to horrible conditions for troops on both sides .
Smaller actions were carried out in the Baltic , the Caucasus , the White Sea and in the North Pacific .
This was welcomed by France and the UK , where the citizens began to turn against their governments as the war dragged on .
Russia lost the war , and was forbidden from hosting warships in the Black Sea .
The Ottoman vassal states of Wallachia and Moldavia became largely independent .
As the legend of the `` Charge of the Light Brigade '' demonstrates , the war quickly became an iconic symbol of logistical , medical and tactical failures and mismanagement .
In 1820-1830 's the Ottoman Empire endured a number of strikes which challenged the existence of the country .
According to the Treaty of Adrianople -LRB- 1829 -RRB- Russian and European commercial ships were authorized to freely pass through Black Sea straits , Serbia received autonomy , and Danubian Principalities -LRB- Moldavia and Walachia -RRB- became the territories under Russian protection .
In 1838 the situation was slightly the same as in 1831 .
Moreover , Muhammad Ali had to admit a formal dependence from the Ottoman sultan .
After Muhammad Ali refused to obey the requirements of the London convention , the allied Anglo-Austrian fleet blocked the Delta , bombarded Beirut and captured Acre .
The United Kingdom could not tolerate Russian dominance of Ottoman affairs , as that would challenge the British domination of the eastern Mediterranean .
-LRB- ch 1 -RRB-
It is often said that Russia was militarily weak , technologically backward , and administratively incompetent .
The bureaucracy was riddled with graft , corruption and inefficiency and was unprepared for war .
By the war 's end , everyone realized the profound weaknesses of the Russian military , and the Russian leadership was determined to reform it .
:7 -- 9 The appointment was made with the intent of forcing the Ottomans to recognise France as the `` sovereign authority '' over the Christian population. :19 Russia disputed this attempted change in authority .
Pointing to two more treaties , one in 1757 and the 1774 Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca , the Ottomans reversed their earlier decision , renouncing the French treaty and insisting that Russia was the protector of the Orthodox Christians in the Ottoman Empire .
By previous treaties , the sultan was committed `` to protect the -LRB- Eastern Orthodox -RRB- Christian religion and its churches . ''
A compromise was reached regarding Orthodox access to the Holy Land , but the Sultan , strongly supported by the British ambassador , rejected the more sweeping demands .
The Leader of the Opposition in the British House of Commons , Benjamin Disraeli , blamed Aberdeen and Stratford 's actions for making war inevitable , thus starting the process which would eventually force the Aberdeen government to resign in January 1855 , over the war .
Now Russia used the Sultan 's failure to resolve the issue of the protection of the Christian sites in the Holy Land as a pretext for Russian occupation of these Danubian provinces .
The European powers continued to pursue diplomatic avenues .
The United Kingdom , France , and Austria united in proposing amendments to mollify the Sultan , but the court of St. Petersburg ignored their suggestions. :143 The UK and France then set aside the idea of continuing negotiations , but Austria and Prussia did not believe that the rejection of the proposed amendments justified the abandonment of the diplomatic process .
Public opinion in the UK and France was outraged and demanded war .
:411
The resulting Battle of Oltenița was the first engagement following the declaration of war .
The Russians counterattacked , but were beaten back .
The battle began when the Russians made a move to recapture Calafat .
Most of the heavy fighting , however , took place in and around Chetatea until the Russians were driven out of the village .
Despite the setback at Chetatea , on 28 January 1854 , Russian forces laid siege to Calafat .
The siege would continue until May 1854 when the Russians lifted the siege .
The Ottomans would also later beat the Russians in battle at Caracal. :130 -- 43
By April 1854 , the Russians had reached the lines of Trajan 's Wall where they were finally halted .
On 28 May 1854 a protocol of the Vienna Conference was signed by Austria and Russia .
One of the aims of the Russian advance had been to encourage the Orthodox Christian Serbs and Bulgarians living under Ottoman rule to rebel .
Accordingly , the Russians were forced to raise the siege of Silistra on 23 June 1854 , and begin abandoning the Principalities. :185 The lifting of the siege reduced the threat of a Russian advance into Bulgaria .
The capture of Giurgiu by the Turks immediately threatened Bucharest in Wallachia with capture by the same Turk army .
Also , in late July 1854 , following up on the Russian retreat , the French staged an expedition against the Russian forces still in Dobruja , but this was a failure. :188 -- 190
During this period , the Russian Black Sea Fleet was operating against Ottoman coastal traffic between Constantinople -LRB- currently named Istanbul -RRB- and the Caucasus ports , while the Ottoman fleet sought to protect this supply line .
The battle outraged opinion in UK , which called for war .
In June , the fleets transported the Allied expeditionary forces to Varna , in support of the Ottoman operations on the Danube ; in September they again transported the armies , this time to the Crimea .
During the rest of the campaign the allied fleets remained in control of the Black Sea , ensuring the various fronts were kept supplied .
There was no sign of the enemy and the men were all landed on 14 September .
It took another four days to land all the stores , equipment , horses and artillery .
The landing was north of Sevastopol , so the Russians had arrayed their army in expectation of a direct attack .
This let them set up a new supply center in a number of protected inlets on the south coast .
The British bombardment worked better than the French , who had smaller caliber guns .
The fleet suffered high casualties during the day .
A large Russian assault on the allied supply base to the southeast , at Balaclava was rebuffed on 25 October 1854. :521 -- 527 The Battle of Balaclava is remembered in the UK for the actions of two British units .
His tactics succeeded .
From up on the ridge to the west , Times correspondent William Howard Russell saw the Highlanders as a ` thin red streak topped with steel ' , a phrase which soon became the ` Thin Red Line . '
This caused a more widespread Russian retreat , including a number of their artillery units .
When the Earl of Cardigan questioned what they referred to , the aide-de-camp pointed to the first Russian battery he could see -- the wrong one .
Although traditionally the charge of the Light Brigade was looked upon as a glorious but wasted sacrifice of good men and horses , recent historians say that the charge of the Light Brigade did succeed in at least some of its objectives .
The aim of any cavalry charge is to scatter the enemy lines and frighten the enemy off the battlefield .
The charge of the Light Brigade had so unnerved the Russian cavalry , which had previously been routed by the Heavy Brigade , that the Russian Cavalry was set to full-scale flight by the subsequent charge of the Light Brigade. :252
Sevastopol remained invested by the allies , while the allied armies were hemmed in by the Russian army in the interior .
The Pipe-and-cable-laying plough failed because of the hard frozen soil , but even so 21 miles of cable were laid. :449
The Allies had had time to consider the problem .
Many more artillery pieces had arrived and been dug into batteries .
In June , a third bombardment was followed after two days by a successful attack on the Mamelon , but a follow-up assault on the Malakoff failed with heavy losses .
Artillery fire aiming to gain superiority over the enemy guns. :450 -- 462 September saw the final assault .
The Russians retreated to the north , blowing up their magazines and the city fell on 9 September 1855 after a 337-day-long siege. :106
The vast amounts of food , especially bread , wheat , barley , and rye that were amassed in the city after the outbreak of war were prevented from being exported .
In July 1855 , the allied squadron tried to go past Taganrog to Rostov on Don , entering the Don River through the Mius River .
1853 : There were four main events .
1 .
Both sides remained immobile for the next seven months .
2 .
The Russians routed them .
The claimed losses were 4000 Turks and 400 Russians .
3 .
They crossed the border and set up artillery south of town .
Prince Orbeliani tried to drive them off and found himself trapped .
The Turks failed to press their advantage , the remaining Russians rescued Orbeliani and the Turks retired west .
Orbeliani lost about 1000 men out of 5000 .
The Russians now decided to advance , the Turks took up a strong position on the Kars road and attacked .
They were defeated in the battle of Başgedikler , losing 6000 men , half their artillery and all their supply train .
The Russians lost 1300 , including Prince Orbeliani .
This was Prince Ellico Orbeliani whose wife was later kidnaped by Shamyl at Tsinandali .
4 .
At sea the Turks sent a fleet east which was destroyed by Admiral Nakhimov at Sinope .
Both slowly approached along the Kars-Gyumri road and faced each other , neither side choosing to fight -LRB- June -- July -RRB- .
They were defeated , losing 8000 men to the Russian 3000 .
10000 irregulars deserted to their villages .
Both sides withdrew to their former positions .
He started in May and by June was south and west of the town .
In late September he learned of the fall of Sevastopol and a Turkish landing at Batum .
This led him to reverse policy and try a direct attack .
It failed , the Russians losing 8000 men and the Turks 1500 -LRB- 29 September -RRB- .
The blockade continued and Kars surrendered on 8 November .
When they relented in August most of the campaigning season was lost .
This required a 100-mile march south through a country with poor roads .
Omar crossed the Ingur on 7 November and then wasted a great deal of time , the Russians doing little .
Learning of the fall of Kars he withdrew to the Ingur .
The Russians did nothing and he evacuated to Batum in February of the following year .
a forgotten theatre of the Crimean War .
The outnumbered Russian Baltic Fleet confined its movements to the areas around its fortifications .
At the same time , the British and French commanders Sir Charles Napier and Alexandre Ferdinand Parseval-Deschenes -- although they led the largest fleet assembled since the Napoleonic Wars -- considered the Sveaborg fortress too well-defended to engage .
Thus , shelling of the Russian batteries was limited to two attempts in the summers of 1854 and 1855 , and initially , the attacking fleets limited their actions to blockading Russian trade in the Gulf of Finland .
Naval attacks on other ports , such as the ones in the island of Hogland in the Gulf of Finland , proved more successful .
Additionally , allies conducted raids on less fortified sections of the Finnish coast .
These battles are known in Finland as the Åland war .
In the same month , the Western Allied Baltic Fleet tried to destroy heavily defended Russian dockyards at Sveaborg outside Helsinki .
More than 1000 enemy guns tested the strength of the fortress for two days .
The Allies fired over 20,000 shells but failed to defeat the Russian batteries .
A massive new fleet of more than 350 gunboats and mortar vessels was prepared -LSB- by whom ? -RSB-
, but before the attack was launched , the war ended .
Part of the Russian resistance was credited -LSB- by whom ? -RSB-
In September 1854 , an Allied landing force was beaten back with heavy casualties , and the Allies withdrew .
Greece played a peripheral role in the war .
However , Greece did not coordinate its plans with Russia , did not declare war , and received no outside military or financial support .
The insurrections were failures that were easily crushed by the Ottoman army .
Greece was not invited to the peace conference and made no gains out of the war. :139 The frustrated Greek leadership blamed the King for failing to take advantage of the situation ; his popularity plunged and he was later forced to abdicate .
Dissatisfaction with the conduct of the war was growing with the public in the UK and in other countries , aggravated by reports of fiascos , especially the humiliating defeat of the Charge of the Light Brigade at the Battle of Balaclava .
In Parliament , Tories demanded an accounting of all soldiers , cavalry and sailors sent to the Crimea and accurate figures as to the number of casualties that had been sustained by all British armed forces in the Crimea ; they were especially concerned with the Battle of Balaclava .
Palmerston took a hard line ; he wanted to expand the war , foment unrest inside the Russian Empire , and permanently reduce the Russian threat to Europe .
Sweden and Prussia were willing to join the UK and France , and Russia was isolated. :400 -- 402 , 406 -- 408
In compliance with article III , Russia restored to the Ottoman Empire the city and citadel of Kars in common with `` all other parts of the Ottoman territory of which the Russian troop were in possession '' .
Russia ceded some land in Bessarabia at the mouth of the Danube to Moldavia .
The Black Sea clauses weakened Russia , and it no longer posed a naval threat to the Ottomans .
The Great Powers pledged to respect the independence and territorial integrity of the Ottoman Empire. :432 -- 33
During his reign , Napoleon III , eager for the support of the United Kingdom , had opposed Russia over the Eastern Question .
Russian interference in the Ottoman Empire , however , did not in any significant manner threaten the interests of France .
Thus , France abandoned its opposition to Russia after the establishment of a republic .
As the United Kingdom alone could not enforce the clauses , Russia once again established a fleet in the Black Sea .
The status of Austria as a great power , with the unifications of Germany and Italy was now severely questioned .
It had to compromise with Hungary , the two countries shared the Danubian Empire and Austria slowly became a little more than a German satellite .
With France now hostile to Germany , allied with Russia , and Russia competing with the newly renamed Austro-Hungarian Empire for an increased role in the Balkans at the expense of the Ottoman Empire , the foundations were in place for creating the diplomatic alliances that would lead to World War I.
As Fuller notes , `` Russia had been beaten on the Crimean peninsula , and the military feared that it would inevitably be beaten again unless steps were taken to surmount its military weakness . ''
Russia feared losing Russian America without compensation in some future conflict , especially to the British .
The British public was very well informed regarding the day-to-day realities of the war in the Crimea .
When the British laid an underwater cable to the Crimean peninsula in April 1855 , news reached London in a few hours .
The daily news reports energised public opinion , which brought down the Aberdeen government and carried Lord Palmerston into office as prime minister. :304 -- 11
However , the reform campaign was not well organized , and the traditional aristocratic leadership of the Army pulled itself together , and blocked all serious reforms .
No one was punished .
The demand for professionalization was , however , achieved by Florence Nightingale , who gained worldwide attention for pioneering and publicizing modern nursing while treating the wounded. :469 -- 71
Newspaper readership informed public opinion in the United Kingdom and France as never before .
It was the first European war to be photographed .
Literature often uses language differently than ordinary language -LRB- see literariness -RRB- .
Contemporary debates over what constitutes literature can be seen as returning to the older , more inclusive notion of what constitutes literature .
Cultural studies , for instance , takes as its subject of analysis both popular and minority genres , in addition to canonical works .
Possibly as a result of Aristotle 's influence -LRB- his Poetics -RRB- , `` poetry '' before the nineteenth century was usually less a technical designation for verse than a normative category of fictive or rhetorical art .
A closet drama , by contrast , refers to a play written to be read rather than to be performed ; hence , it is intended that the meaning of such a work can be realized fully on the page .
Nearly all drama took verse form until comparatively recently .
Tragedies generally presented very serious themes .
With the advent of newer technologies , scripts written for non-stage media have been added to this form .
Conversely , television , film , and radio literature have been adapted to printed or electronic media .
`` The roots of all our modern academic fields can be found within the pages of literature . ''
The plot is for more than just entertainment purposes ; within it lies information about economics , psychology , science , religions , politics , cultures , and social depth .
Through the study of past literature we are able to learn about how society has evolved and about the societal norms during each of the different periods all throughout history .
Not only is there literature written on each of the aforementioned topics themselves , and how they have evolved throughout history -LRB- like a book about the history of economics or a book about evolution and science , for example -RRB- but we can also learn about these things in fictional works .
Through literature we are able to continuously uncover new information about history .
It is easy to see how all academic fields have roots in literature .
Eventually everything was written down , from things like home remedies and cures for illness , or how to build shelter to traditions and religious practices .
From there people were able to study literature , improve on ideas , further our knowledge , and academic fields such as the medical field or trades could be started .
In much the same way as the literature that we study today continue to be updated as we continue to evolve and learn more and more .
Over a long period , the poetry of popular pre-literate balladry and song interpenetrated and eventually influenced poetry in the literary medium .
Ancient Chinese literature had a heavy emphasis on historiography , with often very detailed court records .
An exemplary piece of narrative history of ancient China was the Zuo Zhuan , which was compiled no later than 389 BCE , and attributed to the blind 5th century BCE historian Zuo Qiuming .
In ancient India , literature originated from stories that were originally orally transmitted .
The period between approximately the 6th to 1st centuries BC saw the composition and redaction of the two most influential Indian epics , the Mahabharata and the Ramayana , with subsequent redaction progressing down to the 4th century AD .
Classical Greek genres included philosophy , poetry , historiography , comedies and dramas .
Although drama was popular in Ancient Greece , of the hundreds of tragedies written and performed during the classical age , only a limited number of plays by three authors still exist : Aeschylus , Sophocles , and Euripides .
The plays of Aristophanes provide the only real examples of a genre of comic drama known as Old Comedy , the earliest form of Greek Comedy , and are in fact used to define the genre .
In the Age of Reason philosophical tracts and speculations on history and human nature integrated literature with social and political developments .
Writers such as Proust , Eliot , Joyce , Kafka and Pirandello exemplify the trend of documenting internal rather than external realities .
The separation of `` mainstream '' and `` genre '' forms -LRB- including journalism -RRB- continued to blur during the period up to our own times .
Yet , they remain too technical to sit well in most programmes of literary study .
For example , it allows a person to access emotional states from which the person has distanced himself or herself .
Hogan also explains that the temporal and emotional amount which a person devotes to understanding a character 's situation in literature allows literature to be considered `` ecological -LSB- ly -RSB- valid in the study of emotion '' .
It also allows analysts to understand the author 's intended message and to understand the author 's psychology .
Therefore , literary devices reflect a characters 's and an author 's natural self .
Thus Literature is a reputable tool that allows readers to develop and apply critical reasoning to the nature of emotions .
As a result , the writing in these fields often lacks a literary quality , although it often -LRB- and in its better moments -RRB- has that quality .
Law offers more ambiguity .
The founding documents of many countries , including Constitutions and Law Codes , can count as literature ; however , most legal writings rarely exhibit much literary merit , as they tend to be rather Written by Samuel Dean .
The study of the Quran and the Hadith thrived in such a scholarly atmosphere .
His father worked in the government of Samanid in the village Kharmasain , a Sunni regional power .
After five years , his younger brother , Mahmoud , was born .
A number of theories have been proposed regarding Avicenna 's madhab -LRB- school of thought within Islamic jurisprudence -RRB- .
Conversely , Sharaf Khorasani , citing a rejection of an invitation of the Sunni Governor Sultan Mahmoud Ghazanavi by Avicenna to his court , believes that Avicenna was an Ismaili .
Similar disagreements exist on the background of Avicenna 's family , whereas some writers considered them Sunni , some more recent writers contested that they were Shia .
In such moments of baffled inquiry , he would leave his books , perform the requisite ablutions , then go to the mosque , and continue in prayer till light broke on his difficulties .
Deep into the night , he would continue his studies , and even in his dreams problems would pursue him and work out their solution .
So great was his joy at the discovery , made with the help of a work from which he had expected only mystery , that he hastened to return thanks to God , and bestowed alms upon the poor .
The youthful physician 's fame spread quickly , and he treated many patients without asking for payment .
Qabus , the generous ruler of Tabaristan , himself a poet and a scholar , with whom Ibn Sina had expected to find asylum , was on about that date -LRB- 1012 -RRB- starved to death by his troops who had revolted .
Ibn Sina himself was at this time stricken by a severe illness .
Finally , at Gorgan , near the Caspian Sea , Ibn Sina met with a friend , who bought a dwelling near his own house in which Ibn Sina lectured on logic and astronomy .
Several of Ibn Sina 's treatises were written for this patron ; and the commencement of his Canon of Medicine also dates from his stay in Hyrcania .
Constant feuds which raged between the regent and her second son , Shams al-Daula , however , compelled the scholar to quit the place .
At first , Ibn Sina entered into the service of a high-born lady ; but the emir , hearing of his arrival , called him in as medical attendant , and sent him back with presents to his dwelling .
The emir decreed that he should be banished from the country .
Ibn Sina , however , remained hidden for forty days in sheikh Ahmed Fadhel 's house , until a fresh attack of illness induced the emir to restore him to his post .
Even during this perturbed time , Ibn Sina persevered with his studies and teaching .
Every evening , extracts from his great works , the Canon and the Sanatio , were dictated and explained to his pupils .
On the death of the emir , Ibn Sina ceased to be vizier and hid himself in the house of an apothecary , where , with intense assiduity , he continued the composition of his works .
The new emir of Hamadan , hearing of this correspondence and discovering where Ibn Sina was hiding , incarcerated him in a fortress .
When the storm had passed , Ibn Sina returned with the emir to Hamadan , and carried on his literary labors .
After a perilous journey , they reached Isfahan , receiving an honorable welcome from the prince .
Of linguistic significance even to this day are a few books that he wrote in nearly pure Persian language -LRB- particularly the Danishnamah-yi ` Ala ' , Philosophy for Ala ' ad-Dawla ' -RRB- .
Whereas existence is the domain of the contingent and the accidental , essence endures within a being beyond the accidental .
The search for a definitive Islamic philosophy separate from Occasionalism can be seen in what is left of his work .
He argued that the fact of existence can not be inferred from or accounted for by the essence of existing things , and that form and matter by themselves can not interact and originate the movement of the universe or the progressive actualization of existing things .
Existence must , therefore , be due to an agent-cause that necessitates , imparts , gives , or adds existence to an essence .
To do so , the cause must be an existing thing and coexist with its effect .
Avicenna argued that the impossible being is that which can not exist , while the contingent in itself -LRB- mumkin bi-dhatihi -RRB- has the potentiality to be or not to be without entailing a contradiction .
When actualized , the contingent becomes a ` necessary existent due to what is other than itself ' -LRB- wajib al-wujud bi-ghayrihi -RRB- .
The metaphysical structures of necessity and contingency are different .
It is what always exists .
Furthermore , It is ` One ' -LRB- wahid ahad -RRB- since there can not be more than one ` Necessary-Existent-due-to-Itself ' without differentia -LRB- fasl -RRB- to distinguish them from each other .
Yet , to require differentia entails that they exist ` due-to-themselves ' as well as ` due to what is other than themselves ' ; and this is contradictory .
However , if no differentia distinguishes them from each other , then there is no sense in which these ` Existents ' are not one and the same .
Avicenna wrote a number of short treatises dealing with Islamic theology .
In general these treatises linked his philosophical writings to Islamic religious ideas ; for example , the body 's afterlife .
He argued that , in this scenario , one would still have self-consciousness .
Because it is conceivable that a person , suspended in air while cut off from sense experience , would still be capable of determining his own existence , the thought experiment points to the conclusions that the soul is a perfection , independent of the body , and an immaterial substance .
Avicenna referred to the living human intelligence , particularly the active intellect , which he believed to be the hypostasis by which God communicates truth to the human mind and imparts order and intelligibility to nature .
Following is an English translation of the argument :
The first knowledge of the flying person would be `` I am , '' affirming his or her essence .
Avicenna thus concluded that the idea of the self is not logically dependent on any physical thing , and that the soul should not be seen in relative terms , but as a primary given , a substance .
In itself , the soul is an immaterial substance .
In the Al-Burhan -LRB- On Demonstration -RRB- section of The Book of Healing , Avicenna discussed the philosophy of science and described an early scientific method of inquiry .
Avicenna discussed the issue of a proper methodology for scientific inquiry and the question of `` How does one acquire the first principles of a science ? ''
He asked how a scientist would arrive at `` the initial axioms or hypotheses of a deductive science without inferring them from some more basic premises ? ''
He explains that the ideal situation is when one grasps that a `` relation holds between the terms , which would allow for absolute , universal certainty . ''
Avicenna then adds two further methods for arriving at the first principles : the ancient Aristotelian method of induction -LRB- istiqra -RRB- , and the method of examination and experimentation -LRB- tajriba -RRB- .
In its place , he develops a `` method of experimentation as a means for scientific inquiry . ''
Although he did not develop a real theory of temporal propositions , he did study the relationship between temporalis and the implication .
He stated , `` Anyone who denies the law of noncontradiction should be beaten and burned until he admits that to be beaten is not the same as not to be beaten , and to be burned is not the same as not to be burned . ''
This sensory information is supplied to the internal senses , which merge all the pieces into a whole , unified conscious experience .
This process of perception and abstraction is the nexus of the soul and body , for the material body may only perceive material objects , while the immaterial soul may only receive the immaterial , universal forms .
This is possible , as there was a transit on May 24 , 1032 , but Avicenna did not give the date of his observation , and modern scholars have questioned whether he could have observed the transit from his location at that time ; he may have mistaken a sunspot for Venus .
However Anawati argues -LRB- following Ruska -RRB- that the de Anima is a fake by a Spanish author .
The epistola de Re recta is somewhat less sceptical of alchemy ; Anawati argues that it is by Avicenna , but written earlier in his career when he had not yet firmly decided that transmutation was impossible .
He was one of the Islamic world 's leading writers in the field of medicine .
He is remembered in the Western history of medicine as a major historical figure who made important contributions to medicine and the European Renaissance .
His medical texts were unusual in that where controversy existed between Galen and Aristotle 's views on medical matters -LRB- such as anatomy -RRB- , he preferred to side with Aristotle , where necessary updating Aristotle 's position to take into account post-Aristotelian advances in anatomical knowledge .
Aristotle 's dominant intellectual influence among medieval European scholars meant that Avicenna 's linking of Galen 's medical writings with Aristotle 's philosophical writings in the Canon of Medicine -LRB- along with its comprehensive and logical organisation of knowledge -RRB- significantly increased Avicenna 's importance in medieval Europe in comparison to other Islamic writers on medicine .
Bu-Ali Sina University in Hamadan -LRB- Iran -RRB- , Avicenna Research Institute in Tehran -LRB- Iran -RRB- , the ibn Sīnā Tajik State Medical University in Dushanbe , Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine and Sciences at Aligarh , India , Avicenna School in Karachi and Avicenna Medical College in Lahore , Pakistan Ibne Sina Balkh Medical School in his native province of Balkh in Afghanistan , Ibni Sina Faculty Of Medicine of Ankara University Ankara , Turkey and Ibn Sina Integrated School in Marawi City -LRB- Philippines -RRB- are all named in his honour .
-LSB- year needed -RSB- On the grounds is a museum dedicated to his life , times and work .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The project team stated `` Why Avicenna ?
He has had a lasting influence on the development of medicine and health sciences .
The film 's director Elyor Ishmuhamedov .
Romantic and stormy , performed works , danger and irresistible thirst of knowledge was the youth of Al-Husayn ibn Abdallah ibn al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn Sina , which will be known around the world under the name of Avicenna -- a great physician , scientist and educator X-XI centuries .
The film is set in the ancient city of Bukhara at the turn of the millennium .
In Louis L'Amour 's 1985 historical novel The Walking Drum , Kerbouchard studies and discusses Avicenna 's The Canon of Medicine .
In his book The Physician -LRB- 1988 -RRB- Noah Gordon tells the story of a young English medical apprentice who disguises himself as a Jew to travel from England to Persia and learn from Avicenna , the great master of his time .
The novel was adapted into a feature film , The Physician , in 2013 .
Avicenna was played by Ben Kingsley .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Two encyclopaedic treatises , dealing with philosophy , are often mentioned .
The Latin editions of part of these works have been modified by the corrections which the monastic editors confess that they applied .
There is also a حكمت مشرقيه -LRB- hikmat-al-mashriqqiyya , in Latin Philosophia Orientalis -RRB- , mentioned by Roger Bacon , the majority of which is lost in antiquity , which according to Averroes was pantheistic in tone .
They have been adapted to write a number of other languages including : Japanese , where they are known as kanji , Korean , where they are known as hanja , and Vietnamese in a system known as chữ Nôm .
Collectively , they are known as CJKV characters .
In English , they are sometimes called Han characters .
Chinese characters constitute the oldest continuously used system of writing in the world .
By virtue of their widespread current use in East Asia , and historic use throughout the Sinosphere , Chinese characters are among the most widely adopted writing systems in the world .
In Japan , 2,136 are taught through secondary school -LRB- the Jōyō kanji -RRB- ; hundreds more are in everyday use .
There are various national standard lists of characters , forms , and pronunciations .
Simplified forms of certain characters are used in China , Singapore , and Malaysia ; the corresponding traditional characters are used in Taiwan , Hong Kong , Macau , and to a limited extent in South Korea .
In South Korea , when Chinese characters are used they are of the traditional variant and are almost identical to those used in places like Taiwan and Hong Kong .
Teaching of Chinese characters in South Korea starts in the 7th grade and continues until the 12th grade where 1,800 total characters are taught albeit these characters are only used in certain cases -LRB- on signs , academic papers , historical writings , etc. -RRB- and are slowly declining in use .
To find a character with unknown sound using one of these dictionaries , the reader finds the radical and stroke number of the character , as before , and locates the character in the radical index .
In modern Chinese -LRB- esp .
Mandarin Chinese -RRB- , characters do not necessarily correspond to words ; indeed the majority of Chinese words today consist of two or more characters due to the merging and loss of sounds in the Chinese language over time .
Cognates in the several varieties of Chinese are generally written with the same character .
They typically have similar meanings , but often quite different pronunciations .
In other languages , most significantly today in Japanese and sometimes in Korean , characters are used to represent Chinese loanwords , to represent native words independent of the Chinese pronunciation , and as purely phonetic elements based on their pronunciation in the historical variety of Chinese from which they were acquired .
A few characters , including some of the most commonly used , were originally pictograms , which depicted the objects denoted , or simple ideograms , in which meaning was expressed iconically .
Examples are 河 hé `` river '' , 湖 hú `` lake '' , 流 liú `` stream '' , 沖 chōng `` riptide '' -LRB- or `` flush '' -RRB- , 滑 huá `` slippery '' .
All these characters have on the left a radical of three short strokes -LRB- 氵 -RRB- , which is a reduced form of the character 水 shuǐ meaning `` water '' , indicating that the character has a semantic connection with water .
For example , in the case of 沖 chōng -LRB- Old Chinese * ɡ-ljuŋ -RRB- , the phonetic indicator is 中 zhōng -LRB- Old Chinese * k-ljuŋ -RRB- , which by itself means `` middle '' .
Often these finds are accompanied by media reports that push back the purported beginnings of Chinese writing by thousands of years .
Over 150,000 fragments have been found .
The traditional picture of an orderly series of scripts , each one invented suddenly and then completely displacing the previous one , has been conclusively demonstrated to be fiction by the archaeological finds and scholarly research of the later 20th and early 21st centuries .
Gradual evolution and the coexistence of two or more scripts was more often the case .
Based on studies of these bronze inscriptions , it is clear that , from the Shang dynasty writing to that of the Western Zhou and early Eastern Zhou , the mainstream script evolved in a slow , unbroken fashion , until assuming the form that is now known as seal script in the late Eastern Zhou in the state of Qin , without any clear line of division .
However , despite the Qin script standardization , more than one script remained in use at the time .
For example , a little-known , rectilinear and roughly executed kind of common -LRB- vulgar -RRB- writing had for centuries coexisted with the more formal seal script in the Qin state , and the popularity of this vulgar writing grew as the use of writing itself became more widespread .
By the Warring States period , an immature form of clerical script called `` early clerical '' or `` proto-clerical '' had already developed in the state of Qin based upon this vulgar writing , and with influence from seal script as well .
By around the time of the Eastern Jin dynasty , this Han cursive became known as 章草 zhāngcǎo -LRB- also known as 隶草 / 隸草 lìcǎo today -RRB- , or in English sometimes clerical cursive , ancient cursive , or draft cursive .
However , some scholars postulate that one person alone could not have developed a new script which was universally adopted , but could only have been a contributor to its gradual formation .
The earliest surviving pieces written in regular script are copies of Yao 's works , including at least one copied by Wang Xizhi .
This new script , which is the dominant modern Chinese script , developed out of a neatly written form of early semi-cursive , with addition of the pause -LRB- 頓 / 顿 dùn -RRB- technique to end horizontal strokes , plus heavy tails on strokes which are written to the downward-right diagonal .
Thus , early regular script emerged from a neat , formal form of semi-cursive , which had itself emerged from neo-clerical -LRB- a simplified , convenient form of clerical script -RRB- .
It was not , however , in widespread use at that time , and most writers continued using neo-clerical , or a somewhat semi-cursive form of it , for daily writing , while the conservative bafen clerical script remained in use on some stelae , alongside some semi-cursive , but primarily neo-clerical .
Some call the writing of the early Tang calligrapher Ouyang Xun -LRB- 557 -- 641 -RRB- the first mature regular script .
For instance , to look up the character where the sound is not known , e.g. , 松 -LRB- pine tree -RRB- , the user first determines which part of the character is the radical -LRB- here 木 -RRB- , then counts the number of strokes in the radical -LRB- four -RRB- , and turns to the radical index -LRB- usually located on the inside front or back cover of the dictionary -RRB- .
Under the number `` 4 '' for radical stroke count , the user locates 木 , then turns to the page number listed , which is the start of the listing of all the characters containing this radical .
From there , the user must scan the entries to locate the character he or she is seeking .
Under each radical , characters are listed by their total number of strokes .
It is often also possible to search for characters by sound , using pinyin -LRB- in Chinese dictionaries -RRB- , zhuyin -LRB- in Taiwanese dictionaries -RRB- , kana -LRB- in Japanese dictionaries -RRB- or hangul -LRB- in Korean dictionaries -RRB- .
Most dictionaries also allow searches by total number of strokes , and individual dictionaries often allow other search methods as well .
Significant historically recent coinages date to scientific terms of the 19th century .
Specifically , Chinese coined new characters for chemical elements -- see chemical elements in East Asian languages -- which continue to be used and taught in schools in China and Taiwan .
In Japan , in the Meiji era -LRB- specifically , late 19th century -RRB- , new characters were coined for some -LRB- but not all -RRB- SI units , such as 粁 -LRB- 米 `` meter '' + 千 `` thousand , kilo - '' -RRB- for kilometer .
One such variety is Written Cantonese , in widespread use in Hong Kong even for certain formal documents , due to the former British colonial administration 's recognition of Cantonese for use for official purposes .
Many varieties have specific characters for words exclusive to them .
For example , the vernacular character 㓾 , pronounced cii11 in Hakka , means `` to kill '' .
GB18030 , the modern , mandatory standard , has a much higher number .
The New Hànyǔ Shuǐpíng Kǎoshì -LRB- 汉语水平考试 , Chinese Proficiency Test -RRB- covers approximately 2,600 characters at its highest level -LRB- level six -RRB- .
Modified radicals and new variants are two common reasons for the ever-increasing number of characters .
There are about 300 radicals and 100 are in common use .
Creating a new character by modifying the radical is an easy way to disambiguate homographs among xíngshēngzì pictophonetic compounds .
This practice began long before the standardization of Chinese script by Qin Shi Huang and continues to the present day .
Chinese characters are theoretically an open set and anyone can create new characters , though such inventions are rarely included in official character sets .
However , this is not in common use .
The most complex character that can be input using the Microsoft New Phonetic IME 2002a for traditional Chinese is 龘 -LRB- dá , `` the appearance of a dragon flying '' -RRB- .
It is composed of the dragon radical represented three times , for a total of 16 × 3 = 48 strokes .
It might be argued , however , that while containing the most strokes , it is not necessarily the most complex character -LRB- in terms of difficulty -RRB- , as it simply requires writing the same sixteen-stroke character 龍 lóng -LRB- lit .
`` dragon '' -RRB- four times in the space for one .
`` flourish '' -RRB- four times .
Newspapers have dealt with this problem in varying ways , including using software to combine two existing , similar characters , including a picture of the personality , or , especially as is the case with Yu Shyi-kun , simply substituting a homophone for the rare character in the hope that the reader would be able to make the correct inference .
In the Oracle Bone script , personal names , ritual items , and even phrases such as 受又 -LRB- 祐 -RRB- shòu yòu `` receive blessings '' are commonly contracted into single characters .
In Chinese these units are disyllabic and standardly written with two characters , as 厘米 límǐ `` centimeter '' -LRB- 厘 centi - , 米 meter -RRB- or 千瓦 qiānwǎ `` kilowatt '' .
However , in the 19th century these were often written via compound characters , pronounced disyllabically , such as 瓩 for 千瓦 or 糎 for 厘米 -- some of these characters were also used in Japan , where they were pronounced with borrowed European readings instead .
These have now fallen out of general use , but are occasionally seen .
In handwriting , numbers are very frequently squeezed into one space or combined -- common ligatures include 廿 niàn , `` twenty '' , normally read as 二十 èrshí , 卅 sà , `` thirty '' , normally read as 三十 sānshí , and 卌 xì `` forty '' , normally read as 四十 `` sìshí '' .
In some cases counters are also merged into one character , such as 七十人 qīshí rén `` seventy people '' .
Another common abbreviation is 门 with a `` T '' written inside it , for 問題 , 问题 , wèntí -LRB- `` question ; problem '' -RRB- , where the `` T '' is from pinyin for the second syllable tí 题 .
These do see use , particularly in handwriting or decoration , but also in some cases in print .
In Chinese , these ligatures are called héwén -LRB- 合文 -RRB- , héshū -LRB- 合書 -RRB- or hétǐzì -LRB- 合体字 -RRB- , and in the special case of combining two characters , these are known as `` two-syllable Chinese characters '' -LRB- 双音节汉字 , 雙音節漢字 -RRB- .
In modern Chinese 10 % of morphemes only occur as part of a given compound .
However , a few morphemes are disyllabic , some of them dating back to Classical Chinese .
Excluding foreign loan words , these are typically words for plants and small animals .
They are usually written with a pair of phono-semantic compound characters sharing a common radical .
Examples are 蝴蝶 húdié `` butterfly '' and 珊瑚 shānhú `` coral '' .
Neither exists as an independent morpheme except as a poetic abbreviation of the disyllabic word .
The most important rules regard the strokes employed , stroke placement , and stroke order .
Most characters can be written with just one correct stroke order , though some words also have many valid stroke orders , which may occasionally result in different stroke counts .
It is usually done with ink brushes .
There is a minimalist set of rules of Chinese calligraphy .
Every character from the Chinese scripts is built into a uniform shape by means of assigning it a geometric area in which the character must occur .
Each character has a set number of brushstrokes ; none must be added or taken away from the character to enhance it visually , lest the meaning be lost .
Calligraphy was the means by which scholars could mark their thoughts and teachings for immortality , and as such , represent some of the more precious treasures that can be found from ancient China .
Despite being cursive to the point where individual strokes are no longer differentiable and the characters often illegible to the untrained eye , this script -LRB- also known as draft -RRB- is highly revered for the beauty and freedom that it embodies .
Some of the simplified Chinese characters adopted by the People 's Republic of China , and some simplified characters used in Japan , are derived from the cursive script .
It evolved organically out of the Spring and Autumn period Zhou script , and was adopted in a standardized form under the first Emperor of China , Qin Shi Huang .
`` Simplified '' refers to having significant differences from the Taiwan standard , not necessarily being a newly created character or a newly performed substitution .
Some characters were given simplified forms called shinjitai 新字体 -LRB- lit .
`` new character forms '' , the older forms were then labelled the kyūjitai 旧字体 , lit .
`` old character forms '' -RRB- .
Many variant forms of characters and obscure alternatives for common characters were officially discouraged .
This was done with the goal of facilitating learning for children and simplifying kanji use in literature and periodicals .
These are simply guidelines , hence many characters outside these standards are still widely known and commonly used , especially those used for personal and place names -LRB- for the latter , see jinmeiyō kanji -RRB- , -LSB- citation needed -RSB- as well as for some common words such as `` dragon '' -LRB- Japanese kana : たつ , Rōmaji : tatsu -RRB- in which both the shinjitai 竜 and the kyūjitai 龍 forms of the kanji are both acceptable and widely known amongst native Japanese speakers .
This clerical form uses one fewer stroke , and was thus adopted as a simplified form .
The character 雲 yún -LRB- `` cloud '' -RRB- was written with the structure 云 in the oracle bone script of the Shang dynasty , and had remained in use later as a phonetic loan in the meaning of `` to say '' while the 雨 radical was added to differentiate meanings .
The simplified form adopts the original structure .
Although most often associated with the People 's Republic of China , character simplification predates the 1949 communist victory .
Indeed , this desire by the Kuomintang to simplify the Chinese writing system -LRB- inherited and implemented by the Communist Party of China -RRB- also nursed aspirations of some for the adoption of a phonetic script based on the Latin script , and spawned such inventions as the Gwoyeu Romatzyh .
Before the official reform , character simplifications were not officially sanctioned and generally adopted vulgar variants and idiosyncratic substitutions .
There is no absolute rule for using either system , and often it is determined by what the target audience understands , as well as the upbringing of the writer .
These surrounding Asiatic nations , in writing Chinese words in their own alphabets , have uniformly used g , d , b , & c. , to represent the unaspirated sounds . ''
Around the 13th century the Nôm script was developed to record folk literature in the Vietnamese language .
The script used Chinese characters to represent both borrowed Sino-Vietnamese vocabulary and native words with similar pronunciation or meaning .
In addition thousands of new compound characters were created to write Vietnamese words .
This process resulted in a highly complex system that was never mastered by more than 5 % of the population .
Both Literary Chinese and Nôm were replaced in the early 20th century by Vietnamese written with the Latin-based Vietnamese alphabet .
Currently , it is said that North Korea teaches around 3,000 Hanja characters to North Korean students , and in some cases , the characters appear within advertisements and newspapers .
However , it is also said that the authorities implore students not to use the characters in public .
Due to North Korea 's strict isolationism , accurate reports about hanja use in North Korea are hard to obtain .
The naming of hanja is similar to if `` water '' were named `` water-aqua '' , `` horse-equus '' , or `` gold-aurum '' based on a hybridization of both the English and the Latin names .
Other examples include 사람 인 -LRB- saram-in -RRB- for 人 `` person/people '' , 큰 대 -LRB- keun-dae -RRB- for 大 `` big/large / / great '' , 작을 소 -LRB- jakeul-so -RRB- for 小 `` small/little '' , 아래 하 -LRB- arae-ha -RRB- for 下 `` underneath/below/low '' , 아비 부 -LRB- abi-bu -RRB- for 父 `` father '' , and 나라이름 한 -LRB- naraimreum-han -RRB- for 韓 `` Han/Korea '' .
There is a clear trend toward the exclusive use of hangul in day-to-day South Korean society .
However , due to the lack of tones in Korean , -LSB- citation needed -RSB- as the words were imported from Chinese , many dissimilar characters took on identical sounds , and subsequently identical spelling in hangul .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Chinese characters are sometimes used to this day for either clarification in a practical manner , or to give a distinguished appearance , as knowledge of Chinese characters is considered a high class attribute and an indispensable part of a classical education .
One of the earliest proponents of character simplification was Lufei Kui , who proposed in 1909 that simplified characters should be used in education .
In the years following the May Fourth Movement in 1919 , many anti-imperialist Chinese intellectuals sought ways to modernise China .
In the 1930s and 1940s , discussions on character simplification took place within the Kuomintang government , and many Chinese intellectuals and writers have long maintained that character simplification would help boost literacy in China .
In the 1950s and 1960s , while confusion about simplified characters was still rampant , transitional characters that mixed simplified parts with yet-to-be simplified parts of characters together appeared briefly , then disappeared .
He claimed the apparently uninhabited islands for the Spanish Empire .
Shipwrecked Portuguese mariners are now thought to have been responsible for the 1543 inscription in Portuguese Rock -LRB- previously called Spanish Rock -RRB- .
The island was administered as an extension of Virginia by the Company until 1614 .
At that time , the company 's charter was revoked , and the English Crown took over administration .
Since the return of Hong Kong to China in 1997 , it is the most populous Territory .
Bermuda had one of the world 's highest GDP per capita for most of the 20th century and several years beyond .
The island is in the hurricane belt and prone to severe weather .
In addition to its beaches , there are a number of sightseeing attractions .
It was rediscovered in 1951 after having been thought extinct since the 1620s .
The government has a programme to protect it , including restoration of a habitat area .
Bermuda has a diverse population including both those with relatively deep roots in Bermuda extending back for centuries , and newer communities whose ancestry results from recent immigration , especially from Britain , North America , the West Indies , and the Portuguese Atlantic islands -LRB- especially the Azores -RRB- , although these groups are steadily merging .
The number of people born in Canada declined by 13 % .
Those who reported West Indian ancestry were 13 % .
The number of people born in the West Indies actually increased by 538 .
The deeper ancestral demography of Bermuda 's population has been obscured by the ethnic homogenisation of the last four centuries .
In the 17th century , this was not so .
Non-white minorities included Spanish-speaking , free -LRB- indentured -RRB- blacks from the West Indies , black chattel slaves primarily captured from Spanish and Portuguese ships by Bermudian privateers , and Native Americans , primarily from the Algonquian and other tribes of the Atlantic seaboard , but possibly from as far away as Mexico .
By the 19th century , the white ethnically-English Bermudians had lost their numerical advantage .
Any child born before or since then to one coloured and one white parent has been added to the coloured statistic .
Bermuda 's modern black population contains more than one demographic group .
Although the number of residents born in Africa is very small , it has tripled between 2000 and 2010 -LRB- this group also includes non-blacks -RRB- .
The indigenous populations of many West Indian islands , and much of the South-East of what is now the United States that had survived the 16th - and 17th-century epidemics of European-introduced diseases then became the victims of large-scale slave raiding , with much of the region completely depopulated .
When the supply of indigenous slaves ran out , the slaveholders looked to Africa -RRB- .
In the British West Indian islands -LRB- and also in the United States -RRB- , the majority of enslaved blacks brought across the Atlantic came from West Africa -LRB- roughly between modern Senegal and Ghana -RRB- .
Very little of Bermuda 's original black emigration came from this area .
Ernest Graham Ingham , an expatriate author , published his books at the turn of the 19th and 20th centuries .
In the 20th century , numerous books were written and published locally , though few were directed at a wider market than Bermuda .
The novelist Brian Burland -LRB- 1931 -- 2010 -RRB- achieved a degree of success and acclaim internationally .
One such 7 ft -LRB- 2.1 m -RRB- sculpture , created by Bermudian sculptor Chesley Trott , is installed at the airport 's baggage claim area .
Local artwork may also be viewed at several galleries around the island .
It is mentioned in Legatio Babylonica , published in 1511 by historian Pedro Mártir de Anglería , and was also included on Spanish charts of that year .
Neither Spain nor Portugal tried to settle it .
It established a colony at Jamestown , Virginia , in 1607 .
Somers had previous experience sailing with both Sir Francis Drake and Sir Walter Raleigh .
The flotilla was broken up by a storm .
As the flagship , the Sea Venture , was taking on water , Somers drove it onto Bermuda 's reef and gained the shores safely with smaller boats -- all 150 passengers and a dog survived .
In 1610 , all but three of the survivors of the Sea Venture sailed on to Jamestown .
St. George 's was settled that year and designated as Bermuda 's first capital .
As Great Britain displaced Spain as the dominant European imperial power , it opened up more land for colonial development .
A steady trickle of outward migration continued .
Agricultural production met with limited success , however .
The Bermuda cedar boxes used to ship tobacco to England were reportedly worth more than their contents .
Control of the Turks had passed to the Bahamas in 1819 .
.
On the night of 25 June 1902 , Duquesne slipped out of his tent , worked his way over a barbed-wire fence , swam 1.5 miles -LRB- 2.4 km -RRB- past patrol boats and bright spot lights , through storm-wracked , shark infested waters , using a distant lighthouse for navigation until he arrived ashore on the main island .
In 1942 , Col. Duquesne was arrested by the FBI for leading the Duquesne Spy Ring , which still to this day the largest espionage case in the history of the United States .
There is also a Deputy Governor -LRB- currently David Arkley JP -RRB- .
It must approve any changes to the Constitution of Bermuda .
In 1620 , a Royal Assent granted Bermuda limited self-governance ; its Parliament is the fifth oldest in the world , behind the Parliament of the United Kingdom , the Tynwald of the Isle of Man , the Althing of Iceland , and Sejm of Poland .
Of these , only Bermuda 's and the Isle of Man 's Tynwald have been in continuous existence since 1620 .
A cabinet is nominated by the premier and appointed officially by the governor .
The Senate is the upper house , consisting of 11 members appointed by the governor on the advice of the premier and the leader of the opposition .
There are few accredited diplomats in Bermuda .
The American diplomatic presence is an important element in the Bermuda political landscape .
Legislation was introduced by Private Members Bill by PLP MP Wayne Furbert to amend the Human Rights Act of Bermuda to disallow Same Sex Marriage under the Act in February 2016 .
This is a socio-economic bloc of nations in or near the Caribbean Sea .
Other outlying member states include the Co-operative Republic of Guyana and the Republic of Suriname in South America , along with Belize in Central America .
The Turks and Caicos Islands , an associate member of CARICOM , and the Commonwealth of The Bahamas , a full member of CARICOM , are in the Atlantic , but near to the Caribbean .
It had a history of African slavery , although Britain abolished it decades before the US .
-LRB- The prominent roles of West Indians among Bermuda 's black politicians and labour activists predated party politics in Bermuda , as exemplified by Dr. E. F. Gordon -RRB- .
The Bermuda government maintained a local militia .
Bermuda and Newfoundland were not originally included in the agreement , but both were added to it , with no war material received by the UK in exchange .
When promoted to Brigadier at age 39 , following his wounding at the Anzio landings , Harvey became the youngest-ever Royal Marine Brigadier .
US notes and coins are used interchangeably with Bermudian notes and coins within the islands for most practical purposes ; however , banks levy an exchange rate fee for the purchase of US dollars with Bermudian dollars .
Foreign private individuals can not easily open bank accounts or subscribe to mobile phone or internet services .
There are four hundred securities listed on the stock exchange , of which almost three hundred are offshore funds and alternative investment structures attracted by Bermuda 's regulatory environment .
Once these sports reached Bermuda , they were eagerly adopted by Bermudians .
Bermuda were knocked out of the World Cup .
Also very well-known is David Hemp , a former captain of Glamorgan in English first class cricket .
This tournament began in 1872 when Captain Moresby of the Royal Navy introduced the game to Bermuda , holding a match at Somerset to mark forty years since the unjust thraldom of slavery .
Moresby founded the Somerset Cricket Club which plays the St. George 's Cricket Club in this game -LRB- the membership of both clubs has long been mostly civilian -RRB- .
Bermuda also competed in Men 's Skeleton at the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin , Italy .
Patrick Singleton placed 19th , with a final time of 1:59.81 .
Jillian Teceira competed in the Beijing Olympics in 2008 .
Bermuda also competes in the biennial Island Games , which it hosted in 2013 .
Bermuda has developed a proud Rugby Union community .
They previously beat The Bahamas and Mexico to take the crown .
Rugby 7 's is also played , with four rounds scheduled to take place in the 2011 -- 2012 season .
The Bermuda 7 's team competed in the 2011 Las Vegas 7 's , defeating the Mexican team .
Modern-day Nigeria has been the site of numerous kingdoms and tribal states over the millennia .
The British set up administrative and legal structures whilst practising indirect rule through traditional chiefdoms .
Nigeria has one of the largest populations of youth in the world .
Nigeria is divided roughly in half between Christians , who live mostly in the southern part of the country , and Muslims in the northern part .
A minority of the population practise religions indigenous to Nigeria , such as those native to Igbo and Yoruba peoples .
Nigeria is considered to be an emerging market by the World Bank ; It has been identified as a regional power on the African continent , a middle power in international affairs , and has also been identified as an emerging global power .
Nigeria is a member of the MINT group of countries , which are widely seen as the globe 's next `` BRIC-like '' economies .
It is also listed among the `` Next Eleven '' economies set to become among the biggest in the world .
Nigeria is a founding member of the Commonwealth of Nations , the African Union , OPEC , and the United Nations amongst other international organisations .
Egerew n-igerewen means River of the Rivers .
Members of the clan trace their lineages back to the patriarchal king-figure Eri .
Cities in the area became regional centres in a broad network of trade routes that spanned western , central and northern Africa .
Europeans traded goods with peoples at the coast ; coastal trade with Europeans also marked the beginnings of the Atlantic slave trade .
Other major slaving ports in Nigeria were located in Badagry , Lagos on the Bight of Benin and on Bonny Island on the Bight of Biafra .
The majority of those enslaved and taken to these ports were captured in raids and wars .
Usually the captives were taken back to the conquerors ' territory as forced labour ; after time , they were sometimes acculturated and absorbed into the conquerors ' society .
A number of slave routes were established throughout Nigeria linking the hinterland areas with the major coastal ports .
The slave trade was engaged in by European state and non-state actors such as Great Britain , the Netherlands , Portugal and private companies , as well as various African states and non-state actors .
Britain annexed Lagos as a Crown Colony in August 1861 with the Lagos Treaty of Cession .
British missionaries expanded their operations and travelled further inland .
In 1864 , Samuel Ajayi Crowther became the first African bishop of the Anglican Church .
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries the independent kingdoms of what would become Nigeria fought a number of conflicts against the British Empire 's efforts to expand its territory .
The restraint or conquest of these states opened up the Niger area to British rule .
Some children of the southern elite went to Great Britain to pursue higher education .
The legacy , though less pronounced , continues to the present-day .
Imbalances between North and South were expressed in Nigeria 's political life as well .
Azikiwe became Nigeria 's maiden Governor-General in 1960 .
The cultural and political differences between Nigeria 's dominant ethnic groups -- the Hausa -LRB- ` Northerners ' -RRB- , Igbo -LRB- ` Easterners ' -RRB- and Yoruba -LRB- ` Westerners ' -RRB- -- were sharp .
But , the coup plotters struggled to form a central government .
President Nwafor Orizu handed over government control to the Army , then under the command of another Igbo officer , General JTU Aguiyi-Ironsi .
The Nigerian Civil War began as the official Nigerian government side -LRB- predominated by soldiers from the North and West -RRB- attacked Biafra -LRB- Southeastern -RRB- on 6 July 1967 at Garkem .
As oil revenues fuelled the rise of federal subventions to states , the federal government became the centre of political struggle and the threshold of power in the country .
As oil production and revenue rose , the Nigerian government became increasingly dependent on oil revenues and the international commodity markets for budgetary and economic concerns .
It did not develop other sources of the economy for economic stability .
Buhari promised major reforms , but his government fared little better than its predecessor .
He set 1990 as the official deadline for a return to democratic governance .
Babangida 's regime has been considered the most corrupt , and responsible for creating a culture of corruption in Nigeria .
The international media reported the elections as having run smoothly with relatively little violence or voter fraud , in contrast to previous elections .
Kin-selective altruism has made its way into Nigerian politics , resulting in tribalist efforts to concentrate Federal power to a particular region of their interests .
Because of the above issues , Nigeria 's political parties are pan-national and secular in character -LRB- though this does not preclude the continuing preeminence of the dominant ethnicities -RRB- .
Nigeria 's foreign policy was tested in the 1970s after the country emerged united from its own civil war .
It supported movements against white minority governments in the Southern Africa sub-region .
Nigeria has a varied landscape .
Coastal plains are found in both the southwest and the southeast .
This forest zone 's most southerly portion is defined as `` salt water swamp , '' also known as a mangrove swamp because of the large amount of mangroves in the area .
Guinean forest-savanna mosaic is plains of tall grass interrupted by trees .
Sudan savannah is similar but with shorter grasses and shorter trees .
Sahel savannah consists of patches of grass and sand , found in the northeast .
In the dry north-east corner of the country lies Lake Chad , which Nigeria shares with Niger , Chad and Cameroon .
Waste management including sewage treatment , the linked processes of deforestation and soil degradation , and climate change or global warming are the major environmental problems in Nigeria .
The plethora of states , of which there were only three at independence , reflect the country 's tumultuous history and the difficulties of managing such a heterogeneous national entity at all levels of government .
It has the seventh-largest trade surplus with the US of any country worldwide .
Nigeria is the 50th-largest export market for US goods and the 14th-largest exporter of goods to the US .
The United States is the country 's largest foreign investor .
The IMF further projects an 8 % growth in the Nigerian economy in 2011 .
In June 2013 , the company announced a strategic review of its operations in Nigeria , hinting that assets could be divested .
In August 2014 , Shell Oil Company said it was finalising its interests in four Nigerian oil fields .
Nigeria in recent years has been embracing industrialisation .
In this regard , some foreign vehicle manufacturing companies like Nissan have made known their plans to have manufacturing plants in Nigeria .
Nigeriasat-1 was part of the world-wide Disaster Monitoring Constellation System .
The primary objectives of the Nigeriasat-1 were : to give early warning signals of environmental disaster ; to help detect and control desertification in the northern part of Nigeria ; to assist in demographic planning ; to establish the relationship between malaria vectors and the environment that breeds malaria and to give early warning signals on future outbreaks of meningitis using remote sensing technology ; to provide the technology needed to bring education to all parts of the country through distant learning ; and to aid in conflict resolution and border disputes by mapping out state and International borders .
The NigeriaSat-2 spacecraft alone was built at a cost of over # 35 million .
The spacecraft was operated by NigComSat and the Nigerian Space Agency , NASRDA .
It was based on the Chinese DFH-4 satellite bus , and carries a variety of transponders : 4 C-band ; 14 Ku-band ; 8 Ka-band ; and 2 L-band .
It was designed to provide coverage to many parts of Africa , and the Ka-band transponders would also cover Italy .
National census results in the past few decades have been disputed .
The results of the most recent census were released in December 2006 and gave a population of 140,003,542 .
The only breakdown available was by gender : males numbered 71,709,859 , females numbered 68,293,08 .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Some of the largest of these , notably Yoruba and Igbo , have derived standardised languages from a number of different dialects and are widely spoken by those ethnic groups .
A large number of Sunni Muslims are members of Sufi brotherhoods .
Most Sufis follow the Qadiriyya , Tijaniyyah and/or the Mouride movements .
A significant Shia minority exists -LRB- see Shia in Nigeria -RRB- .
The majority of Quranists follow the Kalo Kato or Quraniyyun movement .
There are also Ahmadiyya and Mahdiyya minorities .
But in some recent report , the Christian population is now sightly larger than the Muslim population .
Additionally , the 2010s census of Association of Religion Data Archives has reported that 46.5 percent of the total population is Christian , slightly bigger than the Muslim population of 45.5 percent , and that 7.7 percent are members of other religious groups .
The middle belt of Nigeria contains the largest number of minority ethnic groups in Nigeria , who were found to be mostly Christians and members of traditional religions , with a small proportion of Muslims .
These include the Redeemed Christian Church of God , Winners ' Chapel , Christ Apostolic Church -LRB- the first Aladura Movement in Nigeria -RRB- , Deeper Christian Life Ministry , Evangelical Church of West Africa , Mountain of Fire and Miracles , Christ Embassy and The Synagogue Church Of All Nations .
In addition , The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , the Aladura Church , the Seventh-day Adventist and various indigenous churches have also experienced growth .
Health care delivery in Nigeria is a concurrent responsibility of the three tiers of government in the country , and the private sector .
The new strategy dramatically increased accessibility through community-based healthcare reform , resulting in more efficient and equitable provision of services .
A comprehensive approach strategy was extended to all areas of health care , with subsequent improvement in the health care indicators and improvement in health care efficiency and cost .
HIV/AIDS rate in Nigeria is much lower compared to the other African nations such as Kenya or South Africa whose prevalence -LRB- percentage -RRB- rates are in the double digits .
Nigeria became the second African country to have successfully carried out this surgery .
In the 2014 ebola outbreak , Nigeria was the first country to effectively contain and eliminate the Ebola threat that was ravaging three other countries in the West African region , the Nigerian unique method of contact tracing employed by Nigeria became an effective method later used by countries , such as the united States , when ebola threats were discovered .
Local authorities take responsibility for implementing policy for state-controlled public education and state schools at a regional level .
The education system is divided into Kindergarten , primary education , secondary education and tertiary education .
.
The various Nigerian Confraternities or `` campus cults '' are active in both organised crime and in political violence as well as providing a network of corruption within Nigeria .
As confraternities have extensive connections with political and military figures , they offer excellent alumni networking opportunities .
The Supreme Vikings Confraternity , for example , boasts that twelve members of the Rivers State House of Assembly are cult members .
On lower levels of society , there are the `` area boys '' , organised gangs mostly active in Lagos who specialise in mugging and small-scale drug dealing .
The victim is talked into exchanging bank account information on the premise that the money will be transferred to him , and then he 'll get to keep a cut .
In reality , money is taken out instead , and/or large fees -LRB- which seem small in comparison with the imaginary wealth he awaits -RRB- are deducted .
Nigeria has also been pervaded by political corruption .
Jonathan however dismissed the claim and replaced Sanusi for his mismanagement of the central bank 's budget .
A Senate committee also found Sanusi 's account to be lacking substance .
Football is largely considered the Nigeria 's national sport and the country has its own Premier League of football .
In April 1994 , the Super Eagles ranked 5th in the FIFA World Rankings , the highest ranking achieved by an African football team .
Other players that graduated from the junior teams are Nduka Ugbade , Jonathan Akpoborie , Victor Ikpeba , Celestine Babayaro , Wilson Oruma and Taye Taiwo .
Some other famous Nigerian footballers include John Obi Mikel , Obafemi Martins , Vincent Enyeama , Yakubu Aiyegbeni , Rashidi Yekini , Peter Odemwingie and Jay-Jay Okocha .
Although there is some evidence of earlier inhabitation in the region of Utrecht , dating back to the Stone Age -LRB- app .
2200 BCE -RRB- and settling in the Bronze Age -LRB- app .
1800 -- 800 BCE -RRB- , the founding date of the city is usually related to the construction of a Roman fortification -LRB- castellum -RRB- , probably built in around 50 CE .
Utrecht is first spoken of again several centuries after the Romans left .
The tenure of Willibrordus is generally considered to be the beginning of the Bishopric of Utrecht .
From then on Utrecht became one of the most influential seats of power for the Roman Catholic Church in the Netherlands .
The archbishops of Utrecht were based at the uneasy northern border of the Carolingian Empire .
In addition , the city of Utrecht had competition from the nearby trading centre Dorestad .
Several churches and monasteries were built inside , or close to , the city of Utrecht .
The choir and transept were finished from 1320 and were followed then by the ambitious Dom tower .
The last part to be constructed was the central nave , from 1420 .
Saint John -LRB- Janskerk -RRB- , originating in 1040 ; Saint Peter , building started in 1039 and Saint Mary 's church building started around 1090 -LRB- demolished in the early 19th century , cloister survives -RRB- .
When the main flow of the Rhine moved south , the old bed , which still flowed through the heart of the town became evermore canalized ; and the wharf system was built as an inner city harbour system .
On the wharfs storage facilities -LRB- werfkelders -RRB- were built , on top of which the main street , including houses was constructed .
The wharfs and the cellars are accessible from a platform at water level with stairs descending from the street level to form a unique structure .
This threatened shipping for the city and led the city of Utrecht to commission a canal to ensure access to the town for shipping trade : the Vaartse Rijn , connecting Utrecht to the Hollandse IJssel at IJsselstein .
The transition from independence to a relatively minor part of a larger union was not easily accepted .
In 1580 the new and predominantly Protestant state abolished the bishoprics , including the archbishopric of Utrecht .
This was the start of a long period of stagnation of trade and development in Utrecht .
The fortifications of the Nieuwe Hollandse Waterlinie were moved east of Utrecht .
The town walls could now be demolished to allow for expansion .
The moats remained intact and formed an important feature of the Zocher plantsoen , an English style landscape park that remains largely intact today .
After that , Utrecht gradually became the main hub of the Dutch railway network .
With the industrial revolution finally gathering speed in the Netherlands and the ramparts taken down , Utrecht began to grow far beyond the medieval centre .
From the 1880s onward neighbourhoods such as Oudwijk , Wittevrouwen , Vogelenbuurt to the East , and Lombok to the West were developed .
During this period , several Jugendstil houses and office buildings were built , followed by Rietveld who built the Rietveld Schröder House -LRB- 1924 -RRB- , and Dudok 's construction of the city theater -LRB- 1941 -RRB- .
Protest against further modernisation of the city centre followed even before the last buildings were finalised .
The music redeveloped music centre opened in 2014 where the original Vredenburg concert and rock and jazz halls are brought together in a single building .
Approximately 10 % of the population consists of immigrants from Western countries , while 21 % of the population is of non-Western origin -LRB- 9 % Moroccan , 5 % Turkish , 3 % Surinamese and Dutch Caribbean and 5 % of other countries -RRB- .
Some of the city 's boroughs have a relatively high percentage of originally non-Dutch inhabitants -- i.e. Kanaleneiland 83 % and Overvecht 57 % .
Like Rotterdam , Amsterdam , The Hague and other large Dutch cities , Utrecht faces some socio-economic problems .
It is sometimes argued that the close by municipalities De Bilt , Zeist , Houten , Vianen , Driebergen-Rijsenburg -LRB- Utrechtse Heuvelrug -RRB- , and Bunnik should also be counted towards the Utrecht agglomeration , bringing the total to 640,000 inhabitants .
Nevertheless , some tall buildings are now being constructed that will become part of the skyline of Utrecht .
The second tallest building of the city , the Rabobank-tower , was completed in 2010 and stands 105 m -LRB- 344.49 ft -RRB- tall .
Two antennas will increase that height to 120 m -LRB- 393.70 ft -RRB- .
These buildings , the ` Kantoortoren Galghenwert ' and ` Apollo Residence ' , stand 85.5 and 64.5 metres high respectively .
The Oudegracht is a curved canal , partly following the ancient main branch of the Rhine .
It is lined with the unique wharf-basement structures that create a two-level street along the canals .
Because of the role of Utrecht as a fortified city , construction outside the medieval centre and its city walls was restricted until the 19th century .
The Dutch Water Line , moved east of the city in the early 19th century required open lines of fire , thus prohibiting all permanent constructions until the middle of the 20th century on the east side of the city .
There are regular intercity services to all major Dutch cities ; direct services to Schiphol Airport .
A former station Utrecht Maliebaan closed in 1939 and has since been converted into the Dutch Railway Museum .
As a general rule , westbound buses depart from the bus station on the west entrance , other buses from the east side station .
Regional buses from the city are operated by Arriva and Connexxion .
Like most Dutch cities , Utrecht has an extensive network of cycle paths , making cycling safe and popular .
33 % of journeys within the city are by bicycle , more than any other mode of transport .
-LRB- Cars , for example , account for 30 % of trips -RRB- .
Bicycles are used by young and old people , and by individuals and families .
They are mostly traditional , upright , steel-framed bicycles , with few or no gears .
This 3-floor construction will cost an estimated 48 million Euro and will hold 12,500 bicycles .
Completion is foreseen in 2018 .
Utrecht is well-connected to the Dutch road network .
Other major motorways in the area are the Almere -- Breda A27 and the Utrecht -- Groningen A28 .
This has led to a passionate debate in the city about the best way to improve the city 's air quality .
Production industry constitutes a small part of the economy of Utrecht .
ProRail is headquartered in The De Inktpot -LRB- nl -RRB- -LRB- The Inkpot -RRB- -- the largest brick building in the Netherlands -LRB- the `` UFO '' featured on its façade stems from an art program in 2000 -RRB- .
In 20 years from 2004 , parts of Hoog Catharijne will be redeveloped as part of the renovation of the larger station area .
Utrecht hosts several large institutions of higher education .
The university is partially based in the inner city as well as in the Uithof campus area , to the east of the city .
There are several theatres and theatre companies .
The 1941 main city theatre was built by Dudok .
Besides theatres there is a large number of cinemas including three arthouse cinemas .
Its acoustics are considered among the best of the 20th-century original music halls .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The original Vredenburg music hall has been redeveloped as part of the larger station area redevelopment plan and in 2014 has gained additional halls that allowed its merger with the rock club Tivoli and the SJU jazzpodium .
There are several other venues for music throughout the city .
There is a specialised museum of automatically playing musical instruments .
There are many art galleries in Utrecht .
There are also several foundations to support art and artists .
The Centraal Museum has many exhibitions on the arts , including a permanent exhibition on the works of Utrecht resident illustrator Dick Bruna , who is best known for creating Miffy -LRB- `` Nijntje '' , in Dutch -RRB- .
There are also initiatives for amateur artists .
Additionally there are also several private initiatives .
Kampong 's men and women top hockey squads play in the highest Dutch hockey league , the Rabohoofdklasse.Utrecht is also home to the baseball and Sofball club : UVV which plays in the highest Dutch baseball league : de Hoofdklasse .
Viking is a large club open to the general public , and the student clubs Orca and Triton compete in the Varsity each year .
He was the eldest of three children .
Miksa 's father and grandfather were both born in Ond -LRB- now part of the town of Szerencs -RRB- , Zemplén County , northern Hungary .
Three generations of the Kann family lived in spacious apartments above the Kann-Heller offices in Budapest ; von Neumann 's family occupied an 18-room apartment on the top floor .
The family had no connection with the town ; the appellation was chosen in reference to Margaret , as was those chosen coat of arms depicting three marguerites .
A copy was contained in a private library Max purchased .
One of the rooms in the apartment was converted into a library and reading room , with bookshelves from ceiling to floor .
This was one of the best schools in Budapest , part of a brilliant education system designed for the elite .
Despite being run by the Lutheran Church , the majority of its pupils were Jewish .
The school system produced a generation noted for intellectual achievement , that included Theodore von Kármán -LRB- b. 1881 -RRB- , George de Hevesy -LRB- b. 1885 -RRB- , Leó Szilárd -LRB- b. 1898 -RRB- , Eugene Wigner -LRB- b. 1902 -RRB- , Edward Teller -LRB- b. 1908 -RRB- , and Paul Erdős -LRB- b. 1913 -RRB- .
Wigner was a year ahead of von Neumann at the Lutheran School .
Although Max insisted von Neumann attend school at the grade level appropriate to his age , he agreed to hire private tutors to give him advanced instruction in those areas in which he had displayed an aptitude .
On their first meeting , Szegő was so astounded with the boy 's mathematical talent that he was brought to tears .
Some of von Neumann 's instant solutions to the problems in calculus posed by Szegő , sketched out on his father 's stationery , are still on display at the von Neumann archive in Budapest .
Since there were few posts in Hungary for mathematicians , and those were not well-paid , his father wanted von Neumann to follow him into industry and therefore invest his time in a more financially useful endeavor than mathematics .
He passed his final examinations for his Ph.D. soon after graduating from ETH Zurich in 1926 .
He then went to the University of Göttingen on a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation to study mathematics under David Hilbert .
His reputed powers of speedy , massive memorization and recall allowed him to recite volumes of information , and even entire directories , with ease .
Max had died in 1929 .
None of the family had converted to Christianity while he was alive , but afterwards they all did .
The couple divorced in 1937 .
He remained a mathematics professor there until his death , although he announced that shortly before his intention to resign and become a professor at large at the University of California .
Von Neumann anglicized his first name to John , keeping the German-aristocratic surname of von Neumann .
His brothers changed theirs to `` Neumann '' and `` Vonneumann '' .
His prewar analysis is often quoted .
Asked about how France would stand up to Germany he said `` Oh , France wo n't matter . ''
Von Neumann liked to eat and drink ; his wife , Klara , said that he could count everything except calories .
He was a non-smoker .
Von Neumann did some of his best work blazingly fast in noisy , chaotic environments , and once admonished his wife for preparing a quiet study for him to work in .
He never used it , preferring the couple 's living room with its television playing loudly .
He believed that much of his mathematical thought occurred intuitively , and he would often go to sleep with a problem unsolved , and know the answer immediately upon waking up .
The axiomatization of mathematics , on the model of Euclid 's Elements , had reached new levels of rigour and breadth at the end of the 19th century , particularly in arithmetic , thanks to the axiom schema of Richard Dedekind and Charles Sanders Peirce , and geometry , thanks to David Hilbert .
Zermelo -- Fraenkel set theory provided a series of principles that allowed for the construction of the sets used in the everyday practice of mathematics .
But they did not explicitly exclude the possibility of the existence of a set that belongs to itself .
With this contribution of von Neumann , the axiomatic system of the theory of sets became fully satisfactory , and the next question was whether or not it was also definitive , and not subject to improvement .
This result was sufficiently innovative as to confound the majority of mathematicians of the time .
Von Neumann acknowledged Gödel 's priority in his next letter .
He never thought much of `` the American system of claiming personal priority for everything . ''
It followed his path-breaking work on rings of operators .
The work of Banach had implied that the problem of measure has a positive solution if n = 1 or n = 2 and a negative solution in all other cases .
In anticipation of his later study of dimension theory in algebras of operators , von Neumann used results on equivalence by finite decomposition , and reformulated the problem of measure in terms of functions .
One of von Neumann 's analyses was to reduce the classification of von Neumann algebras on separable Hilbert spaces to the classification of factors .
Von Neumann provided an abstract exploration of dimension in completed complemented modular topological lattices : `` Dimension is determined , up to a positive linear transformation , by the following two properties .
The deepest part of the proof concerns the equivalence of perspectivity with `` projectivity by decomposition '' -- of which a corollary is the transitivity of perspectivity . ''
Additionally , '' -LSB- I -RSB- n the general case , von Neumann proved the following basic representation theorem .
Any complemented modular lattice L having a `` basis '' of n ≥ 4 pairwise perspective elements , is isomorphic with the lattice ℛ -LRB- R -RRB- of all principal right-ideals of a suitable regular ring R .
He realized , in 1926 , that a state of a quantum system could be represented by a point in a -LRB- complex -RRB- Hilbert space that , in general , could be infinite-dimensional even for a single particle .
In this formalism of quantum mechanics , observable quantities such as position or momentum are represented as linear operators acting on the Hilbert space associated with the quantum system .
When Heisenberg was informed von Neumann had clarified the difference between an unbounded operator that was a Self-adjoint operator and one that was merely symmetric , Heisenberg replied `` Eh ?
What is the difference ? ''
In a chapter of The Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics , von Neumann deeply analyzed the so-called measurement problem .
For example , photons can not pass through two successive filters that are polarized perpendicularly -LRB- e.g. , one horizontally and the other vertically -RRB- , and therefore , a fortiori , it can not pass if a third filter polarized diagonally is added to the other two , either before or after them in the succession , but if the third filter is added in between the other two , the photons will , indeed , pass through .
This experimental fact is translatable into logic as the non-commutativity of conjunction .
The player then plays out the strategy that will result in the minimization of his maximum loss .
Suppose we are dealing with particles -LRB- such as electrons -RRB- of semi-integral spin -LRB- angular momentum -RRB- for which there are only two possible values : positive or negative .
Then , a principle of indetermination establishes that the spin , relative to two different directions -LRB- e.g. , x and y -RRB- results in a pair of incompatible quantities .
Suppose that the state ɸ of a certain electron verifies the proposition `` the spin of the electron in the x direction is positive . ''
By the principle of indeterminacy , the value of the spin in the direction y will be completely indeterminate for ɸ .
Hence , ɸ can verify neither the proposition `` the spin in the direction of y is positive '' nor the proposition `` the spin in the direction of y is negative . ''
Nevertheless , the disjunction of the propositions `` the spin in the direction of y is positive or the spin in the direction of y is negative '' must be true for ɸ .
In the case of distribution , it is therefore possible to have a situation in which , while .
Von Neumann showed that their minimaxes are equal -LRB- in absolute value -RRB- and contrary -LRB- in sign -RRB- .
Morgenstern wrote a paper on game theory and thought he would show it to von Neumann because of his interest in the subject .
He read it and said to Morgenstern that he should put more in it .
This was repeated a couple of times , and then von Neumann became a coauthor and the paper became 100 pages long .
Then it became a book .
The public interest in this work was such that The New York Times ran a front-page story .
In this book , von Neumann declared that economic theory needed to use functional analytic methods , especially convex sets and topological fixed-point theorem , rather than the traditional differential calculus , because the maximum-operator did not preserve differentiable functions .
along with two inequality systems expressing economic efficiency .
The study of von Neumann 's model of an expanding economy continues to interest mathematical economists with interests in computational economics .
Von Neumann 's famous 9-page paper started life as a talk at Princeton and then became a paper in Germany , which was eventually translated into English .
Von Neumann found some faults in that book and corrected them , for example , replacing equations by inequalities .
He noticed that Walras 's General Equilibrium Theory and Walras ' Law , which led to systems of simultaneous linear equations , could produce the absurd result that the profit could be maximized by producing and selling a negative quantity of a product .
He replaced the equations by inequalities , introduced dynamic equilibria , among other things , and eventually produced the paper .
Von Neumann made fundamental contributions to mathematical statistics .
For example , with Robert D. Richtmyer he developed an algorithm defining artificial viscosity that improved the understanding of shock waves .
Other well known contributions to fluid dynamics included the classic flow solution to blast waves , and the co-discovery of the ZND detonation model of explosives .
Implosion was the only method that could be used with the plutonium-239 that was available from the Hanford Site .
He established the design of the explosive lenses required , but there remained concerns about `` edge effects '' and imperfections in the explosives .
Based on his observation alone , von Neumann estimated the test had resulted in a blast equivalent to 5 kilotons of TNT -LRB- 21 TJ -RRB- but Enrico Fermi produced a more accurate estimate of 10 kilotons by dropping scraps of torn-up paper as the shock wave passed his location and watching how far they scattered .
It was in von Neumann 's 1944 papers that the expression `` kilotons '' appeared for the first time .
After the war , Robert Oppenheimer remarked that the physicists involved in the Manhattan project had `` known sin '' .
Von Neumann 's response was that `` sometimes someone confesses a sin in order to take credit for it . ''
Von Neumann continued unperturbed in his work and became , along with Edward Teller , one of those who sustained the hydrogen bomb project .
The Fuchs -- von Neumann patent used radiation implosion , but not in the same way as is used in what became the final hydrogen bomb design , the Teller -- Ulam design .
Their work was , however , incorporated into the `` George '' shot of Operation Greenhouse , which was instructive in testing out concepts that went into the final design .
The historian Jeremy Bernstein has pointed out that ironically , `` John von Neumann and Klaus Fuchs , produced a brilliant invention in 1946 that could have changed the whole course of the development of the hydrogen bomb , but was not fully understood until after the bomb had been successfully made . ''
He involved himself in correcting the severe shortage of tritium and lithium 6 needed for these compact weapons , and he argued against settling for the intermediate range missiles that the Army wanted .
He said the Russians would probably be building a similar weapon system , which turned out to be the case .
Shortly before his death , when he was already quite ill , von Neumann headed the United States government 's top secret ICBM committee , and it would sometimes meet in his home .
The feasibility of an ICBM owed as much to improved , smaller warheads as it did to developments in rocketry , and his understanding of the former made his advice invaluable .
-LRB- Other humorous acronyms coined by von Neumann include his computer , the Mathematical Analyzer , Numerical Integrator , and Computer -- or MANIAC -RRB- .
He also `` moved heaven and earth '' to bring MAD about .
He was quoted in 1950 remarking , `` If you say why not bomb -LSB- the Soviets -RSB- tomorrow , I say , why not today ?
If you say today at five o'clock , I say why not one o'clock ? ''
Von Neumann wrote the sorting program for the EDVAC in ink , being 23 pages long ; traces can still be seen on the first page of the phrase `` TOP SECRET '' , which was written in pencil and later erased .
His algorithm for simulating a fair coin with a biased coin is used in the `` software whitening '' stage of some hardware random number generators .
Though this method has been criticized as crude , von Neumann was aware of this : he justified it as being faster than any other method at his disposal , and also noted that when it went awry it did so obviously , unlike methods which could be subtly incorrect .
`` Anyone who considers arithmetical methods of producing random digits is , of course , in a state of sin . ''
The paper , whose premature distribution nullified the patent claims of EDVAC designers J. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly , described a computer architecture in which the data and the program are both stored in the computer 's memory in the same address space .
John von Neumann also consulted for the ENIAC project .
Some of von Neumann 's early computer programs have been preserved .
The next computer that von Neumann designed was the IAS machine at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton , New Jersey .
John von Neumann recommended that the IBM 701 , nicknamed the defense computer include a magnetic drum .
It was a faster version of the IAS machine and formed the basis for the commercially successful IBM 704 .
He also created the field of cellular automata without the aid of computers , constructing the first self-replicating automata with pencil and graph paper .
The concept of a universal constructor was fleshed out in his posthumous work Theory of Self Reproducing Automata .
Von Neumann proved that the most effective way of performing large-scale mining operations such as mining an entire moon or asteroid belt would be by using self-replicating spacecraft , taking advantage of their exponential growth .
His rigorous mathematical analysis of the structure of self-replication -LRB- of the semiotic relationship between constructor , description and that which is constructed -RRB- , preceded the discovery of the structure of DNA .
Von Neumann 's interest in weather systems and meteorological prediction led him to propose manipulating the environment by spreading colorants on the polar ice caps to enhance absorption of solar radiation -LRB- by reducing the albedo -RRB- .
thereby inducing global warming .
Eugene Wigner wrote that , seeing von Neumann 's mind at work , `` one had the impression of a perfect instrument whose gears were machined to mesh accurately to a thousandth of an inch . ''
Israel Halperin said : `` Keeping up with him was ... impossible .
The feeling was you were on a tricycle chasing a racing car . ''
Edward Teller wrote that von Neumann effortlessly outdid anybody he ever met , and said `` I never could keep up with him '' .
Teller also said `` von Neumann would carry on a conversation with my 3-year-old son , and the two of them would talk as equals , and I sometimes wondered if he used the same principle when he talked to the rest of us .
He was a genius . ''
If in the course of a lecture I stated an unsolved problem , the chances were he 'd come to me at the end of the lecture with the complete solution scribbled on a slip of paper . ''
Halmos recounts a story told by Nicholas Metropolis , concerning the speed of von Neumann 's calculations , when somebody asked von Neumann to solve the famous fly puzzle :
As far as I could tell , von Neumann was able on once reading a book or article to quote it back verbatim ; moreover , he could do it years later without hesitation .
He could also translate it at no diminution in speed from its original language into English .
On one occasion I tested his ability by asking him to tell me how A Tale of Two Cities started .
`` It seems fair to say that if the influence of a scientist is interpreted broadly enough to include impact on fields beyond science proper , then John von Neumann was probably the most influential mathematician who ever lived , '' wrote Miklós Rédei in `` Selected Letters . ''
In this period von Neumann returned to the Roman Catholic faith that had also been significant to his mother after the family 's conversion in 1929 -- 1930 .
John had earlier said to his mother , `` There is probably a God .
Many things are easier to explain if there is than if there is n't . ''
Von Neumann held on to his exemplary knowledge of Latin and quoted to a deathbed visitor the declamation `` Judex ergo cum sedebit , '' and ends `` Quid sum miser tunc dicturus ?
Quem patronum rogaturus , Cum vix iustus sit securus ? ''
-LRB- When the judge His seat hath taken ... What shall wretched I then plead ?
Who for me shall intercede when the righteous scarce is freed ? -RRB-
He invited a Roman Catholic priest , Father Anselm Strittmatter , O.S.B. , to visit him for consultation .
Von Neumann reportedly said in explanation that Pascal had a point , referring to Pascal 's Wager .
The stated clauses of the Nazi-Soviet non-aggression pact were a guarantee of non-belligerence by each party towards the other , and a written commitment that neither party would ally itself to , or aid , an enemy of the other party .
Thereafter , Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939 .
After the Soviet -- Japanese ceasefire agreement took effect on 16 September , Stalin ordered his own invasion of Poland on 17 September .
The outcome of the First World War was disastrous for both the German Reich and the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic .
Consequently , Nazi theory held that Slavs in the Soviet Union were being ruled by `` Jewish Bolshevik '' masters .
In 1934 , Hitler himself had spoken of an inescapable battle against both Pan-Slavism and Neo-Slavism , the victory in which would lead to `` permanent mastery of the world '' , though he stated that they would `` walk part of the road with the Russians , if that will help us . ''
The resulting manifestation of German anti-Bolshevism and an increase in Soviet foreign debts caused German -- Soviet trade to dramatically decline .
-LSB- clarification needed -RSB-
This policy immediately raised the question of whether the Soviet Union could avoid being next on Hitler 's list .
For Germany , because an autarkic economic approach or an alliance with Britain were impossible , closer relations with the Soviet Union to obtain raw materials became necessary , if not just for economic reasons alone .
The third Soviet Five Year Plan required new infusions of technology and industrial equipment .
These contrasting attitudes partly explain why the USSR has often been charged with playing a double game in 1939 : carrying on open negotiations for an alliance with Britain and France while secretly considering propositions from Germany .
By the end of May , drafts were formally presented .
The discussion was focused on potential guarantees to central and east European countries should a German aggression arise .
The USSR proposed to consider that a political turn towards Germany by the Baltic states would constitute an `` indirect aggression '' towards the Soviet Union .
On August 19 , the 1939 German -- Soviet Commercial Agreement was finally signed .
On 21 August , the Soviets suspended Tripartite military talks , citing other reasons .
This happened while the Soviets were still negotiating with the British and French missions in Moscow .
With the Western nations unwilling to accede to Soviet demands , Stalin instead entered a secret Nazi -- Soviet pact .
Most notably , there was also a secret protocol to the pact , revealed only after Germany 's defeat in 1945 , although hints about its provisions were leaked much earlier , e.g. , to influence Lithuania .
According to said protocol Romania , Poland , Lithuania , Latvia , Estonia and Finland were divided into German and Soviet `` spheres of influence '' .
In the north , Finland , Estonia and Latvia were assigned to the Soviet sphere .
On 24 August , Pravda and Izvestia carried news of the non-secret portions of the Pact , complete with the now infamous front-page picture of Molotov signing the treaty , with a smiling Stalin looking on .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The day after the Pact was signed , the French and British military negotiation delegation urgently requested a meeting with Soviet military negotiator Kliment Voroshilov .
Within the first few days of the invasion , Germany began conducting massacres of Polish and Jewish civilians and POWs .
The Luftwaffe also took part by strafing fleeing civilian refugees on roads and carrying out a bombing campaign .
On 21 September , the Soviets and Germans signed a formal agreement coordinating military movements in Poland , including the `` purging '' of saboteurs .
Stalin had decided in August that he was going to liquidate the Polish state , and a German -- Soviet meeting in September addressed the future structure of the `` Polish region '' .
Soviet authorities immediately started a campaign of Sovietization of the newly acquired areas .
On 28 September 1939 , the Soviet Union and German Reich issued a joint declaration in which they declared :
After the Baltic states were forced to accept treaties , Stalin turned his sights on Finland , confident that Finnish capitulation could be attained without great effort .
The Soviets demanded territories on the Karelian Isthmus , the islands of the Gulf of Finland and a military base near the Finnish capital Helsinki , which Finland rejected .
The Soviets staged the shelling of Mainila and used it as a pretext to withdraw from the non-aggression pact .
The Red Army attacked in November 1939 .
-LSB- clarification needed -RSB- The leader of the Leningrad Military District Andrei Zhdanov commissioned a celebratory piece from Dmitri Shostakovich , entitled `` Suite on Finnish Themes '' to be performed as the marching bands of the Red Army would be parading through Helsinki .
State administrations were liquidated and replaced by Soviet cadres , in which 34,250 Latvians , 75,000 Lithuanians and almost 60,000 Estonians were deported or killed .
The Hertza region was initially not requested by the USSR but was later occupied by force after the Romanians agreed to the initial Soviet demands .
The subsequent waves of deportations began in Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina .
Elimination of Polish elites and intelligentia was part of Generalplan Ost .
All Polish males were required to perform forced labour .
While ethnic Poles were subject to selective persecution , all ethnic Jews were targeted by the Reich .
In the winter of 1939 -- 40 , about 100,000 Jews were thus deported to Poland .
Poles and ethnic Jews were imprisoned in nearly every camp of the extensive concentration camp system in German-occupied Poland and the Reich .
On 10 January 1941 , Germany and the Soviet Union signed an agreement settling several ongoing issues .
The agreement formally set the border between Germany and the Soviet Union between the Igorka river and the Baltic Sea .
Before the pact 's announcement , Communists in the West denied that such a treaty would be signed .
Beginning in September 1939 , the Soviet Comintern suspended all anti-Nazi and anti-fascist propaganda , explaining that the war in Europe was a matter of capitalist states attacking each other for imperialist purposes .
When anti-German demonstrations erupted in Prague , Czechoslovakia , the Comintern ordered the Czech Communist Party to employ all of its strength to paralyze `` chauvinist elements . ''
Moscow soon forced the Communist Parties of France and Great Britain to adopt an anti-war position .
On 7 September , Stalin called Georgi Dimitrov , -LSB- clarification needed -RSB- and the latter sketched a new Comintern line on the war .
Thus , the various western Communist parties now had to oppose the war , and to vote against war credits .
Other Communists also deserted from the army .
The Communist Party of Germany featured similar attitudes .
The Soviet people and the working people of Germany have an interest in preventing the English war plan . ''
-LSB- ... -RSB- There is absolutely no justification for this kind of war .
The ideology of Hitlerism , just like any other ideological system , can be accepted or rejected , this is a matter of political views .
But everyone grasps , that an ideology can not be exterminated by force , must not be finished off with a war . ''
The trade pact helped Germany to surmount a British blockade of Germany .
The Soviets would also receive oil and electric equipment , locomotives , turbines , generators , diesel engines , ships , machine tools and samples of German artillery , tanks , explosives , chemical-warfare equipment and other items .
This also provided a refueling and maintenance location , and a takeoff point for raids and attacks on shipping .
The Finnish and Baltic invasions began a deterioration of relations between the Soviets and Germany .
Molotov 's reassurances to the Germans , and the Germans ' mistrust , intensified .
The suspension created significant resource problems for Germany .
The move raised tensions with the Soviets , who responded that Germany was supposed to have consulted with the Soviet Union under Article III of the Molotov -- Ribbentrop Pact .
Stalin sent Molotov to Berlin to negotiate the terms for the Soviet Union to join the Axis and potentially enjoy the spoils of the pact .
After negotiations during November 1940 on where to extend the USSR 's sphere of influence , Hitler broke off talks and continued planning for the eventual attempts to invade the Soviet Union .
In an effort to demonstrate peaceful intentions toward Germany , on 13 April 1941 , the Soviets signed a neutrality pact with Axis power Japan .
Stalin felt that there was a growing split in German circles about whether Germany should initiate a war with the Soviet Union .
Stalin had ignored several warnings that Germany was likely to invade , and ordered no ` full-scale ' mobilization of forces although the mobilization was ongoing .
The lucrative export of Soviet raw materials to Nazi Germany over the course of the Nazi -- Soviet economic relations -LRB- 1934 -- 41 -RRB- continued uninterrupted until the outbreak of hostilities .
The Soviet exports in several key areas enabled Germany to maintain its stocks of rubber and grain from the first day of the invasion until October 1941 .
In May 1945 , von Loesch approached the British Lt. Col. Robert C. Thomson with the request to transmit a personal letter to Duncan Sandys , Churchill 's son-in-law .
In the letter , von Loesch revealed that he had knowledge of the documents ' whereabouts but expected preferential treatment in return .
The microfilms contained a copy of the Non-Aggression Treaty as well as the Secret Protocol .
The decision to publish the key documents on German -- Soviet relations , including the treaty and protocol , had been taken already in spring 1947 .
Sontag and Beddie prepared the collection throughout the summer of 1947 .
Since negotiations at that conference did not prove constructive from an American point of view , the document edition was sent to press .
The documents made headlines worldwide .
For decades , it was the official policy of the Soviet Union to deny the existence of the secret protocol to the Soviet -- German Pact .
As a result , the Congress passed the declaration confirming the existence of the secret protocols , condemning and denouncing them .
The Federal Republic of Germany declared this on September 1 , 1989 and the Soviet Union on December 24 , 1989 , following an examination of the microfilmed copy of the German originals .
Regarding the timing of German rapprochement , many historians agree that the dismissal of Maxim Litvinov , whose Jewish ethnicity was viewed unfavorably by Nazi Germany , removed an obstacle to negotiations with Germany .
Given Litvinov 's prior attempts to create an anti-fascist coalition , association with the doctrine of collective security with France and Britain , and pro-Western orientation by the standards of the Kremlin , his dismissal indicated the existence of a Soviet option of rapprochement with Germany .
-LSB- f -RSB- Likewise , Molotov 's appointment served as a signal to Germany that the USSR was open to offers .
The dismissal also signaled to France and Britain the existence of a potential negotiation option with Germany .
One British official wrote that Litvinov 's disappearance also meant the loss of an admirable technician or shock-absorber , while Molotov 's `` modus operandi '' was `` more truly Bolshevik than diplomatic or cosmopolitan . ''
Carr argued that the Soviet Union 's replacement of Foreign Minister Litvinov with Molotov on May 3 , 1939 indicated not an irrevocable shift towards alignment with Germany , but rather was Stalin 's way of engaging in hard bargaining with the British and the French by appointing a proverbial hard man , namely Molotov , to the Foreign Commissariat .
Historian Albert Resis stated that the Litvinov dismissal gave the Soviets freedom to pursue faster-paced German negotiations , but that they did not abandon British -- French talks .
Edward Hallett Carr , a frequent defender of Soviet policy , stated : `` In return for ` non-intervention ' Stalin secured a breathing space of immunity from German attack . ''
-LSB- page needed -RSB- However , during the last decades , this view has been disputed .
In Maser 's view , `` neither Germany nor Japan were in a situation -LSB- of -RSB- invading the USSR even with the least perspective -LSB- sic -RSB- of success , '' and this could not have been unknown to Stalin .
Carr further stated that , for a long time , the primary motive of Stalin 's sudden change of course was assumed to be the fear of German aggressive intentions .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- This idea is supported by Albert L. Weeks .
The conductors can be thin films , foils or sintered beads of metal or conductive electrolyte , etc. .
The nonconducting dielectric acts to increase the capacitor 's charge capacity .
Materials commonly used as dielectrics include glass , ceramic , plastic film , air , vacuum , paper , mica , and oxide layers .
Capacitors are widely used as parts of electrical circuits in many common electrical devices .
Unlike a resistor , an ideal capacitor does not dissipate energy .
Von Kleist found that touching the wire resulted in a powerful spark , much more painful than that obtained from an electrostatic machine .
He also was impressed by the power of the shock he received , writing , `` I would not take a second shock for the kingdom of France . ''
He also adopted the term `` battery '' , -LRB- denoting the increasing of power with a row of similar units as in a battery of cannon -RRB- , subsequently applied to clusters of electrochemical cells .
Because the double layer mechanism was not known by him at the time , he wrote in the patent : `` It is not known exactly what is taking place in the component if it is used for energy storage , but it leads to an extremely high capacity . ''
.
In simpler terms , the dielectric is just an electrical insulator .
Examples of dielectric media are glass , air , paper , vacuum , and even a semiconductor depletion region chemically identical to the conductors .
In SI units , a capacitance of one farad means that one coulomb of charge on each conductor causes a voltage of one volt across the device .
This is the integral form of the capacitor equation :
This model may also be used to make qualitative predictions for other device geometries .
In addition , these equations assume that the electric field is entirely concentrated in the dielectric between the plates .
This is sometimes called parasitic capacitance .
For some simple capacitor geometries this additional capacitance term can be calculated analytically .
Capacitors deviate from the ideal capacitor equation in a number of ways .
There is yet another group , which may be linear but invalidate the assumption in the analysis that capacitance is a constant .
Finally , combined parasitic effects such as inherent inductance , resistance , or dielectric losses can exhibit non-uniform behavior at variable frequencies of operation .
Typical ratings for capacitors used for general electronics applications range from a few volts to 1 kV .
Once this starts to happen , the breakdown quickly tracks through the dielectric until it reaches the opposite plate , leaving carbon behind and causing a short -LRB- or relatively low resistance -RRB- circuit .
The results can be explosive as the short in the capacitor draws current from the surrounding circuitry and dissipates the energy .
Aging is fastest near the beginning of life of the component , and the device stabilizes over time .
Electrolytic capacitors age as the electrolyte evaporates .
In contrast with ceramic capacitors , this occurs towards the end of life of the component .
Some dielectrics also generate piezoelectricity .
This can generate audible sound , but drains energy and stresses the dielectric and the electrolyte , if any .
The current and voltage will tend to oscillate and may reverse direction several times , with each peak being lower than the previous , until the system reaches an equilibrium .
This is often referred to as ringing .
Reversal is also encountered in AC circuits , where the peak current will be equal in each direction .
For maximum life , capacitors usually need to be able to handle the maximum amount of reversal that a system will experience .
Capacitors made with any type of dielectric material will show some level of `` dielectric absorption '' or `` soakage '' .
This effect can be objectionable in applications such as precision sample and hold circuits or timing circuits .
However , the primary factor is the type of dielectric material .
In some capacitors where dangerous voltages and energies exist , such as in flashtubes , television sets , and defibrillators , the dielectric absorption can recharge the capacitor to hazardous voltages after it has been shorted or discharged .
A capacitor may regain anywhere from 0.01 to 20 % of its original charge over a period of several minutes , allowing a seemingly safe capacitor to become surprisingly dangerous .
Similar considerations apply to component fabricated solid-state -LRB- transistor -RRB- amplifiers , but owing to lower heat production and the use of modern polyester dielectric barriers this once-common problem has become relatively rare .
These dielectrics are most often insulators .
Several solid dielectrics are available , including paper , plastic , glass , mica and ceramic materials .
Ceramic capacitors are generally small , cheap and useful for high frequency applications , although their capacitance varies strongly with voltage and they age poorly .
They are broadly categorized as class 1 dielectrics , which have predictable variation of capacitance with temperature or class 2 dielectrics , which can operate at higher voltage .
Electrolytic capacitors and supercapacitors are used to store small and larger amounts of energy , respectively , ceramic capacitors are often used in resonators , and parasitic capacitance occurs in circuits wherever the simple conductor-insulator-conductor structure is formed unintentionally by the configuration of the circuit layout .
The second electrode is a liquid electrolyte , connected to the circuit by another foil plate .
Electrolytic capacitors offer very high capacitance but suffer from poor tolerances , high instability , gradual loss of capacitance especially when subjected to heat , and high leakage current .
Poor quality capacitors may leak electrolyte , which is harmful to printed circuit boards .
While widely used for power-supply conditioning , poor high-frequency characteristics make them unsuitable for many applications .
Electrolytic capacitors will self-degrade if unused for a period -LRB- around a year -RRB- , and when full power is applied may short circuit , permanently damaging the capacitor and usually blowing a fuse or causing failure of rectifier diodes -LRB- for instance , in older equipment , arcing in rectifier tubes -RRB- .
Unfortunately , the use of this technique may be less satisfactory for some solid state equipment , which may be damaged by operation below its normal power range , requiring that the power supply first be isolated from the consuming circuits .
Several other types of capacitor are available for specialist applications .
They are commonly used in electric motor circuits and are often designed to handle large currents , so they tend to be physically large .
They are usually ruggedly packaged , often in metal cases that can be easily grounded/earthed .
Under transient conditions , the displacement field can be expressed as -LRB- see electric susceptibility -RRB- :
The arrangement of plates and dielectric has many variations depending on the desired ratings of the capacitor .
The leads -LRB- until bent -RRB- are usually in planes parallel to that of the flat body of the capacitor , and extend in the same direction ; they are often parallel as manufactured .
Most capacitors have numbers printed on their bodies to indicate their electrical characteristics .
Audio equipment , for example , uses several capacitors in this way , to shunt away power line hum before it gets into the signal circuitry .
If the inductance is large enough , the energy will generate a spark , causing the contact points to oxidize , deteriorate , or sometimes weld together , or destroying a solid-state switch .
Snubber capacitors are usually employed with a low-value resistor in series , to dissipate energy and minimize RFI .
Such resistor-capacitor combinations are available in a single package .
When the secondary -LRB- start -RRB- winding is placed at an angle with respect to the primary -LRB- run -RRB- winding , a rotating electric field is created .
The force of the rotational field is not constant , but is sufficient to start the rotor spinning .
These are called capacitor-start motors , that have relatively high starting torque .
Typically they can have up-to four times as much starting torque than a split-phase motor and are used on applications such as compressors , pressure washers and any small device requiring high starting torques .
Capacitors may retain a charge long after power is removed from a circuit ; this charge can cause dangerous or even potentially fatal shocks or damage connected equipment .
This is easily capable of delivering a shock .
Capacitors may also have built-in discharge resistors to dissipate stored energy to a safe level within a few seconds after power is removed .
Dielectric or metal interconnection failures may create arcing that vaporizes the dielectric fluid , resulting in case bulging , rupture , or even an explosion .
Scientific methods are considered to be so fundamental to modern science that some consider earlier inquiries into nature to be pre-scientific .
Traditionally , historians of science have defined science sufficiently broadly to include those inquiries .
These other tasks included systematic studies of nature , study of written information gathered and recorded by others , and often of adding to that body of information .
However , while Egyptian medicine had some effective practices , it was not without its ineffective and sometimes harmful practices .
Medical historians believe that ancient Egyptian pharmacology , for example , was largely ineffective .
Nevertheless , it applies the following components to the treatment of disease : examination , diagnosis , treatment , and prognosis , which display strong parallels to the basic empirical method of science and according to G. E. R. Lloyd played a significant role in the development of this methodology .
The Ebers papyrus -LRB- c. 1550 BC -RRB- also contains evidence of traditional empiricism .
But their observations and measurements were seemingly taken for purposes other than for elucidating scientific laws .
... , dated 1900 BC , possibly millennia before Pythagoras , but an abstract formulation of the Pythagorean theorem was not .
Using these data they developed arithmetical methods to compute the changing length of daylight in the course of the year and to predict the appearances and disappearances of the Moon and planets and eclipses of the Sun and Moon .
Babylonian astronomy was `` the first and highly successful attempt at giving a refined mathematical description of astronomical phenomena . ''
Leucippus -LRB- 5th century BC -RRB- introduced atomism , the theory that all matter is made of indivisible , imperishable units called atoms .
This was greatly expanded by his pupil Democritus .
Aristotle also produced many biological writings that were empirical in nature , focusing on biological causation and the diversity of life .
Aristotle 's writings profoundly influenced subsequent Islamic and European scholarship , though they were eventually superseded in the Scientific Revolution .
Thus , clear unbroken lines of influence lead from ancient Greek and Hellenistic philosophers , to medieval Muslim philosophers and scientists , to the European Renaissance and Enlightenment , to the secular sciences of the modern day .
According to Benjamin Farrington , former Professor of Classics at Swansea University :
Technological artifacts of similar complexity did not reappear until the 14th century , when mechanical astronomical clocks appeared in Europe .
He is also known in physics for laying the foundations of hydrostatics , statics , and the explanation of the principle of the lever .
His recognition of the importance of crystal shape is a precursor to modern crystallography , while mention of numerous other minerals presages mineralogy .
He also recognises that other minerals have characteristic crystal shapes , but in one example , confuses the crystal habit with the work of lapidaries .
They also tried to standardize measurement of length to a high degree of accuracy .
Bricks manufactured in ancient Mohenjo-daro often had dimensions that were integral multiples of this unit of length .
During the 14th -- 16th centuries , the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics made significant advances in astronomy and especially mathematics , including fields such as trigonometry and analysis .
In particular , Madhava of Sangamagrama is considered the `` founder of mathematical analysis '' .
According to Sarma -LRB- 2008 -RRB- : `` One finds in the Rigveda intelligent speculations about the genesis of the universe from nonexistence , the configuration of the universe , the spherical self-supporting earth , and the year of 360 days divided into 12 equal parts of 30 days each with a periodical intercalary month . ''
.
The spoken language uses a similar system to English : e.g. four thousand two hundred seven .
No symbol was used for zero .
Pascal 's triangle for binomial coefficients was described around 1100 by Jia Xian .
See Zhang 's seismometer for further details .
There are many notable contributors to the field of Chinese science throughout the ages .
If not for Shen Kuo 's writing , the architectural works of Yu Hao would be little known , along with the inventor of movable type printing , Bi Sheng -LRB- 990-1051 -RRB- .
Shen 's contemporary Su Song -LRB- 1020 -- 1101 -RRB- was also a brilliant polymath , an astronomer who created a celestial atlas of star maps , wrote a pharmaceutical treatise with related subjects of botany , zoology , mineralogy , and metallurgy , and had erected a large astronomical clocktower in Kaifeng city in 1088 .
To operate the crowning armillary sphere , his clocktower featured an escapement mechanism and the world 's oldest known use of an endless power-transmitting chain drive .
The Jesuit China missions of the 16th and 17th centuries `` learned to appreciate the scientific achievements of this ancient culture and made them known in Europe .
Through their correspondence European scientists first learned about the Chinese science and culture . ''
This scholarship was aided by several factors .
Access to Greek texts from the Byzantine Empire , along with Indian sources of learning , provided Muslim scholars a knowledge base to build upon .
The most important development of the scientific method was the use of experiments to distinguish between competing scientific theories set within a generally empirical orientation , which began among Muslim scientists .
Some have also described Ibn al-Haytham as the `` first scientist '' for his development of the modern scientific method .
Heliocentric theories may have also been discussed by several other Muslim astronomers such as Ja ` far ibn Muhammad Abu Ma ` shar al-Balkhi , Abu-Rayhan Biruni , Abu Said al-Sijzi , Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi , and Najm al-Dīn al-Qazwīnī al-Kātibī .
The contact with the Islamic world in Spain and Sicily , and during the Reconquista and the Crusades , allowed Europeans access to scientific Greek and Arabic texts , including the works of Aristotle , Ptolemy , Jābir ibn Hayyān , al-Khwarizmi , Alhazen , Avicenna , and Averroes .
The European universities aided materially in the translation and propagation of these texts and started a new infrastructure which was needed for scientific communities .
In fact , European university put many works about the natural world and the study of nature at the center of its curriculum , with the result that the `` medieval university laid far greater emphasis on science than does its modern counterpart and descendent . ''
By then , the natural philosophy contained in these texts began to be extended by notable scholastics such as Robert Grosseteste , Roger Bacon , Albertus Magnus and Duns Scotus .
The first half of the 14th century saw much important scientific work being done , largely within the framework of scholastic commentaries on Aristotle 's scientific writings .
Scholars such as Jean Buridan and Nicole Oresme started to reinterpret elements of Aristotle 's mechanics .
These developments paved the way for the Scientific Revolution , which may also be understood as a resumption of the process of scientific inquiry , halted at the start of the Black Death .
Thus modern science in Europe was resumed in a period of great upheaval : the Protestant Reformation and Catholic Counter-Reformation ; the discovery of the Americas by Christopher Columbus ; the Fall of Constantinople ; but also the re-discovery of Aristotle during the Scholastic period presaged large social and political changes .
Thus , a suitable environment was created in which it became possible to question scientific doctrine , in much the same way that Martin Luther and John Calvin questioned religious doctrine .
The works of Ptolemy -LRB- astronomy -RRB- and Galen -LRB- medicine -RRB- were found not always to match everyday observations .
The Age of Enlightenment was a European affair .
The early modern period is seen as a flowering of the European Renaissance , in what is often known as the Scientific Revolution , viewed as a foundation of modern science .
The behavior of electricity and magnetism was studied by Faraday , Ohm , and others during the early 19th century .
The beginning of the 20th century brought the start of a revolution in physics .
The long-held theories of Newton were shown not to be correct in all circumstances .
The primary patron of physics became state governments , who recognized that the support of `` basic '' research could often lead to technologies useful to both military and industrial applications .
The theory that all matter is made of atoms , which are the smallest constituents of matter that can not be broken down without losing the basic chemical and physical properties of that matter , was provided by John Dalton in 1803 , although the question took a hundred years to settle as proven .
Dalton also formulated the law of mass relationships .
In 1869 , Dmitri Mendeleev composed his periodic table of elements on the basis of Dalton 's discoveries .
By the 20th century , systematic production of refined materials provided a ready supply of products which provided not only energy , but also synthetic materials for clothing , medicine , and everyday disposable resources .
The 20th century also saw the integration of physics and chemistry , with chemical properties explained as the result of the electronic structure of the atom .
Pauling 's work culminated in the physical modelling of DNA , the secret of life -LRB- in the words of Francis Crick , 1953 -RRB- .
In the same year , the Miller -- Urey experiment demonstrated in a simulation of primordial processes , that basic constituents of proteins , simple amino acids , could themselves be built up from simpler molecules .
Geology existed as a cloud of isolated , disconnected ideas about rocks , minerals , and landforms long before it became a coherent science .
Based on his observation of fossils in a geological stratum in a mountain hundreds of miles from the ocean , he deduced that the land was formed by erosion of the mountains and by deposition of silt .
Modern geology , like modern chemistry , gradually evolved during the 18th and early 19th centuries .
Over the first half of the 19th century , geologists such as Charles Lyell , Adam Sedgwick , and Roderick Murchison applied the new technique to rocks throughout Europe and eastern North America , setting the stage for more detailed , government-funded mapping projects in later decades .
The first comprehensive theories of mountain building were proposed during this period , as were the first modern theories of earthquakes and volcanoes .
Alfred Wegener 's theory of `` continental drift '' was widely dismissed when he proposed it in the 1910s , but new data gathered in the 1950s and 1960s led to the theory of plate tectonics , which provided a plausible mechanism for it .
Plate tectonics also provided a unified explanation for a wide range of seemingly unrelated geological phenomena .
Since 1970 it has served as the unifying principle in geology .
Pasteur was able to link microorganisms with disease , revolutionizing medicine .
He also devised one of the most important methods in preventive medicine , when in 1880 he produced a vaccine against rabies .
Pasteur invented the process of pasteurization , to help prevent the spread of disease through milk and other foods .
Darwin proposed that the features of all living things , including humans , were shaped by natural processes over long periods of time .
The theory of evolution in its current form affects almost all areas of biology .
Mendel 's laws provided the beginnings of the study of genetics , which became a major field of research for both scientific and industrial research .
In the late 20th century , the possibilities of genetic engineering became practical for the first time , and a massive international effort began in 1990 to map out an entire human genome -LRB- the Human Genome Project -RRB- .
In the 1930s , Arthur Tansley and others began developing the field of ecosystem ecology , which combined experimental soil science with physiological concepts of energy and the techniques of field biology .
However , the discipline has a clear set of antecedents such as moral philosophy , political philosophy , political economy , history , and other fields concerned with normative determinations of what ought to be and with deducing the characteristics and functions of the ideal form of government .
The antecedents of European politics trace their roots back even earlier than Plato and Aristotle , particularly in the works of Homer , Hesiod , Thucydides , Xenophon , and Euripides .
In this treatise , the behaviors and relationships of the people , the King , the State , the Government Superintendents , Courtiers , Enemies , Invaders , and Corporations are analysed and documented .
Most of the political questions surrounding the relationship between Church and State were clarified and contested in this period .
Publication of Ferdinand de Saussure 's Cours de linguistique générale created the development of descriptive linguistics .
Descriptive linguistics , and the related structuralism movement caused linguistics to focus on how language changes over time , instead of just describing the differences between languages .
Additional specialties such as sociolinguistics , cognitive linguistics , and computational linguistics have emerged from collaboration between linguistics and other disciplines .
Marxian economics is based on the labor theory of value and assumes the value of good to be based on the amount of labor required to produce it .
Under this assumption , capitalism was based on employers not paying the full value of workers labor to create profit .
The Austrian school responded to Marxian economics by viewing entrepreneurship as driving force of economic development .
This replaced the labor theory of value by a system of supply and demand .
Under Keynesian economics macroeconomic trends can overwhelm economic choices made by individuals .
Governments should promote aggregate demand for goods as a means to encourage economic expansion .
The above `` history of economics '' reflects modern economic textbooks and this means that the last stage of a science is represented as the culmination of its history -LRB- Kuhn , 1962 -RRB- .
That this `` invisible hand '' prefers `` the support of domestic to foreign industry '' is cleansed -- often without indication that part of the citation is truncated .
Freud 's influence has been enormous , though more as cultural icon than a force in scientific psychology .
Some sociologists , including Georg Simmel and W. E. B. Du Bois , utilized more microsociological , qualitative analyses .
This microlevel approach played an important role in American sociology , with the theories of George Herbert Mead and his student Herbert Blumer resulting in the creation of the symbolic interactionism approach to sociology .
Symbolic interactionism also came to be regarded as central to sociological thinking .
Erving Goffman saw social interactions as a stage performance , with individuals preparing `` backstage '' and attempting to control their audience through impression management .
While these theories are currently prominent in sociological thought , other approaches exist , including feminist theory , post-structuralism , rational choice theory , and postmodernism .
Subfields include computability , computational complexity , database design , computer networking , artificial intelligence , and the design of computer hardware .
With the work of I. Bernard Cohen at Harvard , the history of science became an established subdiscipline of history after 1945 .
The field of Science and Technology Studies , an area that overlaps and often informs historical studies of science , focuses on the social context of science in both contemporary and historical periods .
`` Partly by selection and partly by distortion , the scientists of earlier ages are implicitly presented as having worked upon the same set of fixed problems and in accordance with the same set of fixed canons that the most recent revolution in scientific theory and method made seem scientific . ''
However , more recently some of the leading critical theorists have recognized that their postmodern deconstructions have at times been counter-productive , and are providing intellectual ammunition for reactionary interests .
Bruno Latour noted that `` dangerous extremists are using the very same argument of social construction to destroy hard-won evidence that could save our lives .
Was I wrong to participate in the invention of this field known as science studies ?
Is it enough to say that we did not really mean what we meant ? ''
It is closely related to other West Slavic languages , such as Silesian and Polish .
-LRB- See `` Dialects '' below . -RRB-
Czech influence on Slovak was protested by Slovak scholars , and when Slovakia broke off from Czechoslovakia in 1938 as the Slovak State -LRB- which then aligned with Nazi Germany in World War II -RRB- literary Slovak was deliberately distanced from Czech .
Since then , `` Czechoslovak '' refers to improvised pidgins of the languages which have arisen from the decrease in mutual intelligibility .
These missionaries , Constantine and Methodius , helped to convert the Czechs from traditional Slavic paganism to Christianity and established a church system .
This language , later known as Proto-Czech , was beginning to separate from its fellow West Slavic hatchlings Proto-Slovak , Proto-Polish and Proto-Sorbian .
Among other features , Proto-Czech was marked by its ephemeral use of the voiced velar fricative consonant -LRB- / ɣ / -RRB- and consistent stress on the first syllable .
Here , early Czech literature -LRB- a biblical translation , hymns and hagiography -RRB- flourished .
Old Czech texts , including poetry and cookbooks , were produced outside the university as well .
The Czechs became serfs ; Bohemia 's printing industry -LRB- and its linguistic and political rights -RRB- were dismembered , removing official regulation and support from its language .
Changes include the morphological shift of í to ej and é to í -LRB- although é survives for some uses -RRB- and the merging of í and the former ejí .
Changes during this time included spelling reform -LRB- notably , í in place of the former j and j in place of g -RRB- , the use of t -LRB- rather than ti -RRB- to end infinitive verbs and the non-capitalization of nouns -LRB- which had been a late borrowing from German -RRB- .
These changes differentiated Czech from Slovak .
In the 2000 United States Census , Czech was reported as the most-common language spoken at home -LRB- besides English -RRB- in Valley , Butler and Saunders Counties , Nebraska and Republic County , Kansas .
During the second half of the twentieth century , Czech dialect use began to weaken .
Increased travel and media availability to dialect-speaking populations has encouraged them to shift to -LRB- or add to their own dialect -RRB- standard Czech .
They are / a / , / ɛ / , / ɪ / , / o / , and / u / , their long counterparts / aː / , / ɛː / , / iː / , / oː / and / uː / , and three diphthongs , / ou̯ / , / au̯ / and / ɛu̯ / .
The latter two diphthongs and the long / oː / are exclusive to loanwords .
In all words of more than two syllables , every odd-numbered syllable receives secondary stress .
The first slot must contain a subject and object , a main form of a verb , an adverb or a conjunction -LRB- except for the light conjunctions a , `` and '' , i , `` and even '' or ale , `` but '' -RRB- .
The genitive case marks possessive nouns and some types of movement .
The remaining cases -LRB- instrumental , locative , vocative and dative -RRB- indicate semantic relationships , such as secondary objects , movement or position -LRB- dative case -RRB- and accompaniment -LRB- instrumental case -RRB- .
When Czech children learn their language 's declension patterns , the cases are referred to by number :
With few exceptions , feminine nouns in the nominative case end in - a , - e , or - ost ; neuter nouns in - o , - e , or - í , and masculine nouns in a consonant .
The Czech koruna is an example of this feature ; it is shown here as the subject of a hypothetical sentence , and declined as genitive for numbers five and up .
Most verbs are part of inflected aspect pairs -- for example , koupit -LRB- perfective -RRB- and kupovat -LRB- imperfective -RRB- .
This is distinct from past and present tense , and any Czech verb of either aspect can be conjugated into any of its three tenses .
The most common prefixes are na - , o - , po - , s - , u - , vy - , z - and za - .
The verb jít -LRB- to go -RRB- has the iterative form chodit -LRB- to go repeatedly -RRB- and the frequentative form chodívat -LRB- to go regularly -RRB- .
It is the form found in dictionaries and the form that follows auxiliary verbs -LRB- for example , můžu tě slyšet -- `` I can hear you '' -RRB- .
This mood indicates possible events , expressed in English as `` I would '' or `` I wish '' .
The háček -LRB- ˇ -RRB- is used with certain letters to form new characters : š , ž , and č , as well as ň , ě , ř , ť , and ď -LRB- the latter five uncommon outside Czech -RRB- .
The last two letters are sometimes written with a comma above -LRB- ʼ , an abbreviated háček -RRB- because of their height .
Writing of ordinal numerals is similar to most European languages .
The Czech language uses a decimal comma instead of a decimal point .
When writing a long number , spaces between every three numbers -LRB- e.g. between hundreds and thousands -RRB- may be used for better orientation in handwritten texts , but not in decimal places , like in English .
The number 1,234,567.8910 may be written as 1234567,8910 or 1 234 567,8910 .
.
The creatures were first designed to look cute and iconic even on the devices ' small screens ; later developments had them created with a harder-edged style influenced by American comics .
Several seasons of the anime and films based on them have aired , and the video game series has expanded into genres such as role-playing , racing , fighting , and MMORPGs .
Other media forms have also been released .
The character creation process , however , has for most of the franchise 's history been collaborative and reliant on conversation and brainstorming .
.
In the English iterations of the franchise there is another type of Digi-Egg that can be used to digivolve , or transform , Digimon .
in Japanese .
-LRB- This type of Digi-Egg was also featured as a major object throughout season 2 as a way of Digivolution available only to certain characters at certain points throughout the season . -RRB-
The effect of Digivolution , however , is not permanent in the partner Digimon of the main characters in the anime , and Digimon who have digivolved will most of the time revert to their previous form after a battle or if they are too weak to continue .
Some Digimon act feral .
Most , however , are capable of intelligence and human speech .
In some cases , as in the first series , the DigiDestined -LRB- known as the ` Chosen Children ' in the original Japanese -RRB- had to find some special items such as crests and tags so the Digimon could digivolve into further stages of evolution known as Ultimate and Mega in the dub .
Digimon who are reincarnated in this way will sometimes retain some or all their memories of their previous life .
The Digimon pet had several evolution capabilities and abilities too , so many owners had different Digimon .
`` Digimon '' are `` Digital Monsters '' .
The first two series take place in the same fictional universe , but the third , fourth , fifth and sixth each occupy their own unique world .
Each series is commonly based on the original storyline but things are added to make them unique .
However , in Tamers , the Adventure universe is referred to as a commercial enterprise -- a trading card game in Japan , plus a show-within-a-show in the English dub .
It also features an appearance by a character from the Adventure universe .
In addition , each series has spawned assorted feature films .
Digimon still shows popularity , as new card series , video games , and movies are still being produced and released : new card series include Eternal Courage , Hybrid Warriors , Generations , and Operation X ; the video game , Digimon Rumble Arena 2 ; and the previously unreleased movies Revenge of Diaboromon , Runaway Locomon , Battle of Adventurers , and Island of Lost Digimon .
Each Kid was given a Digivice which selected them to be transported to the DigiWorld and was destined to be paired up with a Digimon Partner , such as Tai being paired up with Agumon and Matt with Gabumon .
The children are helped by a mysterious man/digimon named Gennai , who helps them via hologram .
The Digivices help their Digimon allies to Digivolve into stronger creatures in times of peril .
The Digimon usually reached higher forms when their human partners are placed in dangerous situations , such as fighting the evil forces of Devimon , Etemon and Myotismon in their Champion forms .
Later , each character discovered a crest that each belonged to a person ; Tai the Crest of Courage , Matt the Crest of Friendship , Sora the Crest of Love , Izzy the Crest of Knowledge , Mimi the Crest of Sincerity , Joe the Crest of Reliability , T.K. the Crest of Hope , and later Kari the Crest of Light which allowed their Digimon to digivolve into their Ultimate forms .
Later on in the series , an eighth character was introduced : Hikari `` Kari '' Kamiya -LRB- who is Taichi 's younger sister -RRB- .
The Digimon Emperor has been enslaving Digimon with Dark Rings and Control Spires and has somehow made regular Digivolution impossible .
However , five set Digi-Eggs with engraved emblems had been appointed to three new DigiDestined along with T.K. and Kari , two of the DigiDestined from the previous series .
This new evolutionary process , dubbed Armor Digivolution helps the new DigiDestined to defeat evil lurking in the Digital World .
Eventually , the DigiDestined defeat the Digimon Emperor , more commonly known as Ken Ichijouji on Earth , only with the great sacrifice of Ken 's own Digimon , Wormmon .
Just when things were thought to be settled , new Digimon enemies made from the deactivated Control Spires start to appear and cause trouble in the Digital World .
They soon save countries including France and Australia from control spires and defeat MaloMyotismon -LRB- BelialVamdemon -RRB- , the digivolved form of Myotismon -LRB- Vamdemon -RRB- from the previous series .
They stop the evil from destroying the two worlds , and at the end , every person on Earth gains their own Digimon partner .
The plot revolves around three Tamers , Takato Matsuki , Rika Nonaka , and Henry Wong .
It began with Takato creating his own Digimon partner by sliding a mysterious blue card through his card reader , which then became a D-Power .
Guilmon takes form from Takato 's sketchings of a new Digimon .
-LRB- Tamers ' only human connection to the Adventure series is Ryo Akiyama , a character featured in some of the Digimon video games and who made an appearance in some occasions of the Adventure story-line . -RRB-
Some of the changes in this series include the way the Digimon digivolve with the introduction of Biomerge-Digivolution and the way their `` Digivices '' work .
The same process was often used to Digivolve the Digimon , but as usual , emotions play a big part in the digivolving process .
Unlike the two seasons before it and most of the seasons that followed , Digimon Tamers takes a darker and more realistic approach to its story featuring Digimon who do not reincarnate after their deaths and more complex character development in the original Japanese .
The anime has become controversial over the decade , with debates about how appropriate this show actually is for its `` target '' audience , especially due to the Lovecraftian nature of the last arc .
The English dub is more lighthearted dialogue-wise , though still not as much as previous series .
After receiving unusual phone messages from Ophanimon -LRB- one of the three ruling Digimon alongside Seraphimon and Cherubimon -RRB- Takuya Kanbara , Koji Minamoto , Junpei Shibayama , Zoe Orimoto , Tommy Himi , and Koichi Kimura go to a subway station and take a train to the Digital World .
Summoned by Ophanimon , the Digidestined realize that they must find the ten legendary spirits and stop the forces of Cherubimon from physically destroying the Digital World .
After finding the ten spirits of the Legendary Warriors and defeating Mercurymon , Grumblemon , Ranamon , and Arbormon , they finally end up fighting Cherubimon hoping to foil his effort to dominate the Digital World .
After the defeat of Cherubimon , the Digidestined find they must face an even greater challenge as they try to stop the Royal Knights -- Dynasmon and Crusadermon -- from destroying the Digital World and using the collected data to revive the original ruler of the Digital World : the tyrannical Lucemon .
Ultimately the Digidestined fail in preventing Lucemon from reawakening but they do manage to prevent him from escaping into the Real World .
In the final battle , all of the legendary spirits the digidestined have collected thus far merge and create Susanoomon .
With this new form , the digidestined are able to effectively defeat Lucemon and save the Digital World .
In general , Frontier has a much lighter tone than that of Tamers , yet remains darker than Adventure and Adventure 02 .
Like Frontier , Savers has no connection with the previous installments , and also marks a new start for the Digimon franchise , with a drastic change in character designs and story-line , in order to reach a broader audience .
Later the D.A.T.S. is dragged into a massive conflict between Earth and the Digital World , triggered by an ambitious human scientist named Akihiro Kurata , determined to make use of the Digimon for his own personal gains .
The English version was dubbed by Studiopolis and it premiered on the Jetix block on Toon Disney on October 1 , 2007 .
Digivolution in Data Squad requires the human partner 's DNA -LRB- `` Digital Natural Ability '' in the English version and `` Digisoul '' in the Japanese version -RRB- to activate , a strong empathy with their Digimon and a will to succeed .
` Digimon Savers ' also introduces a new form of digivolving called Burst Mode which is essentially the level above Mega -LRB- previously the strongest form a digimon could take -RRB- .
This included giving the Japanese characters full Americanized names and American surnames as well as applying far more Americanization -LRB- Marcus Damon as opposed to the Japanese Daimon Masaru -RRB- , cultural streamlining and more edits to their version similar to the changes 4Kids often made -LRB- such as removal of Japanese text for the purpose of cultural streamlining -RRB- .
Despite all that , the setting of the country was still in Japan and the characters were Japanese in the dub .
This series was the first to show any Japanese cultural concepts that were unfamiliar with American audiences -LRB- such as the manju -RRB- , which were left unedited and used in the English dub .
Also despite the heavy censorship and the English dub aimed at young children , some of the Digimon 's attacks named after real weapons such as RizeGreymon 's Trident Revolver are not edited and used in the English dub .
Well Go USA released it on DVD instead of Disney .
The North American English dub was televised on Jetix in the U.S. and on the Family Channel in Canada .
Reverting to the design style of the first four series as well as the plot taking on the younger , lighter tone present in series one , two and four throughout the story .
Wielding a digivice known as a Fusion Loader -LRB- Xros Loader in Japan -RRB- , Mikey is able to combine multiple Digimon onto one to enhance his power , Shoutmon being the usual core of the combination , using a technique known as ` DigiFuse ' -LRB- Digi-Xros in Japan -RRB- .
Forming Team Fusion Fighters -LRB- Team Xros Heart in Japan -RRB- , Mikey , Shoutmon and their friends travel through the Digital World to liberate it from the evil Bagra Army , led by Bagramon -LRB- Lord Bagra in English -RRB- , and Midnight , a shady group led by AxeKnightmon with Nene as a figurehead before joining the Fusion Fighters .
The second arc of Xros Wars was subtitled The Evil Death Generals and the Seven Kingdoms .
It saw the main cast reshuffled with a new wardrobe while Angie -LRB- Akari in Japan -RRB- and Jeremy -LRB- Zenjiro in Japan -RRB- stay behind in the Human World ; thus making Mikey , Christopher and Nene the lead protagonists as they set off to face the Seven Death Generals of the Bagra Army and AxeKnightmon 's new pawn : Nene 's brother Ewan -LRB- Yuu in Japan -RRB- .
A new evolution known as Super Digivolution was introduced at the end of the first arc .
The series finale reintroduces the heroes of the previous five seasons as they all come together and help the current heroes in the final battle due to the fact that the DigiQuartz is essentially a tear in Space and Time , allowing all of the Digimon universes to converge .
The series announced the return of the protagonists from the original Digimon Adventure series , most of them now as high school students .
A countdown clicking game was posted on the show 's official website , offering news when specific clicks were met .
On December 13 , 2014 the series title and a key visual featuring character designs by Atsuya Uki were revealed with Keitaro Motonaga announced as director with a tentative premiere date of Spring , 2015 .
However , on May 6 , 2015 , it was announced that tri .
Tai and the others also meet another DigiDestined called Meiko Mochizuki and her partner Meicoomon who become their friends , until Meicoomon turns hostile as well and flees after an encounter with Ken , who reappears suddenly , once again as the Digimon Emperor .
All movies except X-Evolution and Ultimate Power !
Activate Burst Mode have been released and distributed internationally .
The European publishing company , Panini , approached Digimon in different ways in different countries .
While Germany created their own adaptations of episodes , the United Kingdom -LRB- UK -RRB- reprinted the Dark Horse titles , then translated some of the German adaptations of Adventure 02 episodes .
When the comic switched to the Tamers series the storylines adhered to continuity more strictly ; sometimes it would expand on subject matter not covered by the original Japanese anime -LRB- such as Mitsuo Yamaki 's past -RRB- or the English adaptations of the television shows and movies -LRB- such as Ryo 's story or the movies that remained undubbed until 2005 -RRB- .
In a money saving venture , the original stories were later removed from Digimon Magazine , which returned to printing translated German adaptations of Tamers episodes .
Once the countdown was finished , it revealed a reboot of the Digimon World series titled Digimon World Re : Digitize .
It is part of the Digimon Story sub-series , originally on Nintendo DS and has also been released with English subtitles in North America .
They also abrade rock and debris from their substrate to create landforms such as cirques and moraines .
Between 35 ° N and 35 ° S , glaciers occur only in the Himalayas , Andes , Rocky Mountains , a few high mountains in East Africa , Mexico , New Guinea and on Zard Kuh in Iran .
Greenland and Patagonia also have huge expanses of continental glaciers .
Glacial ice is the largest reservoir of freshwater on Earth .
Several kilometers deep , they obscure the underlying topography .
Portions of an ice sheet or cap that extend into water are called ice shelves ; they tend to be thin with limited slopes and reduced velocities .
In Antarctica , many ice streams drain into large ice shelves .
Some drain directly into the sea , often with an ice tongue , like Mertz Glacier .
A sub-polar glacier includes both temperate and polar ice , depending on depth beneath the surface and position along the length of the glacier .
A cold-based glacier is below freezing at the ice-ground interface , and is thus frozen to the underlying substrate .
This contrast is thought to a large extent to govern the ability of a glacier to effectively erode its bed , as sliding ice promotes plucking at rock from the surface below .
This snow collects and is compacted by the weight of the snow falling above it forming névé .
Further crushing of the individual snowflakes and squeezing the air from the snow turns it into ` glacial ice ' .
This glacial ice will fill the cirque until it ` overflows ' through a geological weakness or vacancy , such as the gap between two mountains .
When the mass of snow and ice is sufficiently thick , it begins to move due to a combination of surface slope , gravity and pressure .
The upper part of a glacier , where accumulation exceeds ablation , is called the accumulation zone .
Ice in the accumulation zone is deep enough to exert a downward force that erodes underlying rock .
After a glacier melts , it often leaves behind a bowl - or amphitheater-shaped depression that ranges in size from large basins like the Great Lakes to smaller mountain depressions known as cirques .
When a glacier moves through irregular terrain , cracks called crevasses develop in the fracture zone .
If two rigid sections of a glacier move at different speeds and directions , shear forces cause them to break apart , opening a crevasse .
Beneath this point , the plasticity of the ice is too great for cracks to form .
Crevasses can form in several different ways .
Longitudinal crevasses form semi-parallel to flow where a glacier expands laterally .
Marginal crevasses are usually largely transverse to flow .
Moving glacier ice can sometimes separate from stagnant ice above , forming a bergschrund .
These glaciers exhibit normal movement until suddenly they accelerate , then return to their previous state .
During these surges , the glacier may reach velocities far greater than normal speed .
This increase in the numbers of glacial earthquakes in Greenland may be a response to global warming .
This creates a swale and space for snow accumulation in the winter , which in turn creates a ridge .
Extensive glaciers are found in Antarctica , Chile , Canada , Alaska , Greenland and Iceland .
Mainland Australia currently contains no glaciers , although a small glacier on Mount Kosciuszko was present in the last glacial period .
In New Guinea , small , rapidly diminishing , glaciers are located on its highest summit massif of Puncak Jaya .
During glacial periods of the Quaternary , Taiwan , Hawaii on Mauna Kea and Tenerife also had large alpine glaciers , while the Faroe and Crozet Islands were completely glaciated .
Even at high latitudes , glacier formation is not inevitable .
Even during glacial periods of the Quaternary , Manchuria , lowland Siberia , and central and northern Alaska , though extraordinarily cold , had such light snowfall that glaciers could not form .
Glacial abrasion is commonly characterized by glacial striations .
They usually appear as linear mounds of till , a non-sorted mixture of rock , gravel and boulders within a matrix of a fine powdery material .
Terminal or end moraines are formed at the foot or terminal end of a glacier .
The erosion that creates glacial valleys eliminates the spurs of earth that extend across mountain valleys , creating triangular cliffs called truncated spurs .
Within glacial valleys , depressions created by plucking and abrasion can be filled by lakes , called paternoster lakes .
This structure may result in a mountain pass .
The glacier abrades the smooth slope on the upstream side as it flows along , but tears loose and carries away rock from the downstream side via plucking .
After the ice sheet or glacier melts , the mantle begins to flow back to its original position , pushing the crust back up .
That is a very small amount of energy in terms of everyday experience , but everyday experience is not concerned with individual photons any more than with individual atoms or molecules .
It still was not clear why the spectrum of a hot object had the form that it has -LRB- see diagram -RRB- .
The influence of h in this complex factor would not disappear if it were set to zero or to any other value .
They contributed greatly -LRB- along with Einstein 's work on the photoelectric effect -RRB- to convincing physicists that Planck 's postulate of quantized energy levels was more than a mere mathematical formalism .
Another particularly thorough investigation was published by Philipp Lenard in 1902 .
In modern terms , if J is the total angular momentum of a system with rotational invariance , and Jz the angular momentum measured along any given direction , these quantities can only take on the values
There are a number of other such pairs of physically measurable values which obey a similar rule .
In practice , these are no longer the most accurate methods .
Five other measurements by three different methods were initially considered , but not included in the final refinement as they were too imprecise to affect the result .
There are both practical and theoretical difficulties in determining h .
It is difficult to measure gyromagnetic ratios precisely because of the difficulties in precisely measuring B , but the value for protons in water at 7002298150000000000 ♠ 25 °C is known to better than one part per million .
The symbol Γ ′ p-90 is used for the measured gyromagnetic ratio using conventional electrical units .
In practice , it is measured in conventional electrical units , and so given the symbol F90 .
The Planck constant is given by
There are a number of proposals to redefine certain of the SI base units in terms of fundamental physical constants .
This has already been done for the metre , which is defined in terms of a fixed value of the speed of light .
While nobody knows if the mass of the International Prototype Kilogram has changed since 1889 -- the value 1 kg of its mass expressed in kilograms is by definition unchanged and therein lies one of the problems -- it is known that over such a timescale the many similar Pt -- Ir alloy cylinders kept in national laboratories around the world , have changed their relative mass by several tens of parts per million , however carefully they are stored , and the more so the more they have been taken out and used as mass standards .
A change of several tens of micrograms in one kilogram is equivalent to the current uncertainty in the value of the Planck constant in SI units .
-LRB- For more detailed information , see kilogram definitions . -RRB-
Comcast also has significant holding in digital distribution -LRB- thePlatform -RRB- .
Under the terms of the agreement Comcast was to acquire 100 % of Time Warner Cable .
Comcast has been criticized for multiple reasons .
Given Comcast 's negotiating power as a large ISP , some suspect that Comcast could leverage paid peering agreements to unfairly influence end-user connection speeds .
Its ownership of both content production -LRB- in NBCUniversal -RRB- and content distribution -LRB- as an ISP -RRB- has raised antitrust concerns .
Comcast is sometimes described as a family business .
Legal expert Susan P. Crawford has said this gives him `` effective control over its -LSB- Comcast 's -RSB- every step '' .
A 2012 Reddit post written by an anonymous Comcast call center employee eager to share their negative experiences with the public received attention from publications including The Huffington Post .
It sought to examine why the company has become so widely criticized by its customers , the media and even members of its own staff .
The series claimed part of the problem is internal and that Comcast 's staff endures unreasonable corporate policies .
According to the report : `` customer service has been replaced by an obsession with sales ; technicians are understaffed while tech support is poorly trained ; and the company is hobbled by internal fragmentation . ''
Despite these criticisms , Comcast has appeared on multiple `` top places to work '' lists .
Employee diversity is also an attribute upon which Comcast receives strong marks .
Comcast was also named a `` Top 2014 Workplace '' by the Washington Post in their annual feature .
Between 1999 and 2009 , return on capital nearly tripled to 7 percent .
In February 2014 , Comcast generated 1.1 billion in revenue during the first quarter due to the Sochi Olympics , .
Comcast employs multiple former US Congressmen as lobbyists .
Comcast was among the top backers of Barack Obama 's presidential runs , with Comcast vice president David Cohen raising over $ 2.2 million from 2007 to 2012 .
Cohen has been described by many sources as influential in the US government , though he is no longer a registered lobbyist , as the time he spends lobbying falls short of the 20 % which requires official registration .
Comcast is also a major backer of the National Cable and Telecommunications Association Political Action Committee , which raised $ 2.6 million from 2011-2012 .
Comcast spent the most money of any organization in support of the Stop Online Piracy and PROTECT IP bills , spending roughly $ 5 million to lobby for their passage .
Storecast Corporation of America , a product placement supermarket specialist marketing firm , was purchased by American Cable in 1965 .
With Storecast being a Muzak client , American Cable purchased its first Muzak franchise of many in Orlando , Florida .
The company 's UK branch , Comcast UK Cable Partners , goes public while constructing a cable telecommunications network .
Comcast acquired Greater Philadelphia Cablevision in 1999 .
In March 1999 , Comcast offered to buy MediaOne for $ 60 billion .
As part of this acquisition , Comcast also acquired the National Digital Television Center in Centennial , Colorado as a wholly owned subsidiary , which is today known as the Comcast Media Center .
The deal would have made Comcast the largest media conglomerate in the world .
In this deal Comcast acquired approximately 230,000 basic cable customers , 71,000 digital cable customers , and 86,000 high-speed Internet customers .
Comcast previously owned approximately 30 percent of Susquehanna Communications through affiliate company Lenfest .
In December 2005 , Comcast announced the creation of Comcast Interactive Media , a new division focused on online media .
Collaboration and unified messaging technology came from open-source vendor Zimbra .
`` SmartZone users will be able to send and receive e-mail , listen to their voicemail messages online and forward that information via e-mail to others , send instant messages and video instant messages and merge their contacts into one address book '' .
Time Warner Cable became the second largest cable provider in the U.S. , ranking behind Comcast .
As part of the deal , Time Warner and Comcast traded existing subscribers in order to consolidate them into larger geographic clusters .
Comcast denied the rumors at first , while NBC would not comment on them .
It was reported that under the current deal with GE that it would happen in November or December .
On November 1 , 2009 , The New York Times reported Comcast had moved closer to a deal to purchase NBCUniversal and that a formal announcement could be made sometime the following week .
GE would take over the remaining 49 % stake in NBCUniversal , using $ 5.8 billion to buy out Vivendi 's 20 % minority stake in NBCUniversal .
In late December 2012 , Comcast added the NBC peacock symbol to their new logo .
On February 13 , it was reported that Time Warner Cable agreed to the acquisition .
This was to add several metropolitan areas to the Comcast portfolio , such as New York City , Los Angeles , Dallas-Fort Worth , Cleveland , Columbus , Cincinnati , Charlotte , San Diego , and San Antonio .
According to Politico , Comcast `` donated to almost every member of Congress who has a hand in regulating it . ''
The House Judiciary Committee planned its own hearing .
In March 2014 , the division 's chairman , William Baer , recused himself because he was involved in a prior Comcast NBCUniversal acquisition .
Several states ' attorneys general have announced support for the federal investigation .
Comcast delivers third-party television programming content to its own customers , and also produces its own first-party content both for subscribers and customers of other competing television services .
Fully or partially owned Comcast programming includes Comcast Newsmakers , Comcast Network , Comcast SportsNet , SportsNet New York , MLB Network , Comcast Sports Southeast/Charter Sports Southeast , NBC Sports Network , The Golf Channel , AZN Television , and FEARnet .
These plans were then put on hold by the U.S. Olympic Committee .
Comcast also owns many local channels .
The channel shows news , sports , and entertainment and places emphasis in Philadelphia and the Baltimore/Washington , D.C. areas , though the channel is also available in New York , Pittsburgh , and Richmond .
It also carries some National Hockey League and National Basketball Association games when Altitude Sports & Entertainment is carrying the NHL or NBA .
Before it was renamed for Comcast 's cable subsidiary , XFINITY Center was called Comcast Center from its opening in 2002 through July 2014 .
The ACSI indicates that almost half of all cable customers -LRB- regardless of company -RRB- have registered complaints , and that cable is the only industry to score below 60 in the ACSI .
Analysis of the surveys states that `` Comcast is one of the lowest scoring companies in ACSI .
This also means that a cable company can do well financially even though its customers are not particularly satisfied . ''
Brown 's wife , Lisa , believed a Comcast employee changed the name in response to the Browns ' request to cancel their cable service , an incident in which she was refused a cancellation unless she paid a $ 60 fee and instead was routed to a retention specialist .
Elliott posted the facts of the incident , along with a copy of the bill , on his blog .
Comcast released a statement explaining : `` We have spoken with our customer and apologized for this completely unacceptable and inappropriate name change .
We have zero tolerance for this type of disrespectful behavior and are conducting a thorough investigation to determine what happened .
We are working with our customer to make this right and will take appropriate steps to prevent this from happening again . ''
Most infections do not have symptoms , known as latent tuberculosis .
Infection of other organs can cause a wide range of symptoms .
New infections occur in about 1 % of the population each year .
About 80 % of people in many Asian and African countries test positive while 5 -- 10 % of people in the United States population tests positive by the tuberculin test .
Tuberculosis has been present in humans since ancient times .
Symptoms may include chest pain and a prolonged cough producing sputum .
The reason for this difference is not clear .
It may be due either to better air flow , or to poor lymph drainage within the upper lungs .
In 15 -- 20 % of active cases , the infection spreads outside the lungs , causing other kinds of TB .
When it spreads to the bones , it is also known as `` osseous tuberculosis '' , a form of osteomyelitis .
Sometimes , bursting of a tubercular abscess through skin results in tuberculous ulcer .
An ulcer originating from nearby infected lymph nodes is painless , slowly enlarging and has an appearance of `` wash leather '' .
Miliary TB makes up about 10 % of extrapulmonary cases .
The main cause of TB is Mycobacterium tuberculosis , a small , aerobic , nonmotile bacillus .
Mycobacteria have an outer membrane lipid bilayer .
If a Gram stain is performed , MTB either stains very weakly `` Gram-positive '' or does not retain dye as a result of the high lipid and mycolic acid content of its cell wall .
MTB can withstand weak disinfectants and survive in a dry state for weeks .
The M. tuberculosis complex -LRB- MTBC -RRB- includes four other TB-causing mycobacteria : M. bovis , M. africanum , M. canetti , and M. microti .
Transmission should occur from only people with active TB -- those with latent infection are not thought to be contagious .
The probability of transmission from one person to another depends upon several factors , including the number of infectious droplets expelled by the carrier , the effectiveness of ventilation , the duration of exposure , the virulence of the M. tuberculosis strain , the level of immunity in the uninfected person , and others .
In the phagolysosome , the cell attempts to use reactive oxygen species and acid to kill the bacterium .
M. tuberculosis is able to reproduce inside the macrophage and will eventually kill the immune cell .
Tuberculosis of the lungs may also occur via infection from the blood stream .
The granuloma may prevent dissemination of the mycobacteria and provide a local environment for interaction of cells of the immune system .
However , more recent evidence suggests that the bacteria use the granulomas to avoid destruction by the host 's immune system .
Bacteria inside the granuloma can become dormant , resulting in latent infection .
To the naked eye , this has the texture of soft , white cheese and is termed caseous necrosis .
In many people , the infection waxes and wanes .
Tissue destruction and necrosis are often balanced by healing and fibrosis .
During active disease , some of these cavities are joined to the air passages bronchi and this material can be coughed up .
Upon cure , affected areas are eventually replaced by scar tissue .
IGRA have similar limitations in those with HIV .
The Mantoux tuberculin skin test is often used to screen people at high risk for TB .
The test may be falsely negative in those with sarcoidosis , Hodgkin 's lymphoma , malnutrition , and most notably , active tuberculosis .
These are not affected by immunization or most environmental mycobacteria , so they generate fewer false-positive results .
However , they are affected by M. szulgai , M. marinum , and M. kansasii .
Part of the reasoning against the use of the vaccine is that it makes the tuberculin skin test falsely positive , reducing the test 's use in screening .
A number of new vaccines are currently in development .
Treatment of TB uses antibiotics to kill the bacteria .
People with latent infections are also treated to prevent them from progressing to active TB disease later in life .
The evidence to support this practice over people simply taking their medications independently is poor .
Methods to remind people of the importance of treatment do , however , appear effective .
Primary resistance occurs when a person becomes infected with a resistant strain of TB .
A person with fully susceptible MTB may develop secondary -LRB- acquired -RRB- resistance during therapy because of inadequate treatment , not taking the prescribed regimen appropriately -LRB- lack of compliance -RRB- , or using low-quality medication .
Drug-resistant TB is a serious public health issue in many developing countries , as its treatment is longer and requires more expensive drugs .
Totally drug-resistant TB is resistant to all currently used drugs .
In people coinfected with M. tuberculosis and HIV , the risk of reactivation increases to 10 % per year .
However , most infections with M. tuberculosis do not cause TB disease , and 90 -- 95 % of infections remain asymptomatic .
The number of new cases has declined by 17 % between 2004 -- 2014 .
Tuberculosis is more common in developing countries ; about 80 % of the population in many Asian and African countries test positive in tuberculin tests , while only 5 -- 10 % of the US population test positive .
In developed countries , tuberculosis is less common and is found mainly in urban areas .
Rates per 100,000 people in different areas of the world were : globally 178 , Africa 332 , the Americas 36 , Eastern Mediterranean 173 , Europe 63 , Southeast Asia 278 , and Western Pacific 139 in 2010 .
Tuberculosis has been present in humans since antiquity .
However , whether tuberculosis originated in bovines , then was transferred to humans , or whether it diverged from a common ancestor , is currently unclear .
Later , the risk of transmission from this source was dramatically reduced by the invention of the pasteurization process .
While it was not effective , it was later successfully adapted as a screening test for the presence of pre-symptomatic tuberculosis .
Tuberculosis caused the most widespread public concern in the 19th and early 20th centuries as an endemic disease of the urban poor .
Several international organizations are pushing for more transparency in treatment , and more countries are implementing mandatory reporting of cases to the government , although adherence is often sketchy .
Conversely , falling rates of TB-infection may not relate to the number of programs directed at reducing infection rates , but may be tied to increased level of education , income and health of the population .
A greater understanding of the social and cultural dimensions of tuberculosis may also help with stigma reduction .
Two main approaches are being used to attempt to improve the efficacy of available vaccines .
Vaccines are hoped to play a significant role in treatment of both latent and active disease .
A number of medications are being studied for multi drug resistant tuberculosis including : bedaquiline and delamanid .
The safety and effectiveness of these new agents are still uncertain , because they are based on the results of a relatively small studies .
The impetus toward affirmative action is redressing the disadvantages associated with past and present discrimination .
Affirmative action is a subject of controversy .
Affirmative action as a practice was upheld by the Supreme Court 's decision in Grutter v. Bollinger in 2003 .
Many believe that the diversity of current American society suggests that affirmative action policies succeeded and are no longer required .
The proposal was never widely adopted due to strong political opposition .
Nearly a century later -LRB- 1950s-1960s -RRB- , policies to assist classes of individuals reemerged during the Civil Rights Movement .
The decisions came to be known as affirmative action in which mandatory , as well as voluntary programs , affirmed the civil rights of people of color .
Furthermore , these affirmative action programs protected people of color from the present effects stemming from past discrimination .
This executive order realized the government 's intent to create equal opportunities for all qualified people .
This executive order was eventually amended and superseded by Lyndon B. Johnson 's Executive Order 11246 which prevented discrimination based on race , color , religion , and national origin by organizations which received federal contracts and subcontracts .
In 1967 , the order was amended to include sex as well .
The Reagan administration was opposed to the affirmative action requirements of Executive Order 11246 , but these contemplated changes -LSB- which ? -RSB-
faced bi-partisan opposition in Congress .
In the event of discrimination , employees were to be restored to an appropriate status in the company through ` affirmative action ' .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Hearing of the incident , Truman turned to NAACP leader Walter Francis White and declared , `` My God !
I had no idea it was as terrible as that .
We 've got to do something . ''
The book was widely read , influential , and considered utopian for the times : `` In our land men are equal , but they are free to be different .
From these very differences among our people has come the great human and national strength of America . ''
The report discussed and demonstrated racial discrimination in basic freedoms , education , public facilities , personal safety , and employment opportunities .
The recommendations were radical , calling for federal policies and laws to end racial discrimination and bring about equality : `` We can tolerate no restrictions upon the individual which depend upon irrelevant factors such as his race , his color , his religion , or the social position to which he is born . ''
In return , the government `` undertakes to protect his integrity as an individual . ''
The report called for an end to `` all discrimination and segregation based on race , color , creed , or national origins in ... all branches of the Armed Services . ''
:38 -- 39
His speech was a significant departure from traditional race relations in the United States .
`` We must make the Federal government a friendly , vigilant defender of the rights and equalities of all Americans .
And again I mean all Americans . ''
:40
The order `` established in the Civil Service Commission a Fair Employment Board of not less than seven persons . ''
The contractor will take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed , and that employees are treated during employment , without regard to their race , creed , color , or national origin '' .
The administration was `` not demanding any special preference or treatment or quotas for minorities '' but was rather `` advocating racially neutral hiring to end job discrimination '' .
:61 Turning to issues of women 's rights , Kennedy initiated a Commission on the Status of Women in December 1961 .
The commission was charged with `` examining employment policies and practices of the government and of contractors '' with regard to sex. :66
He wanted a phrase that `` gave a sense of positivity to performance under the order . ''
The term `` active recruitment '' started to be used as well .
This order , albeit heavily worked up as a significant piece of legislation , in reality carried little actual power .
The scope was limited to a couple hundred defense contractors , leaving nearly $ 7.5 billion in federal grants and loans unsupervised. :60
They wanted jobs .
Lockheed was doing business with the Defense Department on the first billion-dollar contract .
Due to taxpayer-funding being 90 % of Lockheed 's business , along with disproportionate hiring practices , black workers charged Lockheed with `` overt discrimination . ''
Johnson and his assistants soon pressured other defense contractors , including Boeing and General Electric , to sign similar voluntary agreements indicating plans for progress .
However , these plans were just that , voluntary .
This document was more holistic than any President Kennedy had offered , and therefore more controversial .
Public schools , hospitals , libraries , parks , among other things , were included in the bill as well .
-LSB- ... -RSB- Title VII is designed to encourage the hiring on basis of ability and qualifications , not race or religion . ''
Title VII prohibits discrimination .
Humphrey was the silent hero of the bill 's passing through Congress .
He pledged that the bill required no quotas , just nondiscrimination .
The order included definite `` goals and timetables . ''
As President Nixon asserted , `` We would not impose quotas , but would require federal contractors to show ` affirmative action ' to meet the goals of increasing minority employment . ''
:145 Equal rights was still an important subject to many Americans , yet the world was changing and new issues were being raised .
`` Of all the triumphs that have marked this as America 's Century -- ... none is more inspiring , if incomplete , than our pursuit of racial justice . ''
Because of the possibility the tests were biased in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act , no candidates were promoted pending outcome of the controversy .
To eliminate two of its key components would undermine the purpose of the entire system .
This piece of legislation paved the way for white GIs to attend college .
Furthermore , at the time of its introduction , segregation was still the law of the land barring blacks from the best institutions .
Latinos are disadvantaged compared to White Americans and are more likely to live in poverty .
At times when it is favorable to lawmakers , Latinos were considered `` white '' by the Jim Crow laws during the Reconstruction .
In other cases , according to Paul Brest , Latinos have been classified as an inferior race and a threat to white purity .
Latinos have encountered considerable discrimination in areas such as employment , housing , and education .
Brest finds that stereotypes continue to be largely negative and many perceive Latinos as `` lazy , unproductive , and on the dole . ''
Furthermore , native-born Latino-Americans and recent immigrants are seen as identical since outsiders tend not to differentiate between Latino groups .
Particularly , during World War II , Japanese Americans were interned in camps and lost their property , homes , and businesses .
In addition , whites and non-Asians do not differentiate among the different Asian groups and perpetuate the `` model minority '' stereotype .
A negative outcome of this stereotype is that Asians have been portrayed as having poor leadership and interpersonal skills .
This has contributing to the `` glass ceiling '' phenomenon in which although there are many qualified Asian Americans , they occupy a disproportionately small number of executive positions in businesses .
Furthermore , the model minority stereotype has led to resentment of Asian success and several universities and colleges have limited or have been accused of limiting Asian matriculation .
There are a multitude of supporters as well as opponents to the policy of affirmative action .
Many presidents throughout the last century have failed to take a very firm stance on the policy , and the public has had to discern the president 's opinion for themselves .
In his speech , he discussed the history in the United States that brought the policy into fruition : slavery , Jim Crow , and segregation .
Clinton plainly outlined his stance on affirmative action , saying :
By creating this diverse workforce , these employers and companies gain a competitive advantage in an increasingly global economy .
Therefore , these diversity promoting policies are implemented for competitive reasons rather than as a response to discrimination , but have shown the value in having diversity .
Furthermore , a diverse population of students offers unique perspectives in order to challenge preconceived notions through exposure to the experiences and ideas of others .
According to Professor Gurin of the University of Michigan , skills such as `` perspective-taking , acceptance of differences , a willingness and capacity to find commonalities among differences , acceptance of conflict as normal , conflict resolution , participation in democracy , and interest in the wider social world '' can potentially be developed in college while being exposed to heterogeneous group of students .
In addition , broadening perspectives helps students confront personal and substantive stereotypes and fosters discussion about racial and ethnic issues in a classroom setting .
Furthermore , the 2000 AAUP study states that having a diversity of views leads to a better discussion and greater understanding among the students on issues of race , tolerance , fairness , etc. .
He claims that the supposed `` beneficiaries '' of affirmative action -- minorities -- do not actually benefit and rather are harmed by the policy .
Sander 's claims have been disputed , and his empirical analyses have been subject to substantial criticism .
A group including some of the country 's lead statistical methodologists told the Supreme Court that Sander 's analyses were sufficiently flawed that the Court would be wise to ignore them entirely .
At the same time many scholars have found that minorities gain substantially from affirmative action .
This argument supports the idea of class-based affirmative action .
This would eliminate the need for race-based affirmative action as well as reducing any disproportionate benefits for middle - and upper-class people of color .
Lynch explains that these white men felt frustrated and unfairly victimized by affirmative action .
He argued that blacks had to take full responsibility in their education and in maintaining a job .
Steele believes that there is still a long way to go in America to reach our goals of eradicating discrimination .
Additionally , she argues that affirmative action carries with it a stigma that can create feelings of self-doubt and entitlement in minorities .
Eastland believes that affirmative action is a great risk that only sometimes pays off , and that without it we would be able to compete more freely with one another .
Libertarian economist Thomas Sowell identified what he says are negative results of affirmative action in his book , Affirmative Action Around the World : An Empirical Study .
According to these opponents , this contradiction might make affirmative action counter-productive .
Job positions would not be offered to the applicants who are the most qualified , but to applicants with a special trait such as a certain race , ethnicity , or gender .
For example , opponents say affirmative action causes unprepared applicants to be accepted in highly demanding educational institutions or jobs which result in eventual failure -LRB- see , for example , Richard Sander 's study of affirmative action in Law School , bar exam and eventual performance at law firms -RRB- .
Other opponents say that affirmative action lowers the bar and so denies those who strive for excellence on their own merit and the sense of real achievement .
This causes reverse discrimination in the form of preferential hirings , contracts , and scholarships as a means to ameliorate past wrongs .
They argue that it hinders reconciliation , replaces old wrongs with new wrongs , undermines the achievements of minorities , and encourages groups to identify themselves as disadvantaged , even if they are not .
Michigan joined California , Florida , Texas , and Washington in banning the use of race or sex in admissions considerations .
Some opponents believe , among other things , that affirmative action devalues the accomplishments of people who belong to a group it 's supposed to help , therefore making affirmative action counter-productive .
Furthermore , opponents of affirmative action claim that these policies dehumanize individuals and applicants to jobs or school are judged as members of a group without consideration for the individual person .
Individuals can also be awarded scholarships and have fees paid on the basis of criteria listed above .
.
Class rank tends to benefit top students at less competitive high schools , to the detriment of students at more competitive high schools .
This effect , however , may be intentional since less-funded , less competitive schools are more likely to be schools where minority enrollment is high .
Critics argue that class rank is more a measure of one 's peers than of one 's self .
The top 10 % rule adds racial diversity only because schools are still highly racially segregated because of residential patterns .
The class rank rule has the same consequence as traditional affirmative action : opening schools to students who would otherwise not be admitted had the given school used a holistic , merit-based approach .
From 1996 to 1998 , Texas had merit-based admission to its state universities , and minority enrollment dropped .
The majority of black students at Harvard were Caribbean and African immigrants or their children , with some others the mixed-race children of biracial couples .
He noted that , prior to his article , there had been no comprehensive study on the effects of affirmative action .
Less qualified black students would attend less prestigious schools where they would be more closely matched in abilities with their classmates and thus perform relatively better .
This change occurred after studies showed that the graduation rate of blacks at UCLA was 41 % , compared to 73 % for whites .
Li 's extracurricular activities were described as `` not all that outstanding '' .
`` Princeton had initially waitlisted my application , '' Li said .
`` So if it were not for a yield which was higher than expected , the admissions office very well may have admitted a candidate whose `` outside activities were not all that outstanding '' .
The University of Texas employs the `` Top Ten Percent Law '' , under which admission to any public college or university in Texas is guaranteed to high school students who graduate in the top ten percent of their high school class .
Fisher has brought the admissions policy to court because she believes that she was denied acceptance to the University of Texas based on her race , and thus , her right to equal protection according to the 14th Amendment was violated .
The Supreme Court heard oral arguments in Fisher on October 10 , 2012 , and rendered an ambiguous ruling in 2013 that sent the case back to the lower court , stipulating only that the University must demonstrate that it could not achieve diversity through other , non-race sensitive means .
On February 10 , 2015 , lawyers for Fisher filed a new case in the Supreme Court .
It is a renewed complaint that the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit got the issue wrong -- on the second try as well as on the first .
The Supreme Court agreed in June 2015 to hear the case a second time .
This Supreme Court case will likely be decided in June 2016 or slightly earlier .
The coalition asked for a civil rights investigation into what they described as Harvard 's discriminatory admission practices against Asian-American applicants .
The complaint asserts that recent studies indicate that Harvard has engaged in systematic and continuous discrimination against Asian Americans in its `` holistic '' admissions process .
-LSB- note 1 -RSB- As a result , as well as who wins , significant focus is given to those `` minnows '' -LRB- smaller teams -RRB- who progress furthest , especially if they achieve an unlikely `` giant-killing '' victory .
Winners also qualify for European football and a place in the FA Community Shield match .
Arsenal are the current holders , having beaten Aston Villa 4 -- 0 in the 2015 final to win the cup for the second year in a row .
It was their 12th FA Cup title overall , making Arsenal the FA Cup 's most successful club ahead of Manchester United on 11 .
Wanderers retained the trophy the following year .
Due to the outbreak of World War II , the competition was n't played between the 1938 -- 39 and 1945 -- 46 editions .
All clubs in the top four levels -LRB- the Premier League and the three divisions of the Football League -RRB- are automatically eligible .
The move benefited United as they received a two-week break and won the 1999 -- 2000 league title by an 18-point margin , although they did not progress past the group stage of the Club World Championship .
The number has varied slightly but remained roughly stable since then , with 759 clubs participating in 2010 -- 11 , a record 763 in 2011 -- 12 , 758 for 2012 -- 13 , 737 for 2013 -- 14 and 736 for 2014 -- 15 .
By comparison , the other major English domestic cup , the League Cup , involves only the 92 members of the Premier League and Football League .
The next six rounds are the `` proper '' rounds where all clubs are in one draw .
Replays were traditionally played three or four days after the original game , but from 1991 -- 92 they were staged at least 10 days later on police advice .
This European place applies even if the team is relegated or is not in the English top flight .
Losing finalists , if they entered the Europa League , began earlier , at the play-off or third qualifying round stage .
From the 2015 -- 16 UEFA Europa League season , however , UEFA will not allow the runners-up to qualify for the Europa League through the competition .
The original Wembley Stadium was also used seven times for semi-final , between 1991 and 2000 -LRB- the last held there -RRB- , but not always for fixtures featuring London teams .
One exception to this 78 year series of Empire Stadium finals -LRB- including five replays -RRB- was the 1970 replay between Leeds and Chelsea , held at Old Trafford in Manchester .
The other London venues were Stamford Bridge from 1920 to 1922 -LRB- the last three finals before the move to Empire Stadium -RRB- ; and Oxford University 's Lillie Bridge in Fulham for the second ever final , in 1873 .
The other venues used sparingly in this period were all outside of London , as follows :
The original trophy , known as the `` little tin idol '' , was 18 inches high and made by Martin , Hall & Co. .
It was stolen in 1895 and never recovered , and so was replaced by an exact replica , used until 1910 .
The FA decided to change the design after the 1909 winners , Manchester United , made their own replica , leading the FA to realise they did not own the copyright .
This new , larger design was by Messers Fattorini and Sons , and was used from 1911 .
In order to preserve this original , from 1992 it was replaced by an exact replica , although this had to be replaced after just over two decades , after showing wear and tear from being handled more than in previous eras .
This third replica , first used in 2014 , was built heavier to withstand the increased handling .
Of the four surviving trophies , only the 1895 replica has entered private ownership .
At Cardiff the presentation was made on a podium on the pitch .
He had been further imprisoned in 1957 for seven years for theft from cars .
Released in 1961 , he died in 1964 .
The sale price set a new world record for a piece of football memorabilia , surpassing the # 254,000 paid for the Jules Rimet World Cup Trophy in 1997 .
Accordingly , Gold presented the trophy to the National Football Museum in Preston on 20 April 2006 , where it went on immediate public display .
It later moved with the museum to its new location in Manchester .
In November 2012 , it was ceremonially presented to Royal Engineers , after they beat Wanderers 7 -- 1 in a charity replay of the first FA Cup final .
However , to protect the identity of the competition , the sponsored name has always included ` The FA Cup ' in addition to the sponsor 's name , unlike sponsorship deals for the League Cup where the word ` cup ' is preceded by only the sponsor 's name .
It is considered particularly newsworthy when a top Premier League team suffers an upset defeat , or where the giant-killer is a non-league club , i.e. from outside the professional levels of The Football League .
Only two other actual non-League clubs have even reached the final since the founding of the League : Sheffield Wednesday in 1890 -LRB- champions of the Football Alliance , a rival league which was already effectively the Second Division , which it formally became in 1892 -- Wednesday being let straight into the First Division -RRB- , and Southampton in 1900 and 1902 -LRB- in which years they were also Southern League champions , proving the strength of that league : again , they were probably of equivalent standard to a First Division club at the time , but Southampton 's form subsequently faded and they did not join the League till 1920 and the formation of the Third Division . -RRB-
Chasetown was then a member of the Southern League Division One Midlands -LRB- a lower level within the Southern Football League -RRB- , when they lost to Football League Championship -LRB- Level 2 -RRB- team Cardiff City , the eventual FA Cup runners-up that year .
Their success earned the lowly organisation over # 60,000 in prize money .
Liverpool -LRB- in 2001 -RRB- and Chelsea -LRB- in 2007 -RRB- have since repeated this feat .
In 2012 , Chelsea accomplished a different cup double consisting of the FA Cup and the 2012 Champions League .
In 1998 -- 99 , Manchester United added the 1999 Champions League title to their league and cup double to complete a unique Treble .
Two years later , in 2000 -- 01 , Liverpool won the FA Cup , League Cup and UEFA Cup to complete a cup treble .
An English Treble has never been achieved .
With the exception of Tottenham , these clubs were all playing in the second tier -LRB- the old Second Division -RRB- - Tottenham were playing in the Southern League and were only elected to the Football League in 1908 , meaning they are the only non-league winners of the FA Cup .
The first final on BBC Television was in 1937 in a match which featured Sunderland and Preston North End but this was not televised in full .
The following season 's final between Preston and Huddersfield was covered in full by the BBC .
When ITV was formed in 1955 they shared final coverage with the BBC in one of the only club matches shown live on television , during the 1970s and 1980s coverage became more elaborate with BBC and ITV trying to steal viewers from the others by starting coverage earlier and earlier some starting as early as 9 a.m. which was six hours before kick off .
Nowadays , this continues with Setanta and ESPN having all-day broadcasts from Wembley , but terrestrial TV coverage usually begins two hours before kick off .
The sharing of rights between BBC and ITV continued from 1955 to 1988 , when ITV lost coverage to the new Sports Channel which later became Sky Sports .
From 1997 to 2001 , ITV and Sky shared live coverage with both having two matches per round and BBC continuing with highlights on Match of the Day .
From 2002 to 2008 , BBC and Sky again shared coverage with BBC having two or three matches per round and Sky having one or two .
ITV shows 16 FA Cup games per season , including the first pick of live matches from each of the first to sixth rounds of the competition , plus one semi-final exclusively live .
The final is also shown live on ITV .
Under the same 2008 contract , Setanta Sports showed three games and one replay in each round from round three to five , two quarter-finals , one semi-final and the final .
The channel also broadcast ITV 's matches exclusively to Scotland , after the ITV franchise holder in Scotland , STV , decided not to broadcast FA Cup games .
Setanta entered administration in June 2009 and as a result the FA terminated Setanta 's deal to broadcast FA-sanctioned competitions and England internationals .
As a result of Setanta going out of business ITV showed the competition exclusively in the 2009 -- 10 season with between three and four matches per round , all quarter finals , semi-finals and final live as the FA could not find a pay TV broadcaster in time .
Many -LSB- who ? -RSB-
expected BSkyB to make a bid to show some of the remaining FA Cup games for the remainder of the 2009 -- 10 season which would include a semi-final and shared rights to the final .
The region , as part of Lorraine , was part of the Holy Roman Empire , and then was gradually annexed by France in the 17th century , and formalized as one of the provinces of France .
With the decline of the Roman Empire , Alsace became the territory of the Germanic Alemanni .
Clovis and the Franks defeated the Alemanni during the 5th century AD , culminating with the Battle of Tolbiac , and Alsace became part of the Kingdom of Austrasia .
The part known as Lotharingia , or Lorraine , was given to Lothar 's son .
The rest was shared between Lothar 's brothers Charles the Bald -LRB- ruler of the West Frankish realm -RRB- and Louis the German -LRB- ruler of the East Frankish realm -RRB- .
The Kingdom of Lotharingia was short-lived , however , becoming the stem duchy of Lorraine in Eastern Francia after the Treaty of Ribemont in 880 .
Alsace was united with the other Alemanni east of the Rhine into the stem duchy of Swabia .
Frederick I set up Alsace as a province -LRB- a procuratio , not a provincia -RRB- to be ruled by ministeriales , a non-noble class of civil servants .
The idea was that such men would be more tractable and less likely to alienate the fief from the crown out of their own greed .
Frederick II designated the Bishop of Strasbourg to administer Alsace , but the authority of the bishop was challenged by Count Rudolf of Habsburg , who received his rights from Frederick II 's son Conrad IV .
Strasbourg began to grow to become the most populous and commercially important town in the region .
In 1262 , after a long struggle with the ruling bishops , its citizens gained the status of free imperial city .
Jews were subsequently forbidden to settle in the town .
Prosperity returned to Alsace under Habsburg administration during the Renaissance .
Holy Roman Empire central power had begun to decline following years of imperial adventures in Italian lands , often ceding hegemony in Western Europe to France , which had long since centralized power .
In 1307 , the town of Belfort was first chartered by the Counts of Montbéliard .
It took up winter quarters , demanded the submission of Metz and Strasbourg and launched an attack on Basel .
Although Charles was the nominal landlord , taxes were paid to Frederick III , Holy Roman Emperor .
His efforts were countered by the Roman Catholic Habsburgs who tried to eradicate heresy in Upper Alsace .
On the other hand , Mömpelgard -LRB- Montbéliard -RRB- to the southwest of Alsace , belonging to the Counts of Württemberg since 1397 , remained a Protestant enclave in France until 1793 .
This situation prevailed until 1639 , when most of Alsace was conquered by France so as to keep it out of the hands of the Spanish Habsburgs , who wanted a clear road to their valuable and rebellious possessions in the Spanish Netherlands .
When hostilities were concluded in 1648 with the Treaty of Westphalia , most of Alsace was recognized as part of France , although some towns remained independent .
The treaty stipulations regarding Alsace were complex ; although the French king gained sovereignty , existing rights and customs of the inhabitants were largely preserved .
France continued to maintain its customs border along the Vosges mountains where it had been , leaving Alsace more economically oriented to neighbouring German-speaking lands .
The German language remained in use in local administration , in schools , and at the -LRB- Lutheran -RRB- University of Strasbourg , which continued to draw students from other German-speaking lands .
France did endeavour to promote Catholicism ; Strasbourg Cathedral , for example , which had been Lutheran from 1524 to 1681 , was returned to the Catholic Church .
However , compared to the rest of France , Alsace enjoyed a climate of religious tolerance .
Alsatians played an active role in the French Revolution .
On 21 July 1789 , after receiving news of the Storming of the Bastille in Paris , a crowd of people stormed the Strasbourg city hall , forcing the city administrators to flee and putting symbolically an end to the feudal system in Alsace .
In 1792 , Rouget de Lisle composed in Strasbourg the Revolutionary marching song `` La Marseillaise '' -LRB- as Marching song for the Army of the Rhine -RRB- , which later became the anthem of France .
Many of the residents of the Sundgau made `` pilgrimages '' to places like Mariastein Abbey , near Basel , in Switzerland , for baptisms and weddings .
When the French Revolutionary Army of the Rhine was victorious , tens of thousands fled east before it .
These conditions led to emigration by hundreds of families to newly vacant lands in the Russian Empire in 1803 -- 4 and again in 1808 .
Thus , it is not surprising that people left Alsace , not only for Paris -- where the Alsatian community grew in numbers , with famous members such as Baron Haussmann -- but also for more distant places like Russia and the Austrian Empire , to take advantage of the new opportunities offered there : Austria had conquered lands in Eastern Europe from the Ottoman Empire and offered generous terms to colonists as a way of consolidating its hold on the new territories .
In 1843 and 1844 , sailing ships bringing immigrant families from Alsace arrived at the port of New York .
Some settled in Illinois , many to farm or to seek success in commercial ventures : for example , the sailing ships Sully -LRB- in May 1843 -RRB- and Iowa -LRB- in June 1844 -RRB- brought families who set up homes in northern Illinois and northern Indiana .
Some Alsatian immigrants were noted for their roles in 19th-century American economic development .
Others ventured to Canada to settle in southwestern Ontario , notably Waterloo County .
They were highly segregated and subject to long-standing anti-Jewish regulations .
They maintained their own customs , Yiddish language , and historic traditions within the tightly-knit ghettos ; they adhered to Talmudic law enforced by their rabbis .
They concentrated in trade , services , and especially in money lending .
They financed about a third of the mortgages in Alsace .
However , local antisemitism also increased and Napoleon turned hostile in 1806 , imposing a one-year moratorium on all debts owed to Jews .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- In the 1830-1870 era most Jews moved to the cities , where they integrated and acculturated , as antisemitism sharply declined .
By 1831 , the state began paying salaries to official rabbis , and in 1846 a special legal oath for Jews was discontinued .
Antisemitic local riots occasionally occurred , especially during the Revolution of 1848 .
Between 100,000 and 130,000 Alsatians -LRB- of a total population of about a million and a half -RRB- chose to remain French citizens and leave Reichsland Elsaß-Lothringen , many of them resettling in French Algeria as Pieds-Noirs .
Only in 1911 was Alsace-Lorraine granted some measure of autonomy , which was manifested also in a flag and an anthem -LRB- Elsässisches Fahnenlied -RRB- .
In 1913 , however , the Saverne Affair -LRB- French : Incident de Saverne -RRB- showed the limits of this new tolerance of the Alsatian identity .
The sailors returned home and tried to found a republic .
At the arrival of the French soldiers , many Alsatians and local Prussian/German administrators and bureaucrats cheered the re-establishment of order -LRB- which can be seen and is described in detail in the reference video below -RRB- .
Although U.S. President Woodrow Wilson had insisted that the région was self-ruling by legal status , as its constitution had stated it was bound to the sole authority of the Kaiser and not to the German state , France tolerated no plebiscite , as granted by the League of Nations to some eastern German territories at this time , because Alsatians were considered by the French public as fellow Frenchmen liberated from German rule .
Although Germany never formally annexed Alsace-Lorraine , it was incorporated into the Greater German Reich , which had been restructured into Reichsgaue .
Alsace was merged with Baden , and Lorraine with the Saarland , to become part of a planned Westmark .
Some of the latter were involved in war crimes such as the Oradour-sur-Glane massacre .
Most of them perished on the eastern front .
The few that could escape fled to Switzerland or joined the resistance .
Alsace is one of the most conservative régions of France .
It is one of just two régions in metropolitan France where the conservative right won the 2004 région elections and thus controls the Alsace Regional Council .
The frequently changing status of the région throughout history has left its mark on modern day politics in terms of a particular interest in national identity issues .
Alsace is also one of the most pro-EU regions of France .
Unlike the rest of France , the Local law in Alsace-Moselle still provides for to the Napoleonic Concordat of 1801 and the organic articles , which provides public subsidies to the Roman Catholic , Lutheran , and Calvinist churches , as well as to Jewish synagogues ; religion classes in one of these faiths is compulsory in public schools .
This divergence in policy from the French majority is due to the region having been part of Imperial Germany when the 1905 law separating the French church and state was instituted -LRB- for a more comprehensive history , see : Alsace-Lorraine -RRB- .
Controversy erupts periodically on the appropriateness of this legal disposition , as well as on the exclusion of other religions from this arrangement .
Following the Protestant Reformation , promoted by local reformer Martin Bucer , the principle of cuius regio , eius religio led to a certain amount of religious diversity in the highlands of northern Alsace .
Multiconfessional villages appeared , particularly in the region of Alsace bossue .
Alsace became one of the French regions boasting a thriving Jewish community , and the only region with a noticeable Anabaptist population .
The strongly Catholic Louis XIV tried in vain to drive them from Alsace .
When Napoleon imposed military conscription without religious exception , most emigrated to the American continent .
There is controversy around the recognition of the Alsacian flag .
The German region Hesse uses a flag similar to the Rot-un-Wiss .
It has , however , no real historical relevance .
It has been since replaced again by a slightly different one , also representing the two départements .
Some overzealous statesmen have called it a Nazi invention - while its origins date back to the XIth century and the Red and White banner of Gérard de Lorraine -LRB- aka .
d'Alsace -RRB- .
The Rot-un-Wiss flag is still known as the real historical emblem of the region by most of the population and the departments ' parliaments and has been widely used during protests against the creation of a new `` super-region '' gathering Champagne-Ardennes , Lorraine and Alsace , namely on Colmar 's statue of liberty .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The teaching of German became a major issue , however , as early as 1946 .
Following World War II , the French government pursued , in line with its traditional language policy , a campaign to suppress the use of German as part of a wider Francization campaign .
This memorandum was , however , implemented in a fairly lax manner .
Though the ban has long been lifted and street signs today are often bilingual , Alsace-Lorraine is today very French in language and culture .
A related Alemannic German survives on the opposite bank of the Rhine , in Baden , and especially in Switzerland .
However , Alsatian , along with other regional languages , are recognized by the French government in the official list of languages of France .
Like all regional languages in France , however , the transmission of Alsatian is on the decline .
The gastronomic symbol of the région is undoubtedly the Choucroute , a local variety of Sauerkraut .
This word was included into the French language as choucroute .
To make it , the cabbage is finely shredded , layered with salt and juniper and left to ferment in wooden barrels .
Served alongside are often roasted or steamed potatoes or dumplings .
The opening is envisaged at the end of 2011 , with an average usage of 41,000 vehicles a day .
Estimates of the French Works Commissioner however , raised some doubts over the interest of such a project , since it would pick up only about 10 % of the traffic of the A35 at Strasbourg .
Paradoxically , this reversed the situation of the 1950s .
In accordance with his reading of the New Testament , he rejected baptism of infants and instituted baptism only of believing adults .
In the mid-18th century , the First Great Awakening increased Baptist growth in both New England and the South .
The Second Great Awakening in the South in the early 19th century increased church membership , as did the preachers ' lessening of support for abolition and manumission of slavery , which had been part of the 18th-century teachings .
Baptist missionaries have spread their church to every continent .
This view of Baptist origins has the most historical support and is the most widely accepted .
It was a time of considerable political and religious turmoil .
Both individuals and churches were willing to give up their theological roots if they became convinced that a more biblical `` truth '' had been discovered .
-LSB- page needed -RSB-
There were some Christians who were not content with the achievements of the mainstream Protestant Reformation .
There also were Christians who were disappointed that the Church of England had not made corrections of what some considered to be errors and abuses .
Of those most critical of the Church 's direction , some chose to stay and try to make constructive changes from within the Anglican Church .
Three years earlier , while a Fellow of Christ 's College , Cambridge , he had broken his ties with the Church of England .
He began meeting in England with 60 -- 70 English Separatists , in the face of `` great danger . ''
Smyth and his lay supporter , Thomas Helwys , together with those they led , broke with the other English exiles because Smyth and Helwys were convinced they should be baptized as believers .
In 1609 Smyth first baptized himself and then baptized the others .
Shortly thereafter , Smyth left the group , and layman Thomas Helwys took over the leadership , leading the church back to England in 1611 .
Ultimately , Smyth became committed to believers ' baptism as the only biblical baptism .
He was convinced on the basis of his interpretation of Scripture that infants would not be damned should they die in infancy .
He died while waiting for membership , and some of his followers became Mennonites .
Thomas Helwys and others kept their baptism and their Baptist commitments .
Representative writers including A.C. Underwood and William R. Estep .
Gourley wrote that among some contemporary Baptist scholars who emphasize the faith of the community over soul liberty , the Anabaptist influence theory is making a comeback .
According to a Baptist historian who has researched the matter extensively , `` There is much debate over the centuries as to whether the Providence or Newport church deserved the place of ` first ' Baptist congregation in America .
Exact records for both congregations are lacking . ''
The church was established with the assistance of the New Light evangelist Henry Alline .
Many of Alline 's followers , after his death , would convert and strengthen the Baptist presence in the Atlantic region .
-LSB- page needed -RSB- Two major groups of Baptists formed the basis of the churches in the Maritimes .
These were referred to as Regular Baptist -LRB- Calvinistic in their doctrine -RRB- and Free Will Baptists .
The Methodist Episcopal Church , South had recently separated over the issue of slavery , and southern Presbyterians would do so shortly thereafter .
Many Baptist churches choose to affiliate with organizational groups that provide fellowship without control .
There also are a substantial number of smaller cooperative groups .
Finally , there are Baptist churches that choose to remain autonomous and independent of any denomination , organization , or association .
Baptists have faced many controversies in their 400-year history , controversies of the level of crises .
Shurden writes that contrary to the presumed negative view of crises , some controversies that reach a crisis level may actually be `` positive and highly productive . ''
He claims that even schism , though never ideal , has often produced positive results .
In his opinion crises among Baptists each have become decision-moments that shaped their future .
Both denominations made direct appeals to slaves and free blacks for conversion .
By the mid-19th century , northern Baptists tended to oppose slavery .
It noted that missionaries could not take servants with them , and also that the Board did not want to appear to condone slavery .
They wanted to be free of white supervision .
In 1880 black state conventions united in the national Foreign Mission Convention , to support black Baptist missionary work .
Two other national black conventions were formed , and in 1895 they united as the National Baptist Convention .
This organization later went through its own changes , spinning off other conventions .
It is the largest black religious organization and the second largest Baptist organization in the world .
Baptists are numerically most dominant in the Southeast .
At the same time , during and after slavery , slaves and free formed their own Spiritual Baptist movements - breakaway spiritual movements which often expressed resistance to oppression .
It offered an apology to all African-Americans for `` condoning and/or perpetuating individual and systemic racism in our lifetime '' and repentance for `` racism of which we have been guilty , whether consciously or unconsciously . ''
Although Southern Baptists have condemned racism in the past , this was the first time the predominantly white convention had dealt specifically with the issue of slavery .
While some Landmarkers eventually separated from the Southern Baptist Convention , the influence of the movement on the Convention continued into the 20th century .
Its influence continues to affect convention policies .
Members of both groups originally identified as Southern Baptist , but over time the groups `` became permanent new families of Baptists . ''
This practice is considered exploitative by many international organisations .
In developing countries , with high poverty and poor schooling opportunities , child labour is still prevalent .
This is especially the case in non literate societies .
The Victorian era in particular became notorious for the conditions under which children were employed .
In coal mines , children would crawl through tunnels too narrow and low for adults .
Children also worked as errand boys , crossing sweepers , shoe blacks , or selling matches , flowers and other cheap goods .
The children of the poor were expected to contribute to their family income .
The regulation of child labour began from the earliest days of the Industrial revolution .
As early as 1802 and 1819 Factory Acts were passed to regulate the working hours of workhouse children in factories and cotton mills to 12 hours per day .
Glass making was a dangerous and tough job especially without the current technologies .
The process of making glass includes intense heat to melt glass -LRB- 3133 °F -RRB- .
This could cause eye trouble , lung ailments , heat exhaustion , cut , and burns .
Since furnaces had to be constantly burning , there were night shifts from 5:00 pm to 3:00 am .
Lewis Hine 's photographs of child labourers in the 1910s powerfully evoked the plight of working children in the American south .
Home-based manufacturing across the United States and Europe employed children as well .
Legislation that followed had the effect of moving work out of factories into urban homes .
Families willingly deployed their children in these income generating home enterprises .
In many cases , men worked from home .
In France , over 58 percent of garment workers operated out of their homes ; in Germany , the number of full-time home operations nearly doubled between 1882 and 1907 ; and in the United States , millions of families operated out of home seven days a week , year round to produce garments , shoes , artificial flowers , feathers , match boxes , toys , umbrellas and other products .
Home-based operations and child labour in Australia , Britain , Austria and other parts of the world was common .
Estimates for child labour vary .
It ranges between 250 and 304 million , if children aged 5 -- 17 involved in any economic activity are counted .
If light occasional work is excluded , ILO estimates there were 153 million child labourers aged 5 -- 14 worldwide in 2008 .
This is about 20 million less than ILO estimate for child labourers in 2004 .
Some 60 percent of the child labour was involved in agricultural activities such as farming , dairy , fisheries and forestry .
Another 25 percent of child labourers were in service activities such as retail , hawking goods , restaurants , load and transfer of goods , storage , picking and recycling trash , polishing shoes , domestic help , and other services .
The remaining 15 percent laboured in assembly and manufacturing in informal economy , home-based enterprises , factories , mines , packaging salt , operating machinery , and such operations .
The proportion of child labourers varies greatly among countries and even regions inside those countries .
Africa has the highest percentage of children aged 5 -- 17 employed as child labour , and a total of over 65 million .
In some countries , government policy contributes to this difficulty .
China has enacted regulations to prevent child labour ; still , the practice of child labour is reported to be a persistent problem within China , generally in agriculture and low-skill service sectors as well as small workshops and manufacturing enterprises .
Lack of meaningful alternatives , such as affordable schools and quality education , according to ILO , is another major factor driving children to harmful labour .
In European history when child labour was common , as well as in contemporary child labour of modern world , certain cultural beliefs have rationalised child labour and thereby encouraged it .
Biggeri and Mehrotra have studied the macroeconomic factors that encourage child labour .
While poverty and unavailability of good schools explain the child labour supply side , they suggest that the growth of low-paying informal economy rather than higher paying formal economy is amongst the causes of the demand side .
Other scholars too suggest that inflexible labour market , sise of informal economy , inability of industries to scale up and lack of modern manufacturing technologies are major macroeconomic factors affecting demand and acceptability of child labour .
In Africa , colonial administrators encouraged traditional kin-ordered modes of production , that is hiring a household for work not just the adults .
Other schemes included ` earn-and-learn ' programs where children would work and thereby learn .
Britain for example passed a law , the so-called Masters and Servants Act of 1899 , followed by Tax and Pass Law , to encourage child labour in colonies particularly in Africa .
These laws offered the native people the legal ownership to some of the native land in exchange for making labour of wife and children available to colonial government 's needs such as in farms and as picannins .
The Dutch East India Company officials rationalised their child labour abuses with , `` it is a way to save these children from a worse fate . ''
Children working at a young age has been a consistent theme throughout Africa .
Children in Africa today are often forced into exploitative labour due to family debt and other financial factors , leading to ongoing poverty .
Other types of domestic child labour include working in commercial plantations , begging , and other sales such as boot shining .
What industries children work in depends on if they grew up in a rural area or an urban area .
Yet due to poverty , lack of education and ignorance , the legal actions were not/are not wholly enforced or accepted in Africa .
Other legal factors that have been implemented to end and reduce child labour includes the global response that came into force in 1979 by the declaration of the International Year of the Child .
Along with the Human Rights Committee of the United Nations , these two declarations worked on many levels to eliminate child labour .
In the end , there is a consistent challenge for the national government to strengthen its grip politically on child labour , and to increase education and awareness on the issue of children working below the legal age limit .
With children playing an important role in the African economy , child labour still plays an important role for many in the 20th century .
With a low population , agricultural productivity was higher and families did not face starvation as in established industrialised countries .
Work that many children took part in was not always visible , legal , or paid .
Free or slave labour was a common occurrence for many youths and was a part of their everyday lives as they grew into adulthood .
Yet due to there being no clear definition of how to classify what a child or youth is , there has been little historical documentation of child labour during the colonial period .
Due to this lack of documentation , it is hard to determine just how many children were used for what kinds of work before the nineteenth century .
Yet due to a change in the dictatorship by the military in the 80 's , the minimum age restriction was reduced to the age of twelve but was reviewed due to reports of dangerous and hazardous working conditions in 1988 .
This led to the minimum age being raised once again to 14 .
They were joined by 3.7 million 15-17 year-olds and about 375,000 5-9 year-olds .
Due to the raised age restriction of 14 , at least half of the recorded young workers had been employed illegally which lead to many not being protect by important labour laws .
Although substantial time has passed since the time of regulated child labour , there is still a large number of children working illegally in Brazil .
Many factors played a role in Britain 's long-term economic growth , such as the industrial revolution in the late 1700s and the prominent presence of child labour during the industrial age .
Children who worked at an early age were often not forced ; but did so because they needed to help their family survive financially .
Child Labour first started to occur in England when household businesses were turned into local labour markets that mass-produced the once homemade goods .
Because children often helped produce the goods out of their homes , working in a factory to make those same goods was a simple change for many of these youths .
By the end of the eighteenth century , 20 percent of the population was made up of children between the ages of 5 and 14 .
Due to this substantial shift in available workers , and the development of the industrial revolution , children began to work earlier in life in companies outside of the home .
The first legal steps taken to end the occurrence of child labour was enacted more than fifty years ago .
They all worked towards the goal of ending the most problematic forms of child labour .
Many multinationals often employed children because that they can be recruited for less pay , and have more endurance to utilise in factory environments .
The innocence that comes with childhood was utilised to make a profit by many and was encouraged by the need for family income .
This act was followed by The Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 to which incorporated the basic human rights and needs of children for proper progression and growth in their younger years .
This process is repeated in spring , when collected cotton needs to be hoed and weeded .
In the 1930s 20 % of all agricultural labourers in the Canton of Bern were children below the age of 15 .
10,000 Verdingkinder are still alive .
Therefore , the so-called Wiedergutmachungsinitiative was started in April 2014 .
The law also prohibits the use of a child for prostitution or the production of pornography , child labour in illicit activities such as drug production and trafficking ; and in hazardous work .
Amongst the key initiative is the so-called time-bounded programme countries , where child labour is most prevalent and schooling opportunities lacking .
The Amish believe that one effective way to educate children is on the job .
Under these rules , children of various ages may work in cultural , artistic , sporting or advertising activities if authorised by the competent authority .
The EU Directive clarified that these exceptions do not allow child labour where the children may experience harmful exposure to dangerous substances .
Nonetheless , many children under the age of 13 do work , even in the most developed countries of the EU .
Some scholars -LSB- who ? -RSB-
suggest any labour by children aged 18 years or less is wrong since this encourages illiteracy , inhumane work and lower investment in human capital .
More children that work in poor countries , the fewer and worse-paid are the jobs for adults in these countries .
Other scholars -LSB- who ? -RSB-
suggest that these arguments are flawed , ignores history and more laws will do more harm than good .
If laws ban all lawful work that enables the poor to survive , informal economy , illicit operations and underground businesses will thrive .
These will increase abuse of the children .
In poor countries with very high incidence rates of child labour - such as Ethiopia , Chad , Niger and Nepal - schools are not available , and the few schools that exist offer poor quality education or are unaffordable .
The alternatives for children who currently work , claim these studies , are worse : grinding subsistence farming , militia or prostitution .
It is currently the least undesirable of a set of very bad choices .
Child labour laws and ILO conventions came later .
Other media followed by reporting widespread child slavery and child trafficking in the production of cocoa .
-LSB- not in citation given -RSB- -LSB- better source needed -RSB-
The Malian counsel had to rescue some boys who had not been paid for five years and who were beaten if they tried to run away .
Malian officials believed that 15,000 children , some as young as 11 years old , were working in the Ivory Coast in 2001 .
Parents were told the children would find work and send money home , but once the children left home , they often worked in conditions resembling slavery .
In 2002 , the Ivory Coast had 12,000 children with no relatives nearby , which suggested they were trafficked , likely from neighboring Mali , Burkina Faso and Togo .
Later the industry acknowledged the working conditions for children were unsatisfactory and children 's rights were sometimes violated and acknowledged the claims could not be ignored .
An African NGO report claimed 80,000 child labourers under the age of 15 , or about 40 % of all miners , were supplying ore to Chinese companies in this African region .
The company claimed it has a strict policy whereby all copper was mined correctly , placed in bags with numbered seals and then sent to the smelter .
This form of mining uses labour-intensive and low-tech methods .
It is informal sector of the economy .
Human Rights Watch group estimates that about 12 percent of global gold production comes from artisanal mines .
Locally known as orpaillage , children as young as 6 years old work with their families .
These children and families suffer chronic exposure to toxic chemicals including mercury , and do hazardous work such as digging shafts and working underground , pulling up , carrying and crushing the ore .
The poor work practices harm the long term health of children , as well as release hundreds of tons of mercury every year into local rivers , ground water and lakes .
Gold is important to the economy of Mali and Ghana .
Neil announced that he was turning the case over to the state Attorney General for prosecution , claiming that his department 's inquiry had discovered `` egregious violations of virtually every aspect of Iowa 's child labour laws . ''
In December 2009 , campaigners in the UK called on two leading high street retailers to stop selling clothes made with cotton which may have been picked by children .
It is also suspected that many of their raw materials originates from Uzbekistan , where children aged 10 are forced to work in the fields .
In particular , a # 4 hand-embroidered shirt was the starting point of a documentary produced by BBC 's Panorama programme .
This item looks handmade .
Who made it for such little cost ? ''
In 2011 , following an investigation by the BBC Trust 's Editorial Standards Committee , the BBC announced , `` Having carefully scrutinised all of the relevant evidence , the committee concluded that , on the balance of probabilities , it was more likely than not that the Bangalore footage was not authentic . ''
Concerns have often been raised over the buying public 's moral complicity in purchasing products assembled or otherwise manufactured in developing countries with child labour .
Austrian School economist Murray Rothbard said that British and American children of the pre - and post-Industrial Revolution lived and suffered in infinitely worse conditions where jobs were not available for them and went `` voluntarily and gladly '' to work in factories .
Then they can grow to become productive adults and live longer , healthier lives .
The term child labour can be misleading when it confuses harmful work with employment that may be beneficial to children .
It can also ignore harmful work outside employment and any benefits children normally derive from their work .
In most families in the world , this process extends to productive activities , especially herding and various types of agriculture , and to a variety of small family businesses .
Work can contribute to the well-being of children in a variety of ways ; children often choose to work to improve their lives , both in the short - and long-term .
At the material level , children 's work often contributes to producing food or earning income that benefits themselves and their families ; and such income is especially important when the families are poor .
Young people often enjoy their work , especially paid work , or when work involves the company of peers .
Sometimes even part-time work may hinder school attendance or performance .
On the other hand , many poor children work for resources to attend school .
Children who are not doing well at school sometimes seek more satisfactory experience in work .
In the modern world , school education has become so central to society that schoolwork has become the dominant work for most children , often replacing participation in productive work .
They are the two largest landlocked sounds in the United States .
It consists of gently rolling countryside frequently broken by hills or low mountain ridges .
Because of the rapid population growth in the Piedmont , a significant part of the rural area in this region is being transformed into suburbs with shopping centers , housing , and corporate offices .
Agriculture is steadily declining in importance .
The major rivers of the Piedmont , such as the Yadkin and Catawba , tend to be fast-flowing , shallow , and narrow .
Although agriculture still remains important , tourism has become a dominant industry in the mountains .
Growing Christmas trees has recently become an important industry as well .
Because of the higher altitude , the climate in the mountains often differs markedly from that of the rest of the state .
Winter in western North Carolina typically features high snowfall and subfreezing temperatures more akin to those of a midwestern state than of a southern state .
The coast has mild temperatures in winter , with daytime highs rarely below 40 °F -LRB- 4 °C -RRB- .
The average daytime temperature in the coastal plain is usually in the mid-50s °F -LRB- 11 -- 14 °C -RRB- in winter .
The coastal plain averages only around 1 inch -LRB- 2.5 cm -RRB- of snow or ice annually , and in many years , there may be no snow or ice at all .
While it is not common for the temperature to reach over 100 °F -LRB- 38 °C -RRB- in the state , such temperatures , when they occur , typically are found only in the lower-elevation areas of the Piedmont and far-inland areas of the coastal plain .
Freezing rain can be heavy enough to snarl traffic and break down trees and power lines .
Annual precipitation and humidity are lower in the Piedmont than in the mountains or the coast , but even at its lowest , the average is 40 in -LRB- 1,020 mm -RRB- per year .
Mount Mitchell has received snow in every month of the year .
Severe weather occurs regularly in North Carolina .
Hurricane Isabel stands out as the most damaging of the 21st century .
Tropical storms arrive every 3 or 4 years .
In addition , many hurricanes and tropical storms graze the state .
In some years , several hurricanes or tropical storms can directly strike the state or brush across the coastal areas .
Only Florida and Louisiana are hit by hurricanes more often .
Although many people believe that hurricanes menace only coastal areas , the rare hurricane which moves inland quickly enough can cause severe damage ; for example , in 1989 , Hurricane Hugo caused heavy damage in Charlotte and even as far inland as the Blue Ridge Mountains in the northwestern part of the state .
On the average , North Carolina has 50 days of thunderstorm activity per year , with some storms becoming severe enough to produce hail , flash floods , and damaging winds .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
After the grounding her crew and supplies were transferred to smaller ships .
In November , after losing his ship and appealing to the governor of North Carolina who promised safe-haven and a pardon , the notorious pirate , Blackbeard -LRB- Edward Teach -RRB- was killed in an ambush by troops from Virginia .
Growth was strong in the middle of the 18th century , as the economy attracted Scots-Irish , Quaker , English and German immigrants .
The colonists generally supported the American Revolution , as the number of Loyalists was smaller than in some other colonies .
Officially established in 1792 as both county seat and state capital , the city was named after Sir Walter Raleigh , sponsor of Roanoke , the `` lost colony '' on Roanoke Island .
It ceded them to the national government so that the Northwest Territory could be organized and managed nationally .
The western areas were dominated by white families , especially Scots-Irish , who operated small subsistence farms .
In the early national period , the state became a center of Jeffersonian and Jacksonian democracy , with a strong Whig presence , especially in the West .
After Nat Turner 's slave uprising in 1831 , North Carolina and other southern states reduced the rights of free blacks .
In 1835 the legislature withdrew their right to vote .
A Republican Party coalition of black freedmen , northern carpetbaggers and local scalawags controlled state government for three years .
Republicans were elected to the governorship until 1876 , when the Red Shirts , a paramilitary organization that arose in 1874 and was allied with the Democratic Party , helped suppress black voting .
More than 150 black Americans were murdered in electoral violence in 1876 .
After a decade of white supremacy , many people forgot that North Carolina had ever had thriving middle-class black Americans .
It was not until 1992 that another African American was elected as a US Representative from North Carolina .
Towns and cities remained few in the east .
Railroads were built to connect the new industrializing cities .
The state was the site of the first successful controlled , powered and sustained heavier-than-air flight , by the Wright brothers , near Kitty Hawk on December 17 , 1903 .
In the first half of the 20th century , many African Americans left the state to go North for better opportunities , in the Great Migration .
Their departure changed the demographic characteristics of many areas .
Raleigh , Durham , and Chapel Hill form the Research Triangle , a major area of universities and advanced scientific and technical research .
Tourism has also been a boon for the North Carolina economy as people flock to the Outer Banks coastal area and the Appalachian Mountains anchored by Asheville .
In 1567 Captain Juan Pardo led an expedition to claim the area for the Spanish colony and to establish another route to protect silver mines in Mexico .
Pardo made a winter base at Joara , which he renamed Cuenca .
His expedition built Fort San Juan and left a contingent of 30 men there , while Pardo traveled further , and built and garrisoned five other forts .
He returned by a different route to Santa Elena on Parris Island , South Carolina , then a center of Spanish Florida .
In the spring of 1568 , natives killed all but one of the soldiers and burned the six forts in the interior , including the one at Fort San Juan .
Although the Spanish never returned to the interior , this effort marked the first European attempt at colonization of the interior of what became the United States .
A 16th-century journal by Pardo 's scribe Bandera and archaeological findings since 1986 at Joara have confirmed the settlement .
It was the second American territory which the English attempted to colonize .
The fate of the `` Lost Colony '' of Roanoke Island remains one of the most widely debated mysteries of American history .
Virginia Dare , the first English child to be born in North America , was born on Roanoke Island on August 18 , 1587 ; Dare County is named for her .
In 1710 , owing to disputes over governance , the Carolina colony began to split into North Carolina and South Carolina .
The latter became a crown colony in 1729 .
By 1663 , this northeastern area of the Province of Carolina , known as the Albemarle Settlements , was undergoing full-scale English settlement .
During the same period , the English monarch Charles II gave the province to the Lords Proprietors , a group of noblemen who had helped restore Charles to the throne in 1660 .
The new province of `` Carolina '' was named in honor and memory of King Charles I -LRB- Latin : Carolus -RRB- .
In 1712 , North Carolina became a separate colony .
Except for the Earl Granville holdings , it became a royal colony seventeen years later .
A large revolt happened in the state in 1711 known as Cary 's Rebellion .
The upcountry of western North Carolina was settled chiefly by Scots-Irish , English , and German Protestants , the so-called `` cohee '' .
Arriving during the mid - to late 18th century , the Scots-Irish from what is today Northern Ireland were the largest non-English immigrant group before the Revolution ; English indentured servants were overwhelmingly the largest immigrant group before the Revolution .
The English , Welsh , Scots-Irish , and German settlers of western North Carolina tended to favor American independence from Britain .
Some Africans were allowed to earn their freedom before slavery became a lifelong status .
Most of the free colored families formed in North Carolina before the Revolution were descended from unions or marriages between free white women and enslaved or free African or African-American men .
Because the mothers were free , their children were born free .
Many had migrated or were descendants of migrants from colonial Virginia .
The economy 's growth and prosperity was based on slave labor , devoted first to the production of tobacco .
The dates of both of these events are memorialized on the state flag and state seal .
Throughout the Revolutionary War , fierce guerrilla warfare erupted between bands of pro-independence and pro-British colonists .
In some cases the war was also an excuse to settle private grudges and rivalries .
Most of the soldiers fighting for the British side in this battle were Carolinians who had remained loyal to the Crown -LRB- they were called `` Tories '' or Loyalists -RRB- .
The American victory at Kings Mountain gave the advantage to colonists who favored American independence , and it prevented the British Army from recruiting new soldiers from the Tories .
The road to Yorktown and America 's independence from Great Britain led through North Carolina .
Morgan had moved to the northern part of the state to combine with General Greene 's newly recruited forces .
Although the British troops held the field at the end of the battle , their casualties at the hands of the numerically superior Continental Army were crippling .
This decision would result in Cornwallis ' eventual defeat at Yorktown , Virginia , later in 1781 .
The Patriots ' victory there guaranteed American independence .
Although North Carolina 's plantation system was smaller and less cohesive than that of Virginia , Georgia , or South Carolina , significant numbers of planters were concentrated in the counties around the port cities of Wilmington and Edenton , as well as suburban planters around the cities of Raleigh , Charlotte , and Durham in the Piedmont .
Planters owning large estates wielded significant political and socio-economic power in antebellum North Carolina , which was a slave society .
They placed their interests above those of the generally non-slave-holding `` yeoman '' farmers of western North Carolina .
In mid-century , the state 's rural and commercial areas were connected by the construction of a 129-mile -LRB- 208 km -RRB- wooden plank road , known as a `` farmer 's railroad '' , from Fayetteville in the east to Bethania -LRB- northwest of Winston-Salem -RRB- .
Besides slaves , there were a number of free people of color in the state .
The majority were the descendants of unions in the working classes between white women , indentured servants or free , and African men , indentured , slave or free .
Some were inspired by their efforts and the language of the Revolution to arrange for manumission of their slaves .
Free African Americans were allowed to vote until 1835 , when the state revoked their suffrage in restrictions following the slave rebellion of 1831 led by Nat Turner .
Southern slave codes criminalized willful killing of a slave in most cases .
This was a smaller proportion than in many Southern states .
Numerous slaves escaped to Union lines , where they became essentially free .
In April 1865 , after losing the Battle of Morrisville , Johnston surrendered to Sherman at Bennett Place , in what is today Durham .
North Carolina 's port city of Wilmington was the last Confederate port to fall to the Union , in February 1865 , after the Union won the nearby Second Battle of Fort Fisher , its major defense downriver .
During the Battle of Chickamauga , the 58th North Carolina Regiment advanced farther than any other regiment on Snodgrass Hill to push back the remaining Union forces from the battlefield .
At Appomattox Court House in Virginia in April 1865 , the 75th North Carolina Regiment , a cavalry unit , fired the last shots of the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia in the Civil War .
For many years , North Carolinians proudly boasted that they had been `` First at Bethel , Farthest at Gettysburg and Chickamauga , and Last at Appomattox . ''
The fourth greatest was the Presbyterian Church -LRB- USA -RRB- , with 186,000 members and 710 congregations ; this denomination was brought by Scots-Irish immigrants who settled the backcountry in the colonial era .
There are also a substantial number of Quakers in Guilford County and northeastern North Carolina .
Many universities and colleges in the state have been founded on religious traditions , and some currently maintain that affiliation , including :
In 2011 the civilian labor force was at around 4.5 million with employment near 4.1 million .
The working population is employed across the major employment sectors .
The economy of North Carolina covers 15 metropolitan areas .
In 2010 , North Carolina was chosen as the third-best state for business by Forbes Magazine , and the second-best state by Chief Executive Officer Magazine .
North Carolina 's party loyalties have undergone a series of important shifts in the last few years : While the 2010 midterms saw Tar Heel voters elect a bicameral Republican majority legislature for the first time in over a century , North Carolina has also become a Southern swing state in presidential races .
In the early 2000s , Republican George W. Bush easily won the state by over 12 points , but by 2008 , demographic shifts , population growth , and increased liberalization in heavily populated areas such as the Research Triangle , Charlotte , Greensboro , Winston-Salem , Fayetteville , and Asheville , propelled Barack Obama to victory in North Carolina , the first Democrat to win the state since 1976 .
However , Republican Mitt Romney ultimately eked out a 2-point win in North Carolina , the only 2012 swing state that Obama lost , and one of only two states -LRB- along with Indiana -RRB- to flip from Obama in 2008 to the GOP in 2012 .
Several U.S. House of Representatives seats also flipped control , with the Republicans holding nine seats to the Democrats ' four .
A county may have one or more systems within it .
In total there are 2,425 public schools in the state , including 99 charter schools .
North Carolina Schools were segregated until the Brown v. Board of Education trial and the release of the Pearsall Plan .
More than 200 years later , the University of North Carolina system encompasses 17 public universities including North Carolina State University , North Carolina A&T State University , North Carolina Central University , the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , the University of North Carolina at Greensboro , East Carolina University , Western Carolina University , Winston-Salem State University , the University of North Carolina at Asheville , the University of North Carolina at Charlotte , the University of North Carolina at Pembroke , UNC Wilmington , Elizabeth City State University , Appalachian State University , Fayetteville State University , and UNC School of the Arts , and .
North Carolina is home to many excellent universities as well as dozens of community colleges and private universities .
The Panthers and Hurricanes are the only two major professional sports teams that have the same geographical designation while playing in different metropolitan areas .
North Carolina is also home to Charlotte Hounds of the Major League Lacrosse .
Numerous other tracks around North Carolina host races from low-tier NASCAR circuits as well .
College basketball in particular is very popular , buoyed by the Tobacco Road rivalries between Duke , North Carolina , North Carolina State , and Wake Forest .
Seagrove , in the central portion of the state , attracts many tourists along Pottery Highway -LRB- NC Hwy 705 -RRB- .
North Carolina has theme parks , aquariums , museums , historic sites , lighthouses , elegant theaters , concert halls , and fine dining .
North Carolina has rich traditions in art , music , and cuisine .
Also see this list of museums in North Carolina .
North Carolina has a variety of shopping choices .
Other major malls in Charlotte include Northlake Mall and Carolina Place Mall in nearby suburb Pineville .
There are strong regional differences and rivalries over the sauces and methods used in making the barbecue .
Eastern North Carolina pork barbecue uses a vinegar-and-red-pepper-based sauce and the `` whole hog '' is cooked , thus integrating both white and dark meat .
Despite its name , the hot sauce Texas Pete was created in North Carolina ; its headquarters are also in Winston-Salem .
The Hardee 's fast-food chain was started in Rocky Mount .
Another fast-food chain , Bojangles ' , was started in Charlotte , and has its corporate headquarters there .
A popular North Carolina restaurant chain is Golden Corral .
Started in 1973 , the chain was founded in Fayetteville , with headquarters located in Raleigh .
Popular pickle brand Mount Olive Pickle Company was founded in Mount Olive in 1926 .
Fast casual burger chain Hwy 55 Burgers , Shakes & Fries also makes its home in Mount Olive .
Cook Out , a popular fast-food chain featuring burgers , hot dogs , and milkshakes in a wide variety of flavors , was founded in Greensboro in 1989 and has begun expanding outside of North Carolina .
In 2013 , Southern Living named Durham - Chapel Hill the South 's `` Tastiest City . ''
Asheville boasts the largest breweries per capita of any city in the United States .
Recognized and marketed brands of beer in North Carolina include Highland Brewing , Duck Rabbit Brewery , Mother Earth Brewery , Weeping Radish Brewery , Big Boss Brewing , Foothills Brewing , Carolina Brewing Company , Lonerider Brewing , and White Rabbit Brewing Company .
Many farmers grew some tobacco , and the invention of the cigarette made the product especially popular .
Today it is the second-largest tobacco company in the U.S. -LRB- behind Altria Group -RRB- .
RJR is an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of Reynolds American Inc. , which in turn is 42 % owned by British American Tobacco .
MCAS Cherry Point is home of the 2nd Marine Aircraft Wing .
One of the busiest air stations in the United States Coast Guard is located at the Coast Guard Air Station in Elizabeth City .
is the last division of classical Japanese history , running from 794 to 1185 .
It is the period in Japanese history when Buddhism , Taoism and other Chinese influences were at their height .
Many emperors actually had mothers from the Fujiwara family .
Heian -LRB- 平安 ? -RRB-
Kanmu first tried to move the capital to Nagaoka-kyō , but a series of disasters befell the city , prompting the emperor to relocate the capital a second time , to Heian .
The Heian Period is considered a high point in Japanese culture that later generations have always admired .
However , to protect their interests in the provinces , the Fujiwara and other noble families required guards , police and soldiers .
The warrior class made steady political gains throughout the Heian period .
Still , a true military takeover of the Japanese government was centuries away , when much of the strength of the government would lie within the private armies of the shogunate .
Kyōto had good river access to the sea and could be reached by land routes from the eastern provinces .
Kammu endeavoured to improve the Tang-style administrative system which was in use .
Known as the ritsuryō , this system attempted to recreate the Tang imperium in Japan , despite the `` tremendous differences in the levels of development between the two countries '' .
Despite the decline of the Taika-Taihō reforms , imperial government was vigorous during the early Heian period .
Indeed , Kammu 's avoidance of drastic reform decreased the intensity of political struggles , and he became recognized as one of Japan 's most forceful emperors .
Imperial control over the provinces was tenuous at best , however .
In the ninth and tenth centuries , much authority was lost to the great families , who disregarded the Chinese-style land and tax systems imposed by the government in Kyoto .
Stability came to Japan , but , even though succession was ensured for the imperial family through heredity , power again concentrated in the hands of one noble family , the Fujiwara which also helped Japan develop more .
While these two offices strengthened the emperor 's position temporarily , soon they and other Chinese-style structures were bypassed in the developing state .
Tang China was in a state of decline , and Chinese Buddhists were severely persecuted , undermining Japanese respect for Chinese institutions .
Japan began to turn inward .
Another Fujiwara became regent , Sesshō for his grandson , then a minor emperor , and yet another was appointed Kampaku .
Toward the end of the ninth century , several emperors tried , but failed , to check the Fujiwara .
Nevertheless , the Fujiwara were not demoted by Daigo but actually became stronger during his reign .
People and lands were increasingly beyond central control and taxation , a de facto return to conditions before the Taika Reform .
Despite their usurpation of imperial authority , the Fujiwara presided over a period of cultural and artistic flowering at the imperial court and among the aristocracy .
There was great interest in graceful poetry and vernacular literature .
Hiragana gave written expression to the spoken word and , with it , to the rise in Japan 's famous vernacular literature , much of it written by court women who had not been trained in Chinese as had their male counterparts .
Indigenous art also flourished under the Fujiwara after centuries of imitating Chinese forms .
As culture flourished , so did decentralization .
-LRB- In fact , the form of the old clan system had remained largely intact within the great old centralized government . -RRB-
New institutions were now needed in the face of social , economic , and political changes .
Family administrations now became public institutions .
Family and state affairs were thoroughly intermixed , a pattern followed among other families , monasteries , and even the imperial family .
Under the early courts , when military conscription had been centrally controlled , military affairs had been taken out of the hands of the provincial aristocracy .
The re-establishment of an efficient military system was made gradually through a process of trial-and-error .
This gave rise to the Japanese military class .
Mutual interests , family connections , and kinship were consolidated in military groups that became part of family administration .
In time , large regional military families formed around members of the court aristocracy who had become prominent provincial figures .
Go-Sanjo , determined to restore imperial control through strong personal rule , implemented reforms to curb Fujiwara influence .
He also established an office to compile and validate estate records with the aim of reasserting central control .
Many shōen were not properly certified , and large landholders , like the Fujiwara , felt threatened with the loss of their lands .
Rather than being banished , the Fujiwara were mostly retained in their old positions of civil dictator and minister of the center while being bypassed in decision making .
Military might rather than civil authority dominated the government .
A struggle for succession in the mid-twelfth century gave the Fujiwara an opportunity to regain their former power .
In the end , the Fujiwara were destroyed , the old system of government supplanted , and the insei system left powerless as bushi took control of court affairs , marking a turning point in Japanese history .
Kiyomori filled no less than 50 government posts with his relatives , rebuilt the Inland Sea , and encouraged trade with Sung China .
With Yoritomo firmly established , the bakufu system that would govern Japan for the next seven centuries was in place .
Yoritomo then turned his attention to the elimination of the powerful Fujiwara family , which sheltered his rebellious brother Yoshitsune .
Three years later , he was appointed shogun in Kyoto .
Two of Go-Toba 's sons succeeded him , but they would also be removed by Yoritomo 's successors to the shogunate .
Tendai originated in China and is based on the Lotus Sutra , one of the most important sutras of Mahayana Buddhism ; Saichō was key to its transmission to Japan .
Shingon is the Japanese transmission of the Chinese Chen Yen school .
Both Kūkai and Saichō aimed to connect state and religion and establish support from the aristocracy , leading to the notion of ` aristocratic Buddhism ' .
Saichō also sought independent ordination for Tendai monks .
A close relationship developed between the Tendai monastery complex on Mount Hiei and the imperial court in its new capital at the foot of the mountain .
As a result , Tendai emphasized great reverence for the emperor and the nation .
Kammu himself was a notable patron of the otherworldly Tendai sect , which rose to great power over the ensuing centuries .
Kūkai greatly impressed the emperors who succeeded Emperor Kammu , and also generations of Japanese , not only with his holiness but also with his poetry , calligraphy , painting , and sculpture .
Shingon , through its use of `` rich symbols , rituals and mandalas '' held a wide-ranging appeal .
Poetry , in particular , was a staple of court life .
Every occasion could call for the writing of a verse , from the birth of a child to the coronation of an emperor , or even a pretty scene of nature .
A well-written poem or haiku could easily make or break one 's reputation , and often was a key part of social interaction.Almost as important was the choice of calligraphy , or handwriting , used .
Whether the script was Chinese or Japanese , good writing and artistic skill was paramount to social reputation when it came to poetry .
Sei Shonagon mentions in her Pillow Book that when a certain courtesan tried to ask her advice about how to write a poem to the empress Sadako , she had to politely rebuke him because his writing was so poor .
The Heian period produced a flowering of poetry including works of Ariwara no Narihira , Ono no Komachi , Izumi Shikibu , Murasaki Shikibu , Saigyō and Fujiwara no Teika .
While on one hand the Heian period was an unusually long period of peace , it can also be argued that the period weakened Japan economically and led to poverty for all but a tiny few of its inhabitants .
One reason the samurai were able to take power was that the ruling nobility proved incompetent at managing Japan and its provinces .
The lack of a solid medium of economic exchange is implicitly illustrated in novels of the time .
For instance , messengers were rewarded with useful objects , e.g. , an old silk kimono , rather than paid a fee .
This is implicitly illustrated in novels by the terror that night travel inspired in the main characters .
The shōen system enabled the accumulation of wealth by an aristocratic elite ; the economic surplus can be linked to the cultural developments of the Heian period and the `` pursuit of arts '' .
The expansion pack features a different set of land units , ships and buildings and is also playable in the multiplayer modes .
It presented a body of evidence that the diversity of life arose by common descent through a branching pattern of evolution .
Various evolutionary ideas had already been proposed to explain new findings in biology .
The political and theological implications were intensely debated , but transmutation was not accepted by the scientific mainstream .
As Darwin was an eminent scientist , his findings were taken seriously and the evidence he presented generated scientific , philosophical , and religious discussion .
Within two decades there was widespread scientific agreement that evolution , with a branching pattern of common descent , had occurred , but scientists were slow to give natural selection the significance that Darwin thought appropriate .
The Protestant Reformation inspired a literal interpretation of the Bible , with concepts of creation that conflicted with the findings of an emerging science seeking explanations congruent with the mechanical philosophy of René Descartes and the empiricism of the Baconian method .
In God 's benevolent design , carnivores caused mercifully swift death , but the suffering caused by parasitism was a puzzling problem .
In 1766 , Georges Buffon suggested that some similar species , such as horses and asses , or lions , tigers , and leopards , might be varieties descended from a common ancestor .
Both envisaged that spontaneous generation produced simple forms of life that progressively developed greater complexity , adapting to the environment by inheriting changes in adults caused by use or disuse .
Lamarck thought there was an inherent progressive tendency driving organisms continuously towards greater complexity , in parallel but separate lineages with no extinction .
Geoffroy contended that embryonic development recapitulated transformations of organisms in past eras when the environment acted on embryos , and that animal structures were determined by a constant plan as demonstrated by homologies .
His palæontological work in the 1790s had established the reality of extinction , which he explained by local catastrophes , followed by repopulation of the affected areas by other species .
Grant revealed his enthusiasm for the transmutation of species , but Darwin rejected it .
Starting in 1827 , at Cambridge University , Darwin learnt science as natural theology from botanist John Stevens Henslow , and read Paley , John Herschel and Alexander von Humboldt .
As the Beagle neared England in 1836 , he noted that species might not be fixed .
Darwin began speculating , in a series of notebooks , on the possibility that `` one species does change into another '' to explain these findings , and around July sketched a genealogical branching of a single evolutionary tree , discarding Lamarck 's independent lineages progressing to higher forms .
Unconventionally , Darwin asked questions of fancy pigeon and animal breeders as well as established scientists .
By December 1838 , he had noted a similarity between the act of breeders selecting traits and a Malthusian Nature selecting among variants thrown up by `` chance '' so that `` every part of newly acquired structure is fully practical and perfected '' .
Darwin read it soon after publication , and scorned its amateurish geology and zoology , but he carefully reviewed his own arguments after leading scientists , including Adam Sedgwick , attacked its morality and scientific errors .
Vestiges had significant influence on public opinion , and the intense debate helped to pave the way for the acceptance of the more scientifically sophisticated Origin by moving evolutionary speculation into the mainstream .
His thinking changed from the view that species formed in isolated populations only , as on islands , to an emphasis on speciation without isolation ; that is , he saw increasing specialisation within large stable populations as continuously exploiting new ecological niches .
He conducted empirical research focusing on difficulties with his theory .
Darwin was torn between the desire to set out a full and convincing account and the pressure to quickly produce a short paper .
He met Lyell , and in correspondence with Joseph Dalton Hooker affirmed that he did not want to expose his ideas to review by an editor as would have been required to publish in an academic journal .
He began a `` sketch '' account on 14 May 1856 , and by July had decided to produce a full technical treatise on species .
His theory including the principle of divergence was complete by 5 September 1857 when he sent Asa Gray a brief but detailed abstract of his ideas .
The mechanism was similar to Darwin 's own theory .
Darwin wrote to Lyell that `` your words have come true with a vengeance , ... forestalled '' and he would `` of course , at once write and offer to send -LSB- it -RSB- to any journal '' that Wallace chose , adding that `` all my originality , whatever it may amount to , will be smashed '' .
While Darwin considered Wallace 's idea to be identical to his concept of natural selection , historians have pointed out differences .
Darwin described natural selection as being analogous to the artificial selection practised by animal breeders , and emphasised competition between individuals ; Wallace drew no comparison to selective breeding , and focused on ecological pressures that kept different varieties adapted to local conditions .
He started work on 20 July 1858 , while on holiday at Sandown , and wrote parts of it from memory .
It was long thought that Darwin avoided or delayed making his ideas public for personal reasons .
Charles Darwin 's illness caused repeated delays .
David Quammen has suggested all these factors may have contributed , and notes Darwin 's large output of books and busy family life during that time .
While he was researching , he told many people about his interest in transmutation without causing outrage .
He firmly intended to publish , but it was not until September 1854 that he could work on it full-time .
In total , 1,250 copies were printed but after deducting presentation and review copies , and five for Stationers ' Hall copyright , around 1,170 copies were available for sale .
The second edition of 3,000 copies was quickly brought out on 7 January 1860 , and incorporated numerous corrections as well as a response to religious objections by the addition of a new epigraph on page ii , a quotation from Charles Kingsley , and the phrase `` by the Creator '' added to the closing sentence .
The third edition came out in 1861 , with a number of sentences rewritten or added and an introductory appendix , An Historical Sketch of the Recent Progress of Opinion on the Origin of Species , while the fourth in 1866 had further revisions .
The fifth edition , published on 10 February 1869 , incorporated more changes and for the first time included the phrase `` survival of the fittest '' , which had been coined by the philosopher Herbert Spencer in his Principles of Biology -LRB- 1864 -RRB- .
The book was widely translated in Darwin 's lifetime , but problems arose with translating concepts and metaphors , and some translations were biased by the translator 's own agenda .
Darwin distributed presentation copies in France and Germany , hoping that suitable applicants would come forward , as translators were expected to make their own arrangements with a local publisher .
In 1862 , Bronn produced a second edition based on the third English edition and Darwin 's suggested additions , but then died of a heart attack .
Darwin corresponded with Royer about a second edition published in 1866 and a third in 1870 , but he had difficulty getting her to remove her notes and was troubled by these editions .
He remained unsatisfied until a translation by Edmond Barbier was published in 1876 .
A Dutch translation by Tiberius Cornelis Winkler was published in 1860 .
By 1864 , additional translations had appeared in Italian and Russian .
In Darwin 's lifetime , Origin was published in Swedish in 1871 , Danish in 1872 , Polish in 1873 , Hungarian in 1873 -- 1874 , Spanish in 1877 and Serbian in 1878 .
By 1977 , it had appeared in an additional 18 languages .
Darwin discusses contemporary opinions on the origins of different breeds under cultivation to argue that many have been produced from common ancestors by selective breeding .
Darwin saw two distinct kinds of variation : -LRB- 1 -RRB- rare abrupt changes he called `` sports '' or `` monstrosities '' -LRB- example : ancon sheep with short legs -RRB- , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- ubiquitous small differences -LRB- example : slightly shorter or longer bill of pigeons -RRB- .
Both types of hereditary changes can be used by breeders .
He argues for the ubiquity of variation in nature .
Chapter IV details natural selection under the `` infinitely complex and close-fitting ... mutual relations of all organic beings to each other and to their physical conditions of life '' .
He describes branches falling off as extinction occurred , while new branches formed in `` the great Tree of life ... with its ever branching and beautiful ramifications '' .
Darwin stated that some changes that were commonly attributed to use and disuse , such as the loss of functional wings in some island dwelling insects , might be produced by natural selection .
In later editions of Origin , Darwin expanded the role attributed to the inheritance of acquired characteristics .
The observation that selection works in domestic animals is not destroyed by lack of understanding of the underlying hereditary mechanism .
Although Darwin had privately questioned blending inheritance , he struggled with the theoretical difficulty that novel individual variations would tend to blend into a population .
Why is not all nature in confusion , instead of the species being , as we see them , well defined ? ''
This difficulty can be referred to as the absence or rarity of transitional varieties in habitat space .
His answer was that in many cases animals exist with intermediate structures that are functional .
But I can find out no such case . ''
Chapter VII -LRB- of the first edition -RRB- addresses the evolution of instincts .
His examples included two he had investigated experimentally : slave-making ants and the construction of hexagonal cells by honey bees .
Darwin concluded :
Sometimes what were widely considered to be separate species produced fertile hybrid offspring freely , and in other cases what were considered to be mere varieties of the same species could only be crossed with difficulty .
Chapter IX deals with the fact that the geologic record appears to show forms of life suddenly arising , without the innumerable transitional fossils expected from gradual changes .
Evolved local varieties which migrated into a wider area would seem to be the sudden appearance of a new species .
Darwin had no doubt that earlier seas had swarmed with living creatures , but stated that he had no satisfactory explanation for the lack of fossils .
Fossil evidence of pre-Cambrian life has since been found , extending the history of life back for billions of years .
Chapter X examines whether patterns in the fossil record are better explained by common descent and branching evolution through natural selection , than by the individual creation of fixed species .
This distanced his theory from Lamarckian laws of inevitable progress .
It has been argued that this anticipated the punctuated equilibrium hypothesis , but other scholars have preferred to emphasise Darwin 's commitment to gradualism .
Patterns of extinction matched his theory , with related groups of species having a continued existence until extinction , then not reappearing .
The species found in one area of a continent are more closely allied with species found in other regions of that same continent than to species found on other continents .
The coastal sea life of the Atlantic and Pacific sides of Central America had almost no species in common even though the Isthmus of Panama was only a few miles wide .
He went on to say : `` On this principle of inheritance with modification , we can understand how it is that sections of genera , whole genera , and even families are confined to the same areas , as is so commonly and notoriously the case . ''
Darwin explained how a volcanic island formed a few hundred miles from a continent might be colonised by a few species from that continent .
These species would become modified over time , but would still be related to species found on the continent , and Darwin observed that this was a common pattern .
Darwin discussed ways that species could be dispersed across oceans to colonise islands , many of which he had investigated experimentally .
He remarks that some rudimentary organs , such as teeth in baleen whales , are found only in embryonic stages .
Darwin ends with a passage that became well known and much quoted :
Later chapters provide evidence that evolution has occurred , supporting the idea of branching , adaptive evolution without directly proving that selection is the mechanism .
Darwin had long been immersed in the literary forms and practices of specialist science , and made effective use of his skills in structuring arguments .
David Quammen has described the book as written in everyday language for a wide audience , but noted that Darwin 's literary style was uneven : in some places he used convoluted sentences that are difficult to read , while in other places his writing was beautiful .
He added that some parts of Origin are dense , but other parts are almost lyrical , and the case studies and observations are presented in a narrative style unusual in serious scientific books , which broadened its audience .
There was much less controversy than had greeted the 1844 publication Vestiges of Creation , which had been rejected by scientists , but had influenced a wide public readership into believing that nature and human society were governed by natural laws .
Its proponents made full use of a surge in the publication of review journals , and it was given more popular attention than almost any other scientific work , though it failed to match the continuing sales of Vestiges .
By the mid-1870s , evolutionism was triumphant .
His strategy established that evolution through natural laws was worthy of scientific study , and by 1875 , most scientists accepted that evolution occurred but few thought natural selection was significant .
Alfred Russel Wallace discussed evidence from his Malay archipelago research , including an 1864 paper with an evolutionary explanation for the Wallace line .
Despite this , Huxley strongly supported Darwin on evolution ; though he called for experiments to show whether natural selection could form new species , and questioned if Darwin 's gradualism was sufficient without sudden leaps to cause speciation .
Huxley gained influence , and initiated the X Club , which used the journal Nature to promote evolution and naturalism , shaping much of late Victorian science .
Others that rejected natural selection , but supported `` creation by birth '' , included the Duke of Argyll who explained beauty in plumage by design .
In two years of acrimonious public dispute that Charles Kingsley satirised as the `` Great Hippocampus Question '' and parodied in The Water-Babies as the `` great hippopotamus test '' , Huxley showed that Owen was incorrect in asserting that ape brains lacked a structure present in human brains .
Others , including Charles Lyell and Alfred Russel Wallace , thought that humans shared a common ancestor with apes , but higher mental faculties could not have evolved through a purely material process .
Their ambitious programme to reconstruct the evolutionary history of life was joined by Huxley and supported by discoveries in palaeontology .
Haeckel used embryology extensively in his recapitulation theory , which embodied a progressive , almost linear model of evolution .
Darwin was cautious about such histories , and had already noted that von Baer 's laws of embryology supported his idea of complex branching .
Darwin accepted blending inheritance , but Fleeming Jenkin calculated that as it mixed traits , natural selection could not accumulate useful traits .
Darwin tried to meet these objections in the 5th edition .
Mivart supported directed evolution , and compiled scientific and religious objections to natural selection .
In response , Darwin made considerable changes to the sixth edition .
Historians write that most such political and economic commentators had only a superficial understanding of Darwin 's scientific theory , and were as strongly influenced by other concepts about social progress and evolution , such as the Lamarckian ideas of Spencer and Haeckel , as they were by Darwin 's work .
Even though the book had barely hinted at human evolution , it quickly became central to the debate as mental and moral qualities were seen as spiritual aspects of the immaterial soul , and it was believed that animals did not have spiritual qualities .
that `` Darwinism '' , defined narrowly as including rejection of design , was atheism though he accepted that Asa Gray did not reject design .
Asa Gray responded that this charge misrepresented Darwin 's text .
Some conservative Roman Catholic writers and influential Jesuits opposed evolution in the late 19th and early 20th century , but other Catholic writers , starting with Mivart , pointed out that early Church Fathers had not interpreted Genesis literally in this area .
Modern evolutionary theory continues to develop .
His initial goal as general secretary was to revive the Soviet economy , and he realized that doing so would require reforming underlying political and social structures .
The reforms began with personnel changes of senior Brezhnev-era officials who would impede political and economic change .
He kept the `` power '' ministries happy by promoting KGB Head Viktor Chebrikov from candidate to full member and appointing Minister of Defence Marshal Sergei Sokolov as a Politburo candidate .
Unlike most forms of rationing intended to conserve scarce goods , this was done to restrict sales with the overt goal of curtailing drunkenness .
The disincentivization of alcohol consumption was a serious blow to the state budget according to Alexander Yakovlev , who noted annual collections of alcohol taxes decreased by 100 billion rubles .
Alcohol production migrated to the black market , or through moonshining as some made `` bathtub vodka '' with homegrown potatoes .
Poorer , less educated Russians resorted to drinking unhealthy substitutes such as nail polish , rubbing alcohol or men 's cologne , which only served to be an additional burden on Russia 's healthcare sector due to the subsequent poisoning cases .
The purpose of these reforms , however , was to prop up the existing centrally planned economy , unlike later reforms , which tended toward market socialism .
Gromyko was relegated to the largely ceremonial position of Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet -LRB- officially Soviet Head of State -RRB- , as he was considered an `` old thinker . ''
In the fall of 1985 , Gorbachev continued to bring younger and more energetic men into government .
At the next Central Committee meeting on October 15 , Tikhonov retired from the Politburo and Talyzin became a candidate .
Finally , on December 23 , 1985 , Gorbachev appointed Yeltsin First Secretary of the Moscow Communist Party replacing Viktor Grishin .
Its name refers to the human-rights statements of the Helsinki Accords .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Protesters swelled to 1,000 to 5,000 as other students joined the crowd .
The CPK Central Committee ordered troops from the Ministry of Internal Affairs , druzhiniki -LRB- volunteers -RRB- , cadets , policemen , and the KGB to cordon the square and videotape the participants .
The situation escalated around 5 p.m. , as troops were ordered to disperse the protesters .
Clashes between the security forces and the demonstrators continued throughout the night in Almaty .
The clashes could only be controlled on the third day .
The Almaty events were followed by smaller protests and demonstrations in Shymkent , Pavlodar , Karaganda , and Taldykorgan .
Jeltoqsan leaders say over 60,000 Kazakhs participated in the protests .
According to the Kazakh SSR government , there were two deaths during the riots , including a volunteer police worker and a student .
About 100 others were detained and several others were sentenced to terms in labor camps .
Sources cited by the Library of Congress claimed that at least 200 people died or were summarily executed soon thereafter ; some accounts estimate casualties at more than 1,000 .
Gorbachev also radically expanded the scope of Glasnost , stating that no subject was off-limits for open discussion in the media .
Even so , the cautious Soviet intelligentsia took almost a year to begin pushing the boundaries to see if he meant what he said .
An unintended consequence was that having saved reform , Gorbachev 's move ultimately killed the very system it was designed to save .
On May 6 , 1987 , Pamyat , a Russian nationalist group , held an unsanctioned demonstration in Moscow .
The authorities did not break up the demonstration and even kept traffic out of the demonstrators ' way while they marched to an impromptu meeting with Boris Yeltsin , head of the Moscow Communist Party and at the time one of Gorbachev 's closest allies .
No one had ever addressed the Party leader so brazenly in front of the Central Committee since Leon Trotsky in the 1920s .
In his reply , Gorbachev accused Yeltsin of `` political immaturity '' and `` absolute irresponsibility . ''
This was the first large demonstration in the Baltic republics to commemorate the anniversary of an event contrary to official Soviet history .
The next major anniversary after the August 23 Molotov Pact demonstration was on November 18 , the date of Latvia 's independence in 1918 .
On November 18 , 1987 , hundreds of police and civilian militiamen cordoned off the central square to prevent any demonstration at Freedom Monument , but thousands lined the streets of Riga in silent protest regardless .
Signatures were collected in Tartu , and students assembled in the university 's main hall to express lack of confidence in the government .
At a demonstration on May 1 , 1987 , young people showed up with banners and slogans despite an official ban .
Initially geared toward economic independence , then toward a certain amount of political autonomy , the project , Isemajandav Eesti -LRB- `` A Self-Managing Estonia '' -RRB- became known according to its Estonian acronym , IME , which means `` miracle '' .
On October 21 , a demonstration dedicated to those who gave their lives in the 1918 -- 1920 Estonian War of Independence took place in Võru , which culminated in a conflict with the militia .
For the first time in years , the blue , black , and white national tricolor was publicly displayed .
Police tried to prevent the protest but took no action to stop it once the march was underway .
The demonstration was led by Armenian writers such as Silva Kaputikian , Zori Balayan , and Maro Margarian and leaders from the National Survival organization .
Väljas attended , gambling that the front could help Estonia become a model of economic and political revival , while moderating separatist and other radical tendencies .
In February 20 , 1988 , after a week of growing demonstrations in Stepanakert , capital of the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast -LRB- the Armenian majority area within Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic -RRB- , the Regional Soviet voted to secede and join with the Soviet Socialist Republic of Armenia .
This local vote in a small , remote part of the Soviet Union made headlines around the world ; it was an unprecedented defiance of republic and national authorities .
The authorities totally lost control and occupied the city with paratroopers and tanks ; nearly all of the 14,000 Armenian residents of Sumgait fled .
Gorbachev refused to make any changes to the status of Nagorno Karabakh , which remained part of Azerbaijan .
From July 23 to September 1988 , a group of Azerbaijani intellectuals began working for a new organization called the Popular Front of Azerbaijan , loosely based on the Estonian Popular Front .
On December 5 , 1988 , the Soviet militia finally moved in , cleared the square by force , and imposed a curfew that lasted ten months .
The rebellion of fellow Armenians in Nagorno-Karabakh had an immediate effect in Armenia itself .
This was the first of the large , peaceful public demonstrations that would become a feature of communism 's overthrow in Prague , Berlin , and , ultimately , Moscow .
Leading Armenian intellectuals and nationalists , including future first President of independent Armenia Levon Ter-Petrossian , formed the eleven-member Karabakh Committee to lead and organize the new movement .
Gorbachev again refused to make any changes to the status of Nagorno Karabakh , which remained part of Azerbaijan .
Instead he sacked both Republics ' Communist Party Leaders : On May 21 , 1988 , Karen Demirchian was replaced by Suren Harutyunyan as First Secretary of the Communist Party of Armenia .
However , Harutyunyan quickly decided to run before the nationalist wind and on May 28 , allowed Armenians to unfurl the red-blue-gold First Armenian Republic flag for the first time in almost 70 years .
On June 15 , 1988 , the Armenian Supreme Soviet adopted a resolution formally approving the idea of Nagorno Karabakh joining Armenia .
Armenia , formerly one of the most loyal Republics , had suddenly turned into the leading rebel republic .
In September , further large demonstrations in Yerevan led to the deployment of armored vehicles .
On January 15 , 1988 , in a tribute to Mihai Eminescu at his bust on the Aleea Clasicilor , Anatol Şalaru submitted a proposal to continue the meetings .
The transition from `` movement '' -LRB- an informal association -RRB- to `` front '' -LRB- a formal association -RRB- was seen as a natural `` upgrade '' once a movement gained momentum with the public , and the Soviet authorities no longer dared to crack down on it .
On June 16 , 1988 , 6,000 to 8,000 people gathered in Lviv to hear speakers declare no confidence in the local list of delegates to the 19th Communist Party conference , to begin on June 29 .
On July 7 , 10,000 to 20,000 people witnessed the launch of the Democratic Front to Promote Perestroika .
On August 4 , which came to be known as `` Bloody Thursday , '' local authorities violently suppressed a demonstration organized by the Democratic Front to Promote Perestroika .
Forty-one people were detained , fined , or sentenced to 15 days of administrative arrest .
On September 1 , local authorities violently displaced 5,000 students at a public meeting lacking official permission at Ivan Franko State University .
From November 14 -- 18 , 15 Ukrainian activists were among the 100 human - , national - and religious-rights advocates invited to discuss human rights with Soviet officials and a visiting delegation of the U.S. Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe -LRB- also known as the Helsinki Commission -RRB- .
The unauthorized gathering resulted in the detention of local activists .
It claimed that the NKVD performed secret killings in Kurapaty .
Composing the final legislative group in the Soviet Union , those elected in 1989 played a vital part in reforms and the eventual breakup of the Soviet Union during the next two years .
After vigorous debate , the 542-member Supreme Soviet passed the measure 254-85 -LRB- with 36 abstentions -RRB- .
It also passed measures that would allow direct elections for presidents of each of the 15 constituent republics .
Gorbachev strongly opposed such a move during debate but was defeated .
The six Warsaw Pact countries of Eastern Europe , while nominally independent , were widely recognized in the international community as the Soviet satellite states .
All had been occupied by the Soviet Red Army in 1945 , had Soviet-style socialist states imposed upon them , and had very restricted freedom of action in either domestic or international affairs .
The Baltic Way or Baltic Chain -LRB- also Chain of Freedom Estonian : Balti kett , Latvian : Baltijas ceļš , Lithuanian : Baltijos kelias , Russian : Балтийский путь -RRB- was a peaceful political demonstration on August 23 , 1989 .
In the second half of 1989 , weapons were handed out in Nagorno-Karabakh .
When Karabakhis got hold of small arms to replace hunting rifles and crossbows , casualties began to mount ; bridges were blown up , roads were blockaded , and hostages were taken .
Under pressure from the Popular Front the Communist authorities in Azerbaijan started making concessions .
Transport communications between Azerbaijan and Armenia never fully recovered .
On April 14 , Gorbachev removed Jumber Patiashvili as First Secretary of the Georgian Communist Party and replaced him with former Georgian KGB chief Givi Gumbaridze .
In Kiev , 60 activists met in a Kiev apartment to commemorate the proclamation of the Ukrainian People 's Republic in 1918 .
On February 11 -- 12 , 1989 , the Ukrainian Language Society held its founding congress .
On February 15 , 1989 , the formation of the Initiative Committee for the Renewal of the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church was announced .
The program and statutes of the movement were proposed by the Writers Association of Ukraine and were published in the journal Literaturna Ukraina on February 16 , 1989 .
The organization heralded Ukrainian dissidents such as Vyacheslav Chornovil .
A public rally was held the next day .
On March 26 , elections were held to the union Congress of People 's Deputies ; by-elections were held on April 9 , May 14 , and May 21 .
On May 3 , a pre-election rally attracted 30,000 in Lviv .
After a march from Kiev to the site , a memorial service was staged .
They were especially active during the July session of the World Council of Churches held in Moscow .
The protest ended with the arrests of the group on September 18 .
On August 19 , 1989 , the Russian Orthodox Parish of Saints Peter and Paul announced it would be switching to the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church .
On September 17 , between 150,000 and 200,000 people marched in Lviv , demanding the legalization of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church .
On September 21 , 1989 , exhumation of a mass grave begins in Demianiv Laz , a nature preserve south of Ivano-Frankivsk .
On September 28 , First Secretary of the Communist Party of the Ukraine Volodymyr Shcherbytsky , a holdover from the Brezhnev era , was replaced by Vladimir Ivashko .
On October 10 , Ivano-Frankivsk was the site of a pre-election protest attended by 30,000 people .
On October 15 , several thousand people gathered in Chervonohrad , Chernivtsi , Rivne , and Zhytomyr ; 500 in Dnipropetrovsk ; and 30,000 in Lviv to protest the election law .
On October 24 , the union Supreme Soviet passed a law eliminating special seats for Communist Party and other official organizations ' representatives .
From October 26 -- 28 , the Zelenyi Svit -LRB- Friends of the Earth -- Ukraine -RRB- environmental association held its founding congress , and on October 27 the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet passed a law eliminating the special status of party and other official organizations .
On the same day The Congregation of the Church of the Transfiguration in Lviv left the Russian Orthodox Church and proclaimed itself the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church .
On November 28 , 1989 , the Ukrainian SSR 's Council for Religious Affairs issued a decree allowing Ukrainian Catholic congregations to register as legal organizations .
The decree was proclaimed on December 1 , coinciding with a meeting at the Vatican between the pope and the Soviet president .
Later , they gathered in the city center near the government 's headquarters , where speakers demanded resignation of Yefrem Sokolov , the republic 's Communist Party leader , and called for the evacuation of half a million people from the contaminated zones .
They brought public transportation to a halt and shut down various shops and industries .
Mobs of young people also rampaged through Yeraliev , Shepke , Fort-Shevchenko and Kulsary , where they poured flammable liquid on trains housing temporary workers and set them on fire .
On January 11 , Popular Front radicals stormed party buildings and effectively overthrew the communist powers in the southern town of Lenkoran .
More than 700 civilians were wounded , hundreds were detained , but only a few were actually tried for alleged criminal offenses .
On February 9 , 1990 , the Ukrainian Ministry of Justice officially registered Rukh .
However , the registration came too late for Rukh to stand its own candidates for the parliamentary and local elections on March 4 .
A majority of the seats had to hold run-off elections .
On March 18 , Democratic candidates scored further victories in the run-offs .
The Democratic Bloc gained about 90 out of 450 seats in the new parliament .
The Russian Orthodox Church refused to yield .
The bloc of conservative communists held 239 seats ; the Democratic Bloc , which had evolved into the National Council , had 125 deputies .
On June 4 , 1990 , two candidates remained in the protracted race for parliament chair .
The leader of the Communist Party of Ukraine -LRB- CPU -RRB- , Volodymyr Ivashko , was elected with 60 percent of the vote as more than 100 opposition deputies boycotted the election .
The UAOC declared its full independence from the Moscow Patriarchate of the Russian Orthodox Church , which in March had granted autonomy to the Ukrainian Orthodox church headed by Metropolitan Filaret .
Stanislav Hurenko was elected first secretary of the CPU .
On July 11 , Ivashko resigned from his post as chairman of the Ukrainian Parliament after he was elected deputy general secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union .
The people 's deputies voted 339 to 5 to proclaim July 16 a Ukrainian national holiday .
On July 30 , Parliament adopted a resolution on military service ordering Ukrainian soldiers `` in regions of national conflict such as Armenia and Azerbaijan '' to return to Ukrainian territory .
On August 3 , it adopted a law on the economic sovereignty of the Ukrainian republic .
On September 5 -- 7 , the International Symposium on the Great Famine of 1932 -- 1933 was held in Kiev .
In September 28 -- 30 , the Green Party of Ukraine held its founding congress .
On September 30 , nearly 100,000 people marched in Kiev to protest against the new union treaty proposed by Gorbachev .
On October 25 -- 28 , 1990 , Rukh held its second congress and declared that its principal goal was the `` renewal of independent statehood for Ukraine '' .
On November 1 , the leaders of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church and of the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church , respectively , Metropolitan Volodymyr Sterniuk and Patriarch Mstyslav , met in Lviv during anniversary commemorations of the 1918 proclamation of the Western Ukrainian National Republic .
This event further weakened the Soviet Union 's position internationally and domestically , and stiffened Lithuanian resistance .
In contrast to the reformers ' lukewarm response to the treaty , the conservatives , `` patriots , '' and Russian nationalists of the USSR -- still strong within the CPSU and the military -- were opposed to weakening the Soviet state and its centralized power structure .
The special forces dispatched by the coup leaders took up positions near the White House , but members refused to storm the barricaded building .
Even the isolated Gorbachev was able to stay abreast of developments by tuning into BBC World Service on a small transistor radio .
They also invited other republics to join the CIS .
Gorbachev called it an unconstitutional coup .
The legality of this action was questionable , since Soviet law did not allow a republic to unilaterally recall its deputies .
However , no one in either Russia or the Kremlin objected .
Any objections from the latter would have likely had no effect , since the Soviet government had effectively been rendered impotent long before December .
In effect , the largest and most powerful republic had seceded from the Union .
Doubts remained over the authority of the Belavezha Accords to disband the Soviet Union , since they were signed by only three republics .
They also `` accepted '' Gorbachev 's resignation .
A week earlier , Gorbachev had met with Yeltsin and accepted the fait accompli of the Soviet Union 's dissolution .
The following day Yeltsin moved into Gorbachev 's former office , though the Russian authorities had taken over the suite two days earlier .
By December 31 , 1991 , the few remaining Soviet institutions that had not been taken over by Russia ceased operation , and individual republics assumed the central government 's role .
The Alma-Ata Protocol also addressed other issues , including UN membership .
In early December 1990 the Party of Democratic Rebirth of Ukraine was founded ; on December 15 , the Democratic Party of Ukraine was founded .
Jesus was stripped of his clothing and offered wine mixed with gall to drink , before being crucified .
They then divided his garments among them , but cast lots for his seamless robe .
Bart Ehrman states that the crucifixion of Jesus on the orders of Pontius Pilate is the most certain element about him .
Craig Blomberg states that most scholars in the third quest for the historical Jesus consider the crucifixion indisputable .
The analyses at the Hadassah Medical School estimated that he died in his late 20s .
In each Gospel these five events in the life of Jesus are treated with more intense detail than any other portion of that Gospel 's narrative .
Jesus then had to make his way to the place of his crucifixion .
Matthew 's and Mark 's Gospels record that he refused this .
According to some translations from the original Greek , the thieves may have been bandits or Jewish rebels .
The soldiers affixed a sign above his head stating `` Jesus of Nazareth , King of the Jews '' in three languages , divided his garments and cast lots for his seamless robe .
The Roman soldiers did not break Jesus ' legs , as they did to the other two men crucified -LRB- breaking the legs hastened the crucifixion process -RRB- , as Jesus was dead already .
In the Synoptic Gospels , various supernatural events accompany the crucifixion , including darkness , an earthquake , and -LRB- in Matthew -RRB- the resurrection of saints .
There are several details that are only found in one of the gospel accounts .
The curtain of the Temple is torn in two .
John includes several of the same elements as those found in Mark , though they are treated differently .
However , in John 19:14 Jesus is still before Pilate at the sixth hour .
For behold , the days are coming when they will say , ` Blessed are the barren and the wombs that never bore and the breasts that never nursed ! '
Then they will begin to say to the mountains , ` Fall on us , ' and to the hills , ` Cover us . '
For if they do these things when the wood is green , what will happen when it is dry ? ''
-LSB- Lk .
23:28 -31 -RSB-
The text does not indicate why it was so designated , but several theories have been put forward .
Another is that Calvary is named after a nearby cemetery -LRB- which is consistent with both of the proposed modern sites -RRB- .
While often referred to as `` Mount Calvary '' , it was more likely a small hill or rocky knoll .
The Koine Greek terms used in the New Testament are stauros -LRB- σταυρός -RRB- and xylon -LRB- ξύλον -RRB- .
The latter means wood -LRB- a live tree , timber or an object constructed of wood -RRB- ; in earlier forms of Greek , the former term meant an upright stake or pole , but in Koine Greek it was used also to mean a cross .
However , early Christian writers who speak of the shape of the particular gibbet on which Jesus died invariably describe it as having a cross-beam .
For the lamb , which is roasted , is roasted and dressed up in the form of the cross .
For one spit is transfixed right through from the lower parts up to the head , and one across the back , to which are attached the legs of the lamb . ''
In the Western Church , before the Renaissance usually four nails would be depicted , with the feet side by side .
After the Renaissance most depictions use three nails , with one foot placed on the other .
Since other verses of the same Psalm are cited in the crucifixion accounts , it is often considered a literary and theological creation .
Raymond Brown likewise comments that he finds ` no persuasive argument against attributing to the Jesus of Mark/Matt the literal sentiment of feeling forsaken expressed in the Psalm quote ' .
For Paul , the crucifixion of Jesus was not an isolated event in history , but a cosmic event with significant eschatological consequences , as in 1 Corinthians 2:8 .
This Christological theme continued into the 20th century , both in the Eastern and Western Churches .
These interpretations vary widely in how much emphasis they place on the death of Jesus as compared to his words .
By contrast the moral influence theory of atonement focuses much more on the moral content of Jesus ' teaching , and sees Jesus ' death as a martyrdom .
Since the Middle Ages there has been conflict between these two views within Western Christianity .
Evangelical Protestants typically hold a substitutionary view and in particular hold to the theory of penal substitution .
Liberal Protestants typically reject substitutionary atonement and hold to the moral influence theory of atonement .
Miami is a major center , and a leader in finance , commerce , culture , media , entertainment , the arts , and international trade .
In 2010 , Miami ranked seventh in the United States in terms of finance , commerce , culture , entertainment , fashion , education , and other sectors .
According to a 2009 UBS study of 73 world cities , Miami was ranked as the richest city in the United States , and the world 's fifth-richest city in terms of purchasing power .
In the late 19th century , reports described the area as a promising wilderness .
The area was also characterized as `` one of the finest building sites in Florida . ''
Miami was officially incorporated as a city on July 28 , 1896 with a population of just over 300 .
It was named for the nearby Miami River , derived from Mayaimi , the historic name of Lake Okeechobee .
Black labor played a crucial role in Miami 's early development .
Whatever their role in the city 's growth , their community 's growth was limited to a small space .
During the early 20th century , northerners were attracted to the city , and Miami prospered during the 1920s with an increase in population and infrastructure .
The legacy of Jim Crow was embedded in these developments .
Unsurprisingly , these officers enforced social codes far beyond the written law .
The city developed businesses and cultural amenities as part of the New South .
Racial and cultural tensions were sometimes sparked , but the city developed in the latter half of the 20th century as a major international , financial , and cultural center .
The highest undulations are found along the coastal Miami Rock Ridge , whose substrate underlies most of the eastern Miami metropolitan region .
The main portion of the city lies on the shores of Biscayne Bay which contains several hundred natural and artificially created barrier islands , the largest of which contains Miami Beach and South Beach .
Miami limestone formed as the result of the drastic changes in sea level associated with recent glaciations or ice ages .
All of southern Florida was covered by a shallow sea .
Several parallel lines of reef formed along the edge of the submerged Florida plateau , stretching from the present Miami area to what is now the Dry Tortugas .
The area behind this reef line was in effect a large lagoon , and the Miami limestone formed throughout the area from the deposition of oolites and the shells of bryozoans .
By 15,000 years ago , the sea level had dropped to 300 to 350 feet -LRB- 90 to 110 m -RRB- below the contemporary level .
The sea level rose quickly after that , stabilizing at the current level about 4000 years ago , leaving the mainland of South Florida just above sea level .
Most of the Miami metropolitan area obtains its drinking water from this aquifer .
For this reason , the mass transit systems in and around Miami are elevated or at-grade .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Downtown is South Florida 's central business district , and Florida 's largest and most influential central business district .
Downtown is home to many major banks , courthouses , financial headquarters , cultural and tourist attractions , schools , parks and a large residential population .
Just northwest of Downtown , is the Civic Center , which is Miami 's center for hospitals , research institutes and biotechnology with hospitals such as Jackson Memorial Hospital , Miami VA Hospital , and the University of Miami 's Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine .
It is a historic neighborhood with narrow , winding roads , and a heavy tree canopy .
Coconut Grove has many parks and gardens such as Villa Vizcaya , The Kampong , The Barnacle Historic State Park , and is the home of the Coconut Grove Convention Center and numerous historic homes and estates .
Its sea-level elevation , coastal location , position just above the Tropic of Cancer , and proximity to the Gulf Stream shapes its climate .
As of 2008 -LSB- update -RSB- , the United Nations estimates that the Miami Urban Agglomeration is the 44th-largest in the world .
Miami is regarded as more of a multicultural mosaic , than it is a melting pot , with residents still maintaining much of , or some of their cultural traits .
The overall culture of Miami is heavily influenced by its large population of Hispanics and blacks mainly from the Caribbean islands .
Miami is a major television production center , and the most important city in the U.S. for Spanish language media .
The city also attracts many artists for music video and film shootings .
During this period , the city had well over a hundred approved high-rise construction projects in which 50 were actually built .
This rapid high-rise construction , has led to fast population growth in the city 's inner neighborhoods , primarily in Downtown , Brickell and Edgewater , with these neighborhoods becoming the fastest-growing areas in the city .
The metro area has one of the highest violent crime rates in the country and workers face lengthy daily commutes .
Due to its strength in international business , finance and trade , many international banks have offices in Downtown such as Espírito Santo Financial Group , which has its U.S. headquarters in Miami .
Tourism is also an important industry in Miami .
However , since that time , Miami has experienced a revival : in 2008 , Miami was ranked as `` America 's Cleanest City '' according to Forbes for its year-round good air quality , vast green spaces , clean drinking water , clean streets and city-wide recycling programs .
In addition to such annual festivals like Calle Ocho Festival and Carnaval Miami , Miami is home to many entertainment venues , theaters , museums , parks and performing arts centers .
The center attracts many large-scale operas , ballets , concerts , and musicals from around the world and is Florida 's grandest performing arts center .
Miami-area natives George McCrae and Teri DeSario were also popular music artists during the 1970s disco era .
Many popular Freestyle acts such as Pretty Tony , Debbie Deb , Stevie B , and Exposé , originated in Miami .
The new sound fed back into mainstream clubs across the country .
Today , these are part of the local culture , and can be found throughout the city in window cafés , particularly outside of supermarkets and restaurants .
The dialect developed among second - or third-generation Hispanics , including Cuban-Americans , whose first language was English -LRB- though some non-Hispanic white , black , and other races who were born and raised the Miami area tend to adopt it as well . -RRB-
However , this is a native dialect of English , not learner English or interlanguage ; it is possible to differentiate this variety from an interlanguage spoken by second-language speakers in that `` Miami accent '' does not generally display the following features : there is no addition of / ɛ / before initial consonant clusters with / s / , speakers do not confuse of / dʒ / with / j / , -LRB- e.g. , Yale with jail -RRB- , and / r / and / rr / are pronounced as alveolar approximant -LSB- ɹ -RSB- instead of alveolar tap -LSB- ɾ -RSB- or alveolar trill -LSB- r -RSB- in Spanish .
The city streets has hosted professional auto races , the Miami Indy Challenge and later the Grand Prix Americas .
The city has numerous marinas , rivers , bays , canals , and the Atlantic Ocean , which make boating , sailing , and fishing popular outdoors activities .
The city commission constitutes the governing body with powers to pass ordinances , adopt regulations , and exercise all powers conferred upon the city in the city charter .
The mayor is elected at large and appoints a city manager .
The Miami Herald and El Nuevo Herald are Miami 's and South Florida 's main , major and largest newspapers .
An additional Spanish-language newspapers , Diario Las Americas also serve Miami .
Many neighborhoods and neighboring areas also have their own local newspapers such as the Aventura News , Coral Gables Tribune , Biscayne Bay Tribune , and the Palmetto Bay News .
Miami is also the headquarters and main production city of many of the world 's largest television networks , record label companies , broadcasting companies and production facilities , such as Telemundo , TeleFutura , Galavisión , Mega TV , Univisión , Univision Communications , Inc. , Universal Music Latin Entertainment , RCTV International and Sunbeam Television .
Miami International Airport serves as the primary international airport of the Greater Miami Area .
Miami is home to one of the largest ports in the United States , the PortMiami .
It is the largest cruise ship port in the world .
It has retained its status as the number one cruise/passenger port in the world for well over a decade accommodating the largest cruise ships and the major cruise lines .
China is the port 's number one import country , and Honduras is the number one export country .
Miami has the world 's largest amount of cruise line headquarters , home to : Carnival Cruise Lines , Celebrity Cruises , Norwegian Cruise Line , Oceania Cruises , and Royal Caribbean International .
In 2014 , the Port of Miami Tunnel was completed and will serve the PortMiami .
Metrorail connects the urban western suburbs of Hialeah , Medley , and inner-city Miami with suburban The Roads , Coconut Grove , Coral Gables , South Miami and urban Kendall via the central business districts of Miami International Airport , the Civic Center , and Downtown .
Several expansion projects are being funded by a transit development sales tax surcharge throughout Miami-Dade County .
The second phase of the line was envisioned to connect Miami .
Because its point of origin is in Downtown , which is close to the coast , therefore , the `` NW '' and `` SW '' quadrants are much larger than the `` SE '' and `` NE '' quadrants .
The Julia Tuttle Causeway connects Midtown and Miami Beach .
The 79th Street Causeway connects the Upper East Side with North Beach .
This is the longest-running such event in the US .
In October 2009 , the city also approved an extensive 20-year plan for bike routes and paths around the city .
The city has begun construction of bike routes as of late 2009 , and ordinances requiring bike parking in all future construction in the city became mandatory as of October 2009 .
However , not all highest courts are named as such .
This court hears appeals of decisions made by courts of appeal from the provinces and territories and appeals of decisions made by the Federal Court of Appeal .
The title `` Supreme '' can be confusing because , for example , The Supreme Court of British Columbia does not have the final say and controversial cases heard there often get appealed in higher courts - it is in fact one of the lower courts in such a process .
Under the Basic Law , its constitution , the territory remains a common law jurisdiction .
Consequently , judges from other common law jurisdictions -LRB- including England and Wales -RRB- can be recruited and continue to serve in the judiciary according to Article 92 of the Basic Law .
This arrangement became controversial in light of the right of abode issue in 1999 , raising concerns for judicial independence .
It is also the highest authority in the interpretation of the law .
Constitutionally it must have authority to interpret the constitution but its further appellate jurisdiction from lower courts is defined by law .
Judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the President in accordance with the binding advice of the Government .
Israel 's Supreme Court is at the head of the court system in the State of Israel .
It is the highest judicial instance .
The area of its jurisdiction is the entire State .
A ruling of the Supreme Court is binding upon every court , other than the Supreme Court itself .
As an appellate court , the Supreme Court considers cases on appeal -LRB- both criminal and civil -RRB- on judgments and other decisions of the District Courts .
It also considers appeals on judicial and quasi-judicial decisions of various kinds , such as matters relating to the legality of Knesset elections and disciplinary rulings of the Bar Association .
The court has broad discretionary authority to rule on matters in which it considers it necessary to grant relief in the interests of justice , and which are not within the jurisdiction of another court or tribunal .
The High Court of Justice grants relief through orders such as injunction , mandamus and Habeas Corpus , as well as through declaratory judgments .
The Supreme Court can also sit at a further hearing on its own judgment .
A further hearing may be held if the Supreme Court makes a ruling inconsistent with a previous ruling or if the Court deems that the importance , difficulty or novelty of a ruling of the Court justifies such hearing .
The High Court of New Zealand was until 1980 known as the Supreme Court .
In some cases , an appeal may be removed directly to the Supreme Court from the High Court .
Devolution issues under the Scotland Act 1998 , Government of Wales Act and Northern Ireland Act were also transferred to the new Supreme Court by the Constitutional Reform Act , from the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council .
Other than that , administrative acts are reviewed by the Administrative Court -LRB- Verwaltungsgerichtshof -RRB- .
It is both the constitutional court and the court of last resort in Brazilian law .
The Superior Court of Justice -LRB- Tribunal Superior de Justiça -RRB- reviews State and Federal Circuit courts decisions for civil law and criminal law cases , when dealing with federal law or conflicting rulings .
The Superior Electoral Tribunal -LRB- Tribunal Superior Eleitoral -RRB- is the court of last resort of electoral law , and also oversees general elections .
The Superior Military Tribunal -LRB- Tribunal Superior Militar -RRB- is the highest court in matters of federal military law .
As the courts have well-defined areas of responsibility , situations like these are rather rare and so , the Joint Senate gathers very infrequently , and only to consider matters which are mostly definitory .
In the Netherlands , the Supreme Court of the Netherlands is the highest .
This can be attributed to the fact that the Philippines was colonized by both Spain and the United States , and the system of laws of both nations strongly influenced the development of Philippine laws and jurisprudence .
Even as the body of Philippine laws remain mostly codified , the Philippine Civil Code expressly recognizes that decisions of the Supreme Court `` form part of the law of the land '' , belonging to the same class as statutes .
In most private law cases , two Supreme Court judgements supporting a claim are needed to appeal at the Supreme Court .
Five sections form the Spanish Supreme court :
Exceptions are issues where the Supreme Court is the court of first instance .
Such cases include an application for a retrial of a criminal case in the light of new evidence , and prosecutions made against an incumbent minister of the Government for severe neglect of duty .
If a lower court has to try a case which involves a question where there is no settled interpretation of the law , it can also refer the question to the relevant Supreme Court for an answer .
The Supreme Court is the highest and final superior court of record and is empowered to exercise its powers , subject to the provisions of the Constitution .
In some cases such as capital punishment , the decision may be passed on to the President of the Republic for clemency petitions .
Therefore , in such situations , Civil law empowerment vanishes .
Many ancient works , such as the Bible and the Greek tragedies , -LSB- citation needed -RSB- survive in hundreds of copies , and the relationship of each copy to the original may be unclear .
Textual scholars have debated for centuries which sources are most closely derived from the original , hence which readings in those sources are correct .
However , the application of textual criticism to non-religious works does not antedate the invention of printing .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Maas comments further that `` A dictation revised by the author must be regarded as equivalent to an autograph manuscript '' .
The lack of autograph manuscripts applies to many cultures other than Greek and Roman .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The age of printing made the scribal profession effectively redundant .
Since each scribe or printer commits different errors , reconstruction of the lost original is often aided by a selection of readings taken from many sources .
In contrast to this approach , some textual critics prefer to identify the single best surviving text , and not to combine readings from multiple sources .
It is not always apparent which single variant represents the author 's original work .
The textual critic 's task , therefore , is to sort through the variants , eliminating those most likely to be un-original , hence establishing a `` critical text '' , or critical edition , that is intended to best approximate the original .
In establishing the critical text , the textual critic considers both `` external '' evidence -LRB- the age , provenance , and affiliation of each witness -RRB- and `` internal '' or `` physical '' considerations -LRB- what the author and scribes , or printers , were likely to have done -RRB- .
Although a reading supported by the majority of witnesses is frequently preferred , this does not follow automatically .
Critics will often prefer the readings supported by the oldest witnesses .
Readings supported by a majority of witnesses are also usually preferred , since these are less likely to reflect accidents or individual biases .
Other factors being equal , these are the best witnesses .
The role of the textual critic is necessary when these basic criteria are in conflict .
For instance , there will typically be fewer early copies , and a larger number of later copies .
The textual critic will attempt to balance these criteria , to determine the original text .
Such cases also include scribes simplifying and smoothing texts they did not fully understand .
Brooke Foss Westcott -LRB- 1825 -- 1901 -RRB- and Fenton J. A. Hort -LRB- 1828 -- 1892 -RRB- published an edition of the New Testament in Greek in 1881 .
Best-text editing -LRB- a complete rejection of eclecticism -RRB- became one extreme .
Stemmatics and copy-text editing -- while both eclectic , in that they permit the editor to select readings from multiple sources -- sought to reduce subjectivity by establishing one or a few witnesses presumably as being favored by `` objective '' criteria .
Karl Lachmann -LRB- 1793 -- 1851 -RRB- greatly contributed to making this method famous , even though he did not invent it .
The method takes its name from the word stemma .
The Ancient Greek word στέμματα and its loanword in classical Latin stemmata may refer to `` family trees '' .
This specific meaning shows the relationships of the surviving witnesses -LRB- the first known example of such a stemma , albeit with the name , dates from 1827 -RRB- .
The method works from the principle that `` community of error implies community of origin . ''
Relations between the lost intermediates are determined by the same process , placing all extant manuscripts in a family tree or stemma codicum descended from a single archetype .
The process of selectio resembles eclectic textual criticism , but applied to a restricted set of hypothetical hyparchetypes .
In fact , the other techniques can be seen as special cases of stemmatics in which a rigorous family history of the text can not be determined but only approximated .
The critic Joseph Bédier -LRB- 1864 -- 1938 -RRB- launched a particularly withering attack on stemmatics in 1928 .
Some of the method 's rules that are designed to reduce the exercise of editorial judgment do not necessarily produce the correct result .
For example , where there are more than two witnesses at the same level of the tree , normally the critic will select the dominant reading .
A plausible reading that occurs less often may , nevertheless , be the correct one .
The French critic Joseph Bédier likewise became disenchanted with the stemmatic method , and concluded that the editor should choose the best available text , and emend it as little as possible .
Citing the example of Nathaniel Hawthorne , he noted :
Bowers said that his edition of Stephen Crane 's first novel , Maggie , presented `` the author 's final and uninfluenced artistic intentions . ''
Bowers confronted a similar problem in his edition of Maggie .
Cladistics is a technique borrowed from biology , where it was originally named phylogenetic systematics by Willi Hennig .
In its application in textual criticism , the text of a number of different manuscripts is entered into a computer , which records all the differences between them .
This makes it more like an automated approach to stemmatics .
Other types of evidence must be used for that purpose .
At that time BYU Professor Ellis Rasmussen and his associates were asked by the LDS Church to begin preparation for a new edition of the Holy Scriptures .
To that end , Larson carefully examined the Original Manuscript -LRB- the one dictated by Joseph Smith to his scribes -RRB- and the Printer 's Manuscript -LRB- the copy Oliver Cowdery prepared for the Printer in 1829 -- 1830 -RRB- , and compared them with the 1st , 2nd , and 3rd editions of the Book of Mormon to determine what sort of changes had occurred over time and to make judgments as to which readings were the most original .
Many of his observations were included as improvements in the 1981 LDS edition of the Book of Mormon .
Thus was born the FARMS Critical Text Project which published the first volume of the 3-volume Book of Mormon Critical Text in 1984 .
However , these were merely preliminary steps to a far more exacting and all-encompassing project .
He also collated the various editions of the Book of Mormon down to the present to see what sorts of changes have been made through time .
While textual criticism developed into a discipline of thorough analysis of the Bible -- both the Hebrew Bible and the New Testament -- scholars also use it to determine the original content of classic texts , such as Plato 's Republic .
Not all EU member States have transposed art. 5 into national law .
Records retained the largest market share even when new formats such as compact cassette were mass-marketed .
Likewise , in the UK sales have increased five-fold from 2009 to 2014 .
Phonautograms of singing and speech made by Scott in 1860 were played back as sound for the first time in 2008 .
Despite the similarity of name , there is no documentary evidence that Edison 's phonograph was based on Scott 's phonautograph .
Edison first tried recording sound on a wax-impregnated paper tape , with the idea of creating a `` telephone repeater '' analogous to the telegraph repeater he had been working on .
Although the visible results made him confident that sound could be physically recorded and reproduced , his notes do not indicate that he actually reproduced sound before his first experiment in which he used tinfoil as a recording medium several months later .
The tinfoil was wrapped around a grooved metal cylinder and a sound-vibrated stylus indented the tinfoil while the cylinder was rotated .
The recording could be played back immediately .
Edison also invented variations of the phonograph that used tape and disc formats .
Numerous applications for the phonograph were envisioned , but although it enjoyed a brief vogue as a startling novelty at public demonstrations , the tinfoil phonograph proved too crude to be put to any practical use .
A decade later , Edison developed a greatly improved phonograph that used a hollow wax cylinder instead of a foil sheet .
This proved to be both a better-sounding and far more useful and durable device .
Berliner 's earliest discs , first marketed in 1889 , but only in Europe , were 5 inches -LRB- 13 cm -RRB- in diameter , and were played with a small hand-propelled machine .
Both the records and the machine were adequate only for use as a toy or curiosity , due to the limited sound quality .
In the United States in 1894 , under the Berliner Gramophone trademark , Berliner started marketing records with somewhat more substantial entertainment value , along with somewhat more substantial gramophones to play them .
Abandoning Berliner 's `` Gramophone '' trademark for legal reasons , in 1901 Johnson 's and Berliner 's separate companies reorganized to form the Victor Talking Machine Company , whose products would come to dominate the market for many years .
Emile Berliner moved his company to Montreal in 1900 .
In 1901 , 10-inch disc records were introduced , followed in 1903 by 12-inch records .
These could play for more than three and four minutes respectively , while contemporary cylinders could only play for about two minutes .
Early recordings were made entirely acoustically , the sound being collected by a horn and piped to a diaphragm , which vibrated the cutting stylus .
Lillian Hardin Armstrong , a member of King Oliver 's Creole Jazz Band , which recorded at Gennett Records in 1923 , remembered that at first Oliver and his young second trumpet , Louis Armstrong , stood next to each other and Oliver 's horn could not be heard .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Distant or less strong sounds that were impossible to record by the old methods could now be captured .
Volume was now limited only by the groove spacing on the record and the limitations of the intended playback device .
The first classical recording was of Chopin impromptus and Schubert 's Litanei by Alfred Cortot for Victor .
The production of shellac records continued until the end of the 78 rpm format -LRB- i.e. , the late 1950s in most developed countries , but well into the 1960s in some other places -RRB- , but increasingly less abrasive formulations were used during its declining years and very late examples in truly like-new condition can have as low noise levels as vinyl .
Flexible or so-called `` unbreakable '' records made of unusual materials were introduced by a number of manufacturers at various times during the 78 rpm era .
In the United States , Columbia Records introduced flexible , fiber-cored `` Marconi Velvet Tone Record '' pressings in 1907 , but the advantages and longevity of their relatively noiseless surfaces depended on the scrupulous use of special gold-plated Marconi Needles and the product was not a success .
Thin , flexible plastic records such as the German Phonycord and the British Filmophone and Goodson records appeared around 1930 but also did not last long .
The contemporary French Pathé Cellodiscs , made of a very thin black plastic , which uncannily resembles the vinyl `` sound sheet '' magazine inserts of the 1965 -- 1985 era , were similarly short-lived .
A new issue came out every week and they were sold at newsstands like a weekly magazine .
Related Durium records continued to be made somewhat later in the UK and elsewhere , and as remarkably late as 1950 in Italy , where the name `` Durium '' survived far into the LP era as a trademark on ordinary vinyl records .
During the Second World War , the United States Armed Forces produced thousands of 12-inch vinyl 78 rpm V-Discs for use by the troops overseas .
After the war , the wider use of vinyl became more practical as new record players with relatively lightweight crystal pickups and precision-ground styli made of sapphire or an exotic osmium alloy proliferated .
In late 1945 , RCA Victor began offering special transparent red vinyl De Luxe pressings of some classical 78s , at a de luxe price .
Victor , Brunswick and Columbia also issued 12-inch popular medleys , usually spotlighting a Broadway show score .
However , other sizes did appear .
In January 1938 , Milt Gabler started recording for his new label , Commodore Records , and to allow for longer continuous performances , he recorded some 12-inch records .
Eddie Condon explained : `` Gabler realized that a jam session needs room for development . ''
The first two 12-inch recordings did not take advantage of the extra length : `` Carnegie Drag '' was 3:15 ; `` Carnegie Jump '' , 2:41 .
But at the second session , on April 30 , the two 12-inch recordings were longer : `` Embraceable You '' was 4:05 ; `` Serenade to a Shylock '' , 4:32 .
Another way around the time limitation was to issue a selection on both sides of a single record .
An early multi-record release was in 1903 , when HMV in England made the first complete recording of an opera , Verdi 's Ernani , on 40 single-sided discs .
In 1940 , Commodore released Eddie Condon and his Band 's recording of `` A Good Man Is Hard to Find '' in four parts , issued on both sides of two 12-inch 78s .
This limitation on the duration of recordings persisted from 1910 until the invention of the LP record , in 1948 .
One exception is Frank Sinatra 's recording of Rodgers and Hammerstein 's `` Soliloquy '' , from Carousel , made on May 28 , 1946 .
The same was true of John Raitt 's performance of the song on the original cast album of Carousel , which had been issued on a 78-rpm album set by American Decca in 1945 .
-LRB- It is not indicated what size the records are . -RRB-
However , Deutsche Grammophon had produced an album for its complete recording of the opera Carmen in the previous year .
Underground comic cartoonist and 78 rpm record collector Robert Crumb released three discs with his Cheap Suit Serenaders in the 1980s .
This was a disaster because Rhino did not warn customers that their records were made of vinyl , and that the vintage 78 RPM juke boxes were designed with heavy tone arms and steel needles to play the hard shellac records of their time .
These were all 78 rpm .
In the 1940s , radio transcriptions , which were usually on 16-inch records , but sometimes 12-inch , were always made of vinyl , but cut at 33 1⁄3 rpm .
Shorter transcriptions were often cut at 78 rpm .
Beginning in 1939 , Dr. Peter Goldmark and his staff at Columbia Records and at CBS Laboratories undertook efforts to address problems of recording and playing back narrow grooves and developing an inexpensive , reliable consumer playback system .
The short playing time of a single 45 rpm side meant that long works , such as symphonies , had to be released on multiple 45s instead of a single LP , but RCA claimed that the new high-speed changer rendered side breaks so brief as to be inaudible or inconsequential .
One early attempt at lengthening the playing time should be mentioned .
In parts of the world that used 50 Hz current , the standard was 77.92 rpm -LRB- 3,000 rpm with a 77:2 ratio -RRB- , which was also the speed at which a strobe disc with 77 lines would `` stand still '' in 50 Hz light -LRB- 92 lines for 60 Hz -RRB- .
Earlier they were just called records , or when there was a need to distinguish them from cylinders , disc records .
As late as the 1970s , some children 's records were released at the 78 rpm speed .
Both types of new disc used narrower grooves , intended to be played with smaller stylus -- typically 0.001 inches -LRB- 25 µm -RRB- wide , compared to 0.003 inches -LRB- 76 µm -RRB- for a 78 -- so the new records were sometimes called Microgroove .
Prior to the establishment of the standard each company used its own preferred standard , requiring discriminating listeners to use pre-amplifiers with multiple selectable equalization curves .
Some recordings , such as books for the blind , were pressed at 16 2⁄3 rpm .
Prestige Records released jazz records in this format in the late 1950s ; for example , two of their Miles Davis albums were paired together in this format .
-LRB- See also format war . -RRB-
The 7-inch -LRB- 175 mm -RRB- 45 rpm disc or `` single '' established a significant niche for shorter duration discs , typically containing one item on each side .
LP albums could be purchased 1 EP at a time , with four items per EP , or in a boxed set with 3 EPs or 12 items .
One indication of the decline of the 45 rpm EP is that the last Columbia Records reissue of Frank Sinatra songs on 45 rpm EP records , called Frank Sinatra -LRB- Columbia B-2641 -RRB- was issued on December 7 , 1959 .
The EP lasted considerably longer in Europe , and was a popular format during the 1960s for recordings by artists such as Serge Gainsbourg and the Beatles .
The adapter could be a small solid circle that fit onto the bottom of the spindle -LRB- meaning only one 45 could be played at a time -RRB- or a larger adaptor that fit over the entire spindle , permitting a stack of 45s to be played .
This was achieved on the two stereo channels by electronic matrixing , where the additional channels were combined into the main signal .
When the records were played , phase-detection circuits in the amplifiers were able to decode the signals into four separate channels .
There were two main systems of matrixed quadraphonic records produced , confusingly named SQ -LRB- by CBS -RRB- and QS -LRB- by Sansui -RRB- .
That was remedied by cutting at half the speed .
The first record , a Chicago Symphony Orchestra performance of Pictures at an Exhibition , conducted by Rafael Kubelik , was described as `` being in the living presence of the orchestra '' by The New York Times music critic .
The series of records was then named Mercury Living Presence .
Record masters were cut directly from a three-track to two-track mixdown console , with all editing of the master tapes done on the original three-tracks .
In 1961 , Mercury enhanced this technique with three-microphone stereo recordings using 35 mm magnetic film instead of half-inch tape for recording .
Through the 1960s , 1970s , and 1980s , various methods to improve the dynamic range of mass-produced records involved highly advanced disc cutting equipment .
Two main elements were combined : another disk material with less surface noise in the groove and dynamic compression for masking background noise .
Both elements were reflected in the brandname of Dynagroove , described elsewhere in more detail .
It also used the earlier advanced method of forward-looking control on groove spacing with respect to volume of sound and position on the disk .
Also , the higher track density at lower volumes enabled disk recordings to end farther away from the disk center than usual , helping to reduce endtrack distortion even further .
Also during this period , half-speed mastered and `` original master '' records were released , using expensive state-of-the-art technology .
This excludes grooved recordings such as cylinders and some radio transcriptions that feature a hill-and-dale format of recording , and stereophonic or quadraphonic grooved recordings , which utilize a combination of the two as well as supersonic encoding for quadraphonic .
Many pre-1952 LPs , however , played for about 15 minutes per side .
The large center hole on 7-inch 45 rpm records allows for easier handling by jukebox mechanisms .
The term `` album '' , originally used to mean a `` book '' with liner notes , holding several 78 rpm records each in its own `` page '' or sleeve , no longer has any relation to the physical format : a single LP record , or nowadays more typically a compact disc .
This format was soon dropped as it became clear that the RCA 45 was the single of choice and the Columbia 12 inch LP would be the ` album ' of choice .
All colors were soon dropped in favor of black because of production problems .
The last part of the spiral meets an earlier part to form a circle .
On some recordings -LRB- for example Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band by The Beatles , Super Trouper by Abba and Atom Heart Mother by Pink Floyd -RRB- , the sound continues on the lock groove , which gives a strange repeating effect .
Automatic turntables rely on the position or angular velocity of the arm , as it reaches the wider spacing in the groove , to trigger a mechanism that lifts the arm off the record .
180 g vinyl is more expensive to produce only because it uses more vinyl .
An exception is the propensity of 200 g pressings to be slightly more prone to non-fill , when the vinyl biscuit does not sufficiently fill a deep groove during pressing -LRB- percussion or vocal amplitude changes are the usual locations of these artifacts -RRB- .
Original master discs are created by lathe-cutting : a lathe is used to cut a modulated groove into a blank record .
The blank records for cutting used to be cooked up , as needed , by the cutting engineer , using what Robert K. Morrison describes as a `` metallic soap , '' containing lead litharge , ozokerite , barium sulfate , montan wax , stearin and paraffin , among other ingredients .
Cut `` wax '' sound discs would be placed in a vacuum chamber and gold-sputtered to make them electrically conductive for use as mandrels in an electroforming bath , where pressing stamper parts were made .
Later , the French company Pyral invented a ready-made blank disc having a thin nitro-cellulose lacquer coating -LRB- approximately 7 mils thickness on both sides -RRB- that was applied to an aluminum substrate .
Lacquer cuts result in an immediately playable , or processable , master record .
If vinyl pressings are wanted , the still-unplayed sound disc is used as a mandrel for electroforming nickel records that are used for manufacturing pressing stampers .
The electroformed nickel records are mechanically separated from their respective mandrels .
This is done with relative ease because no actual `` plating '' of the mandrel occurs in the type of electrodeposition known as electroforming , unlike with electroplating , in which the adhesion of the new phase of metal is chemical and relatively permanent .
The one-molecule-thick coating of silver -LRB- that was sprayed onto the processed lacquer sound disc in order to make its surface electrically conductive -RRB- reverse-plates onto the nickel record 's face .
This negative impression disc -LRB- having ridges in place of grooves -RRB- is known as a nickel master , `` matrix '' or `` father . ''
The `` father '' is then used as a mandrel to electroform a positive disc known as a `` mother '' .
Many mothers can be grown on a single `` father '' before ridges deteriorate beyond effective use .
The `` mothers '' are then used as mandrels for electroforming more negative discs known as `` sons '' .
Each `` mother '' can be used to make many `` sons '' before deteriorating .
The `` sons '' are then converted into `` stampers '' by center-punching a spindle hole -LRB- which was lost from the lacquer sound disc during initial electroforming of the `` father '' -RRB- , and by custom-forming the target pressing profile .
This allows them to be placed in the dies of the target -LRB- make and model -RRB- record press and , by center-roughing , to facilitate the adhesion of the label , which gets stuck onto the vinyl pressing without any glue .
In this way , several million vinyl discs can be produced from a single lacquer sound disc .
A poignant moment in J. D. Salinger 's 1951 novel The Catcher in the Rye occurs after the adolescent protagonist buys a record for his younger sister but drops it and `` it broke into pieces ... I damn-near cried , it made me feel so terrible . ''
Vinyl readily acquires a static charge , attracting dust that is difficult to remove completely .
This is the origin of the phrase `` like a broken record '' or `` like a scratched record '' , which is often used to describe a person or thing that continually repeats itself .
Locked grooves are not uncommon and were even heard occasionally in radio broadcasts .
This , if placed within the outer cardboard cover so that the opening was entirely within the outer cover , was said to reduce ingress of dust onto the record surface .
*
This is a form of frequency multiplexing as the control signal -LRB- restoring force -RRB- used to keep the stylus in the groove is carried by the same mechanism as the sound itself .
High fidelity sound equipment can reproduce tracking noise and rumble .
Some subsonic content is directly out of phase in each channel .
If played back on a mono subwoofer system , the noise will cancel , significantly reducing the amount of rumble that is reproduced .
Due to recording mastering and manufacturing limitations , both high and low frequencies were removed from the first recorded signals by various formulae .
The playback equipment boosts bass and cuts treble so as to restore the tonal balance in the original signal ; this also reduces the high frequency noise .
Thus more music will fit on the record , and noise is reduced .
In 1926 Joseph P. Maxwell and Henry C. Harrison from Bell Telephone Laboratories disclosed that the recording pattern of the Western Electric `` rubber line '' magnetic disc cutter had a constant velocity characteristic .
Therefore , it was necessary to attenuate the bass frequencies below about 250 Hz , the bass turnover point , in the amplified microphone signal fed to the recording head .
Otherwise , bass modulation became excessive and overcutting took place into the next record groove .
When played back electrically with a magnetic pickup having a smooth response in the bass region , a complementary boost in amplitude at the bass turnover point was necessary .
Brilliance such as this compensated for dullness in many early magnetic pickups having drooping midrange and treble response .
For example , what Brunswick-Balke-Collender -LRB- Brunswick Corporation -RRB- did was different from the practices of Victor .
A number of 78 rpm record producers as well as early LP makers also cut their records to the NAB/NARTB lateral standard .
Likewise at the treble end beginning at 1,000 Hz , if audio frequencies were boosted by 16 dB at 10,000 Hz the delicate sibilant sounds of speech and high overtones of musical instruments could survive the noise level of cellulose acetate , lacquer/aluminum , and vinyl disc media .
The RCA Victor New Orthophonic curve was within the tolerances for the NAB/NARTB , Columbia LP , and AES curves .
It eventually became the technical predecessor to the RIAA curve .
The early electric recordings were reminiscent tonally of acoustic recordings , except there was more recorded bass and treble as well as delicate sounds and overtones cut on the records .
The double button carbon microphone with stretched diaphragm was a marked improvement .
Both of these high quality microphones became widespread in motion picture , radio , recording , and public address applications .
There were important quality advances in recordings specifically made for radio broadcast .
The newly invented Western Electric moving coil or dynamic microphone was part of the Wide Range System .
Groove cuts in the vertical plane were employed rather than the usual lateral cuts .
Audio response was claimed out to 8,000 Hz , later 13,000 Hz , using light weight pickups employing jeweled styli .
Amplifiers and cutters both using negative feedback were employed thereby improving the range of frequencies cut and lowering distortion levels .
These recordings use a bass turnover of 300 Hz and a 10,000 Hz rolloff of − 8.5 dB .
The business grew quickly and interest spread in high fidelity sound and the do-it-yourself market for pickups , turntables , amplifier kits , loudspeaker enclosure plans , and AM/FM radio tuners .
The industry flourished .
According to Red Book specifications , the compact disc has a frequency response of 20 Hz up to 22,050 Hz , and most CD players measure flat within a fraction of a decibel from at least 20 Hz to 20 kHz at full output .
Turntable rumble obscures the low-end limit of vinyl but the upper end can be , with some cartridges , reasonably flat within a few decibels to 30 kHz , with gentle roll-off .
Carrier signals of Quad LPs popular in the 1970s were at 30 kHz to be out of the range of human hearing .
The mastering process was originally something of an art as the operator had to manually allow for the changes in sound which affected how wide the space for the groove needed to be on each rotation .
For example , Nimbus Records uses a specially built horn record player to transfer 78s .
First the distributors began charging retailers more for new product if they returned unsold vinyl , and then they stopped providing any credit at all for returns .
Retailers , fearing they would be stuck with anything they ordered , only ordered proven , popular titles that they knew would sell , and devoted more shelf space to CDs and cassettes .
Record companies also deleted many vinyl titles from production and distribution , further undermining the availability of the format and leading to the closure of pressing plants .
-LRB- See Record collecting . -RRB-
With CDs or compact audio cassettes one normally has only indirect manipulation options , e.g. , the play , stop , and pause buttons .
Historically , the channel 's programming consisted mainly of featured classic theatrically released feature films from the Turner Entertainment film library -- which comprises films from Warner Bros. .
Turner Broadcasting System was split into two companies ; Turner Broadcasting System and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and reincorporated as MGM/UA Communications Co. .
The film library of Turner Entertainment would serve as the base form of programming for TCM upon the network 's launch .
Hosted by Robert Osborne , the four-day long annual festival celebrates Hollywood and its movies , and features celebrity appearances , special events , and screenings of around 50 classic movies including several newly restored by the Film Foundation , an organization devoted to preserving Hollywood 's classic film legacy .
Turner Classic Movies essentially operates as a commercial-free service , with the only advertisements on the network being shown between features -- which advertise TCM products , network promotions for upcoming special programs and the original trailers for films that are scheduled to be broadcast on TCM -LRB- particularly those that will air during the primetime hours -RRB- , and featurettes about classic film actors and actresses .
TCM also regularly presents widescreen presentations of films not available in the format on any home video release .
Besides its deals to broadcast film releases from Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and Warner Bros. .
Classic films released by 20th Century Fox , Paramount Pictures , Universal Studios , and Columbia Pictures are licensed individually for broadcast on Turner Classic Movies .
This summer block featured classic feature films -LRB- such as The Wizard of Oz , Sounder , Bringing Up Baby , Singin ' in the Rain , Mr. Smith Goes to Washington , The Adventures of Robin Hood and 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea -RRB- aimed at introducing these movies to new generations of children and their families .
In addition to films , Turner Classic Movies also airs original content , mostly documentaries about classic movie personalities , the world of filmmaking and particularly notable films .
An occasional month-long series , Race and Hollywood , showcases films by and about people of non-white races , featuring discussions of how these pictures influenced white people 's image of said races , as well as how people of those races viewed themselves .
Following the recent death of an especially famous classic film personality -LRB- usually an actor , producer , filmmaker or director -RRB- , the segment will feature a montage of select shots of the deceased 's work .
These boxed set releases are of films by notable actors , directors or studios that were previously unreleased on DVD or VHS .
Turner Classic Movies is available in many other countries around the world .
While the schedule for the Canadian feed is generally the same as that of the U.S. network , some films are replaced for broadcast in Canada due to rights issues and other reasons .
Other versions of TCM are available in Australia , France , Middle East , South Africa , Cyprus , Spain , Asia , Latin America , Scandinavia , the United Kingdom , Ireland and Malta .
Nāstika Indian philosophies include Buddhism , Jainism , Cārvāka , Ājīvika , and others .
The various sibling traditions included in Hindu philosophies are diverse , and they are united by shared history and concepts , same textual resources , similar ontological and soteriological focus , and cosmology .
Examples of such schools include Pāśupata Śaiva , Śaiva siddhānta , Pratyabhijña , Raseśvara and Vaiṣṇava .
Some sub-schools share Tantric ideas with those found in some Buddhist traditions .
The ideas of these sub-schools are found in the Puranas and Āgamas .
The various schools vary on how many of these six are valid paths of knowledge .
For example , the Cārvāka nāstika philosophy holds that only one -LRB- perception -RRB- is an epistemically reliable means of knowledge , the Samkhya school holds three are -LRB- perception , inference and testimony -RRB- , while the Mīmāṃsā and Advaita schools hold all six are epistemically useful and reliable means to knowledge .
Jiva -LRB- a living being -RRB- is that state in which puruṣa is bonded to prakriti in some form .
The universe is described by this school as one created by Purusa-Prakriti entities infused with various permutations and combinations of variously enumerated elements , senses , feelings , activity and mind .
Samkhya philosophy includes a theory of gunas -LRB- qualities , innate tendencies , psyche -RRB- .
Everything , all life forms and human beings , state Samkhya scholars , have these three gunas , but in different proportions .
The interplay of these gunas defines the character of someone or something , of nature and determines the progress of life .
Samkhya theorises a pluralism of souls -LRB- Jeevatmas -RRB- who possess consciousness , but denies the existence of Ishvara -LRB- God -RRB- .
The foundational text , the Vaiśeṣika Sūtra , opens as follows ,
Each of these four are of two types : atomic -LRB- paramāṇu -RRB- and composite .
An atom is , according to Vaiśeṣika scholars , that which is indestructible -LRB- anitya -RRB- , indivisible , and has a special kind of dimension , called `` small '' -LRB- aṇu -RRB- .
The Vaiśeṣikas stated that size , form , truths and everything that human beings experience as a whole is a function of atoms , their number and their spatial arrangements , their guṇa -LRB- quality -RRB- , karma -LRB- activity -RRB- , sāmānya -LRB- commonness -RRB- , viśeṣa -LRB- particularity -RRB- and amavāya -LRB- inherence , inseparable connectedness of everything -RRB- .
This premise led Nyāya to concern itself with epistemology , that is the reliable means to gain correct knowledge and to remove wrong notions .
Correct knowledge is discovering and overcoming one 's delusions , and understanding true nature of soul , self and reality .
The Nyāya Sūtras begin :
The Kumārila Bhaṭṭa sub-school of Mīmāṃsā added sixth to its canon of reliable epistemology - anupalabdi -LRB- non-perception , negative/cognitive proof -RRB- .
The Mīmāṃsākas held that the Vedas are `` eternal authorless infallible '' , that Vedic vidhi -LRB- injunctions -RRB- and mantras in rituals are prescriptive karya -LRB- actions -RRB- , and the rituals are of primary importance and merit .
While their deep analysis of language and linguistics influenced other schools , their views were not shared by others .
Mīmāṃsākas considered orderly , law-driven , procedural life as central purpose and noblest necessity of dharma and society , and divine -LRB- theistic -RRB- sustenance means to that end .
Each of these have been further categorized in terms of conditionality , completeness , confidence and possibility of error , by each sub-school of Vedanta .
The Upanishads were variously interpreted by ancient and medieval era Vedanta scholars .
It is a sub-school of Vedanta , and asserts spiritual and universal non-dualism .
Its metaphysics is a form of absolute monism , that is all ultimate reality is interconnected oneness .
This is the oldest and most widely acknowledged Vedantic school .
The foundational texts of this school are the Brahma Sutras and the early Upanishads from the 1st millennium BCE .
Its first great consolidator was the 8th century scholar Adi Shankara , who continued the line of thought of the Upanishadic teachers , and that of his teacher 's teacher Gaudapada .
He wrote extensive commentaries on the major Vedantic scriptures and is celebrated as one of the major Hindu philosophers from whose doctrines the main currents of modern Indian thought are derived .
Māyā connotes `` that which exists , but is constantly changing and thus is spiritually unreal '' .
They hold that dualities and misunderstanding of māyā as the spiritual reality that matters is caused by ignorance , and are the cause of sorrow , suffering .
Jīvanmukti -LRB- liberation during life -RRB- can be achieved through Self-knowledge , the understanding that ātman within is same as ātman in another person and all of Brahman -- the eternal , unchanging , entirety of cosmic principles and true reality .
Viśiṣṭādvaitins argued against the Advaitin conception of Brahman as an impersonal empty oneness .
They saw Brahman as an eternal oneness , but also as the source of all creation , which was omnipresent and actively involved in existence .
To them the sense of subject-object perception was illusory and a sign of ignorance .
However , the individual 's sense of self was not a complete illusion since it was derived from the universal beingness that is Brahman .
The first and the only independent reality , states the Dvaita school , is that of Vishnu or Brahman .
Soul and matter are different from Brahman in that they have attributes and capacities different from Brahman .
Brahman exists independently , while soul and matter are dependent .
Thus soul and matter have an existence that is separate yet dependent .
Further , Brahman is a controller , the soul is the enjoyer , and matter the thing enjoyed .
Early history of Shaivism is difficult to determine .
Shaivism is represented by various philosophical schools , including non-dualist -LRB- abheda -RRB- , dualist -LRB- bheda -RRB- , and non-dualist-with-dualist -LRB- bhedābheda -RRB- perspectives .
Paśu in Paśupati refers to the effect -LRB- or created world -RRB- , the word designates that which is dependent on something ulterior .
Whereas , Pati means the cause -LRB- or principium -RRB- , the word designates the Lord , who is the cause of the universe , the pati , or the ruler .
They recognised that those depending upon another and longing for independence will not be emancipated because they still depend upon something other than themselves .
According to Pāśupatas , soul possesses the attributes of the Supreme Deity when it becomes liberated from the ` germ of every pain ' .
The insentient was further divided into effects and causes .
The effects were of ten kinds , the earth , four elements and their qualities , colour etc. .
The causes were of thirteen kinds , the five organs of cognition , the five organs of action , the three internal organs , intellect , the ego principle and the cognising principle .
These insentient causes were held responsible for the illusive identification of Self with non-Self .
While there is some international commonality in the way political parties are recognized , and in how they operate , there are often many differences , and some are significant .
Many political parties have an ideological core , but some do not , and many represent very different ideologies than they did when first founded .
As the century wore on , the factions slowly began to adopt more coherent political tendencies as the interests of their power bases began to diverge .
The Whig party 's initial base of support from the great aristocratic families , widened to include the emerging industrial interests and wealthy merchants .
They acted as a united , though unavailing , opposition to Whig corruption and scandals .
When they lost power , the old Whig leadership dissolved into a decade of factional chaos with distinct `` Grenvillite '' , `` Bedfordite '' , `` Rockinghamite '' , and `` Chathamite '' factions successively in power , and all referring to themselves as `` Whigs '' .
Out of this chaos , the first distinctive parties emerged .
In the late 1820s disputes over political reform broke up this grouping .
A government led by the Duke of Wellington collapsed amidst dire election results .
At the same time , the political party reached its modern form , with a membership disciplined through the use of a party whip and the implementation of efficient structures of control .
He created a new selection procedure to ensure the professional selection of party candidates committed to taking their seats , and in 1884 he imposed a firm ` party pledge ' which obliged MPs to vote as a bloc in parliament on all occasions .
The creation of a strict party whip and a formal party structure was unique at the time .
Most of the above positions are also members of the party executive , the leading organization which sets policy for the entire party at the national level .
The structure is far more decentralized in the United States because of the separation of powers , federalism and the multiplicity of economic interests and religious sects .
Even state parties are decentralized as county and other local committees are largely independent of state central committees .
The national party leader in the U.S. will be the president , if the party holds that office , or a prominent member of Congress in opposition -LRB- although a big-state governor may aspire to that role -RRB- .
Officially , each party has a chairman for its national committee who is a prominent spokesman , organizer and fund-raiser , but without the status of prominent elected office holders .
In nonpartisan elections , each candidate is eligible for office on his or her own merits .
In nonpartisan legislatures , there are no typically formal party alignments within the legislature .
In the United States , the unicameral legislature of Nebraska is nonpartisan but is elected and votes on informal party lines .
In Canada , the territorial legislatures of the Northwest Territories and Nunavut are nonpartisan .
In New Zealand , Tokelau has a nonpartisan parliament .
Many city and county governments -LSB- vague -RSB- are nonpartisan .
Nonpartisan elections and modes of governance are common outside of state institutions .
Although minor parties may sometimes be allowed , they are legally required to accept the leadership of the dominant party .
In the latter case , the definition between dominant and one-party system becomes rather blurred .
Since a conservative -LRB- such as the Republican Party -RRB- and liberal -LRB- such as the Democratic Party -RRB- party has usually been the status quo within American politics .
The former became the Whig Party and the latter became the Democratic Party .
Third parties -LRB- such as the Libertarian Party -RRB- often receive little support and are very rarely the victors in elections .
Despite this , there have been several examples of third parties siphoning votes from major parties that were expected to win -LRB- such as Theodore Roosevelt in the election of 1912 and George Wallace in the election of 1968 -RRB- .
As third party movements have learned , the Electoral College 's requirement of a nationally distributed majority makes it difficult for third parties to succeed .
Thus , such parties rarely win many electoral votes , although their popular support within a state may tip it toward one party or the other .
Wallace had weak support outside the South .
More generally , parties with a broad base of support across regions or among economic and other interest groups , have a great chance of winning the necessary plurality in the U.S. 's largely single-member district , winner-take-all elections .
Though coalition and minority governments have been an occasional feature of parliamentary politics , the first-past-the-post electoral system used for general elections tends to maintain the dominance of these two parties , though each has in the past century relied upon a third party to deliver a working majority in Parliament .
There are also numerous other parties that hold or have held a number of seats in Parliament .
This has been an emerging trend in the politics of the Republic of Ireland since the 1980s and is almost always the case in Germany on national and state level , and in most constituencies at the communal level .
Since then , numerous coalition governments have been formed .
These coalitions have been exclusively led by one of either Fianna Fáil or Fine Gael .
-LSB- dubious -- discuss -RSB- If factions in a two-party system are in fundamental disagreement on policy goals , or even principles , they can be slow to make policy changes , which appears to be the case now in the U.S. with power split between Democrats and Republicans .
When one party in a two-party system controls all elective branches , however , policy changes can be both swift and significant .
Democrats Woodrow Wilson , Franklin Roosevelt and Lyndon Johnson were beneficiaries of such fortuitous circumstances , as were Republicans as far removed in time as Abraham Lincoln and Ronald Reagan .
Barack Obama briefly had such an advantage between 2009 and 2011 .
Such donations are the traditional source of funding for all right-of-centre cadre parties .
They started a new party type , the mass membership party , and a new source of political fundraising , membership dues .
For example , in the United Kingdom and Australia membership of the two main parties in 2006 is less than an 1/8 of what it was in 1950 , despite significant increases in population over that period .
Some countries provide both direct and indirect public funding to political parties .
Funding may be equal for all parties or depend on the results of previous elections or the number of candidates participating in an election .
Support can be purely financial or otherwise .
Frequently it is provided as capacity development activities including the development of party manifestos , party constitutions and campaigning skills .
Sometimes this can be perceived as directly supporting the political aims of a political party , such as the support of the US government to the Georgian party behind the Rose Revolution .
Other donors work on a more neutral basis , where multiple donors provide grants in countries accessible by all parties for various aims defined by the recipients .
White also is associated with nationalism .
`` Purple Party '' is also used as an academic hypothetical of an undefined party , as a Centrist party in the United States -LRB- because purple is created from mixing the main parties ' colors of red and blue -RRB- and as a highly idealistic `` peace and love '' party -- in a similar vein to a Green Party , perhaps .
Political color schemes in the United States diverge from international norms .
The color scheme happened to get inordinate attention that year , so the cycle was stopped lest it cause confusion the following election .
Organized in Italy in 1945 , the International Communist Party , since 1974 headquartered in Florence has sections in six countries .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Worldwide green parties have recently established the Global Greens .
The Universal Party , The Socialist International , the Liberal International , and the International Democrat Union are all based in London .
It contrasts with cantata , which is accompanied singing .
Jewish and Christian music were originally a cappella , -LSB- citation needed -RSB- and this practice has continued in both of these religions as well as in Islam .
The early a cappella polyphonies may have had an accompanying instrument , although this instrument would merely double the singers ' parts and was not independent .
By the 16th century , a cappella polyphony had further developed , but gradually , the cantata began to take the place of a cappella forms .
16th century a cappella polyphony , nonetheless , continued to influence church composers throughout this period and to the present day .
Recent evidence has shown that some of the early pieces by Palestrina , such as what was written for the Sistine Chapel was intended to be accompanied by an organ `` doubling '' some or all of the voices .
Learning from the preceding two composeres , Heinrich Schütz utilized the a cappella style in numerous pieces , chief among these were the pieces in the oratorio style , which were traditionally performed during the Easter week and dealt with the religious subject matter of that week , such as Christ 's suffering and the Passion .
This was a near requirement for this type of piece , and the parts of the crowd were sung while the solo parts which were the quoted parts from either Christ or the authors were performed in a plainchant .
In the Byzantine Rite of the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Eastern Catholic Churches , the music performed in the liturgies is exclusively sung without instrumental accompaniment .
Bishop Kallistos Ware says , `` The service is sung , even though there may be no choir ... In the Orthodox Church today , as in the early Church , singing is unaccompanied and instrumental music is not found . ''
Praise ye the Lord .
Divine Liturgies and Western Rite masses composed by famous composers such as Peter Tchaikovsky , Sergei Rachmaninoff , Alexander Arkhangelsky , and Mykola Leontovych are fine examples of this .
Many Mennonites also conduct some or all of their services without instruments .
Instruments have divided Christendom since their introduction into worship .
The use of instruments for Christian worship during this period is also undocumented .
While worship in the Temple in Jerusalem included musical instruments -LRB- 2 Chronicles 29:25 -- 27 -RRB- , traditional Jewish religious services in the Synagogue , both before and after the last destruction of the Temple , did not include musical instruments given the practice of scriptural cantillation .
-LRB- This prohibition has been relaxed in many Reform and some Conservative congregations . -RRB-
During the Three Weeks musical instruments are prohibited .
Weaving together Jewish and Greek thought , Philo promoted praise without instruments , and taught that `` silent singing '' -LRB- without even vocal chords -RRB- was better still .
The King 's Singers are credited with promoting interest in small-group a cappella performances in the 1960s .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Examples of such professional groups include Straight No Chaser , Pentatonix , The House Jacks , Rockapella , Mosaic , and M-pact .
Examples of such groups are Take 6 , Glad and Acappella .
According to the show 's website , it is scheduled to reopen for an open-ended commercial run in the Fall of 2011 .
The earliest documented quartets all began in barbershops .
The Barbershop Harmony Society provides a highly organized competition structure for a cappella quartets and choruses singing in the barbershop style .
It is not clear exactly where collegiate a cappella began .
Collegiate a cappella groups grew throughout the 20th century .
Some notable historical groups formed along the way include Princeton University 's Tigertones -LRB- 1946 -RRB- , Colgate University 's The Colgate 13 -LRB- 1942 -RRB- , Dartmouth College 's Aires -LRB- 1946 -RRB- , Cornell University 's Cayuga 's Waiters -LRB- 1949 -RRB- and The Hangovers -LRB- 1968 -RRB- , the University of Maine Maine Steiners -LRB- 1958 -RRB- , the Columbia University Kingsmen -LRB- 1949 -RRB- , the Jabberwocks of Brown University -LRB- 1949 -RRB- , and the University of Rochester YellowJackets -LRB- 1956 -RRB- .
A cappella groups exploded in popularity beginning in the 1990s , fueled in part by a change in style popularized by the Tufts University Beelzebubs and the Boston University Dear Abbeys .
The new style used voices to emulate modern rock instruments , including vocal percussion / `` beatboxing '' .
Some larger universities now have multiple groups .
Mira Sorvino is an alumna of the Harvard-Radcliffe Veritones of Harvard College where she had the solo on Only You by Yaz .
Co-ed South Asian a cappella groups are also gaining in popularity .
In December 2009 , a new television competition series called The Sing-Off aired on NBC .
More recently , `` Twilight Zone '' by 2 Unlimited was sung a cappella to the instrumentation on the comedy television series Tompkins Square .
Groups such as Vocal Sampling and Undivided emulate Latin rhythms a cappella .
Vocal artist Bobby McFerrin is famous for his instrumental emulation .
A cappella group Naturally Seven recreates entire songs using vocal tones for every instrument .
The advent of vocal percussion added new dimensions to the a cappella genre and has become very prevalent in modern arrangements .
Haden has also released a cappella versions of Journey 's `` Do n't Stop Believin ' '' , The Beach Boys ' `` God Only Knows '' and Michael Jackson 's `` Thriller '' .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Membership in this `` mendicant '' order includes friars , nuns , active sisters , and lay or secular Dominicans -LRB- formerly known as tertiaries , though recently there has been a growing number of Associates , who are unrelated to the tertiaries -RRB- affiliated with the order .
Members of the order generally carry the letters O.P. , standing for Ordinis Praedicatorum , meaning of the Order of Preachers , after their names .
The Dominican Order came into being in the Middle Ages at a time when religion began to be contemplated in a new way .
Instead , they travelled among the people , taking as their examples the apostles of the primitive Church .
They were both active in preaching , and contemplative in study , prayer and meditation .
The brethren of the Dominican Order were urban and learned , as well as contemplative and mystical in their spirituality .
Dominic was fired by a reforming zeal after they encountered Albigensian Christians at Toulouse .
For these reasons , Prior Diego suggested that the papal legates begin to live a reformed apostolic life .
The prior took up the challenge , and he and Dominic dedicated themselves to the conversion of the Albigensians .
The monastery was at Prouille would later become Dominic 's headquarters for his missionary effort there .
When his preaching companions heard of his death , all save Dominic and a very small number of others returned to their homes .
Its purpose was revolutionary in the pastoral ministry of the Catholic Church .
These priests were organized and well trained in religious studies .
Dominic needed a framework -- a rule -- to organize these components .
They could practice ministry and common life while existing in individual poverty .
In Dominic 's thinking , it was impossible for men to preach what they did not or could not understand .
This was the first of many Dominican schools established by the brethren , some near large universities throughout Europe .
Before that time the friars had only a temporary residence in Rome at the convent of San Sisto Vecchio which Honorius III had given to Dominic circa 1218 intending it to become a convent for a reformation of nuns at Rome under Dominic 's guidance .
This studium was transformed into the order 's first studium provinciale by Saint Thomas Aquinas in 1265 .
Part of the curriculum of this studium was relocated in 1288 at the studium of Santa Maria sopra Minerva which in the 16th century world be transformed into the College of Saint Thomas -LRB- Latin : Collegium Divi Thomæ -RRB- .
Its members included popes , cardinals , bishops , legates , inquisitors , confessors of princes , ambassadors , and paciarii -LRB- enforcers of the peace decreed by popes or councils -RRB- .
In his Papal Bull Ad extirpanda of 1252 , Pope Innocent IV authorised the Dominicans ' use of torture under prescribed circumstances .
The expansion of the order produced changes .
This movement was the prelude to the reforms undertaken , at the end of the century , by Raymond of Capua , and continued in the following century .
During this critical period , the number of Preachers seems never to have sunk below 3,500 .
From this province were detached the province of Lyon , called Occitania -LRB- 1862 -RRB- , that of Toulouse -LRB- 1869 -RRB- , and that of Canada -LRB- 1909 -RRB- .
The French restoration likewise furnished many laborers to other provinces , to assist in their organization and progress .
Here should be mentioned the province of St. Joseph in the United States .
Founded in 1805 by Edward Fenwick , afterwards first Bishop of Cincinnati , Ohio -LRB- 1821 -- 1832 -RRB- , this province has developed slowly , but now ranks among the most flourishing and active provinces of the order .
In 1910 it numbered seventeen convents or secondary houses .
In 1905 , it established a large house of studies at Washington , D.C. , called the Dominican House of Studies .
There are now four Dominican provinces in the United States .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Since 1903 the pulpit of Notre Dame has been occupied by a succession of Dominicans .
Père Henri Didon -LRB- d. 1900 -RRB- was a Dominican .
The house of studies of the province of France publishes L'Année Dominicaine -LRB- founded 1859 -RRB- , La Revue des Sciences Philosophiques et Theologiques -LRB- 1907 -RRB- , and La Revue de la Jeunesse -LRB- 1909 -RRB- .
Doctrinal development has had an important place in the restoration of the Preachers .
Several institutions , besides those already mentioned , played important parts .
Among numerous writers of the order in this period are : Cardinals Thomas Zigliara -LRB- d. 1893 -RRB- and Zephirin González -LRB- d. 1894 -RRB- , two esteemed philosophers ; Alberto Guillelmotti -LRB- d. 1893 -RRB- , historian of the Pontifical Navy , and Heinrich Denifle , one of the most famous writers on medieval history -LRB- d. 1905 -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
As the order first developed on the European continent , learning continued to be emphasized by these friars and their sisters in Christ .
These religious also struggled for a deeply personal , intimate relationship with God .
This topic is discussed below .
He rarely spoke , so little of his interior life is known .
What is known about it comes from accounts written by people near to him .
The spirituality evidenced throughout all of the branches of the order reflects the spirit and intentions of its founder , though some of the elements of what later developed might have surprised the Castilian friar .
It is that spirit which -LSB- Dominic -RSB- bequeathed to his followers '' .
He also wanted his friars to reach excellence in their preaching , and this was his most lasting contribution to the order .
The growth of the spirituality of young preachers was his first priority .
He once cried to his students : '' ... consider how excellent this office -LSB- of preaching -RSB- is , because it is apostolic ; how useful , because it is directly ordained for the salvation of souls ; how perilous , because few have in them , or perform , what the office requires , for it is not without great danger ... , vol .
xxv .
-LRB- Lyon , 1677 -RRB-
Humbert is at the center of ascetic writers in the Dominican Order .
In this role , he added significantly to its spirituality .
His influence on the brotherhood permeated nearly every aspect of Dominican life .
This love may manifest itself through brief ecstatic experiences , such that one may be engulfed by God and gain an immediate knowledge of Him , which is unknowable through the intellect alone .
And there is no contradiction between a relative affirmation and an absolute negation .
It is not contradictory to say that someone is white-toothed and not white '' .
According to him , these are the tools that God uses to commune with a contemplative .
Love in the soul is both the cause and result of true understanding and judgement .
It causes not only an intellectual knowledge of God , but a spiritual and emotional knowledge as well .
Things that once seemed static and unchanging become full of possibility and perfection .
The contemplative then knows that God is , but she does not know what God is .
As the image of God grows within man , he learns to rely less on an intellectual pursuit of virtue and more on an affective pursuit of charity and meekness .
The Dominican Order was affected by a number of elemental influences .
Its early members imbued the order with a mysticism and learning .
The English Dominicans looked for this complete unity as well , but were not so focused on ecstatic experiences .
In the tradition of Holy Writ , the impossibility of coming face to face with God is a recurring motif , thus the commandment against graven images -LRB- Exodus 20.4-5 -RRB- .
These images arose out of a confusing mass of ambiguous and ambivalent statements regarding the nature of God and man 's relationship to Him .
In spite of these doubts , women 's houses dotted the countryside throughout Europe .
A number of these houses became centers of study and mystical spirituality in the 14th century .
In that year , the number lessened due to disasters like the Black Death .
Their lives were often much more strict than their brothers ' lives .
They were compelled to obey all the rules and shared in all the applicable privileges of the order .
Candidates to profession were tested to reveal whether they were actually married women who had merely separated from their husbands .
Nuns were to be silent in places of prayer , the cloister , the dormitory , and refectory .
Silence was maintained unless the prioress granted an exception for a specific cause .
They did participate , however , in a number of intellectual activities .
Learning still had an elevated place in the lives of these religious .
It survived in the minds of the nuns .
The English nuns were proud of this heritage , and aware that many of them shared in England 's great history as members of the noble class , as seen in the next chapter .
The English Province was a component of the international order from which it obtained its laws , direction , and instructions .
English and European ingredients constantly came in contact .
Actually , the Dominican brothers likely began a school immediately after their arrival , as priories were legally schools .
Information about the schools of the English Province is limited , but a few facts are known .
Much of the information available is taken from visitation records .
The `` visitation '' was a section of the province through which visitors to each priory could describe the state of its religious life and its studies to the next chapter .
There were four such visits in England and Wales -- Oxford , London , Cambridge and York .
This is not surprising when one remembers Dominic 's zeal for it .
This was an essential moral imitation of the Savior as an ideal for religious change , and as the means for reformation of humanity 's nature as an image of divinity .
Second , there was a connection linking moral emulation of Christ 's life and humanity 's disposition as images of the divine .
Third , English Dominican mysticism focused on an embodied spirituality with a structured love of fellow men at its center .
Finally , the supreme aspiration of this mysticism was either an ethical or an actual union with God .
They wanted to create in themselves that environment that allowed Jesus to fulfill His divine mission , insofar as they were able .
English Dominican mystics sought through this love to become images of God .
This increase in universal love allowed men 's wills to conform to God 's will , just as Christ 's will submitted to the Father 's will .
As their love and knowledge of God grows and is sanctified by faith and experience , the image of God within man becomes ever more bright and clear .
Eton has educated 19 British prime ministers and generations of the aristocracy and has been referred to as the chief nurse of England 's statesmen .
Eton has a long list of distinguished former pupils .
The recent Head Master , Tony Little , said that Eton is developing plans to allow any boy to attend the school whatever his parents ' income and , in 2011 , said that around 250 boys received `` significant '' financial help from the school .
Little said that , in the short term , he wanted to ensure that around 320 pupils per year receive bursaries , and that 70 were educated free of charge , with the intention that the number of pupils receiving financial assistance would continue to increase .
These comparatively new developments will run alongside long-established courses that Eton has provided for pupils from state schools , most of them in the summer holidays -LRB- July and August -RRB- .
Launched in 1982 , the Universities Summer School is an intensive residential course open to boys and girls throughout the UK who attend state schools , are at the end of their first year in the Sixth Form , and are about to begin their final year of schooling .
The Brent-Eton Summer School , started in 1994 , offers 40-50 young people from the London Borough of Brent , an area of inner-city deprivation , an intensive one-week residential course , free of charge , designed to help bridge the gap between GCSE and A-level .
In 2008 , Eton helped found the Eton , Slough , Windsor and Hounslow Independent and State School Partnership -LRB- ISSP -RRB- , with six local state schools .
Only the Quire of the intended building was completed .
As the school suffered reduced income while still under construction , the completion and further development of the school has since depended to some extent on wealthy benefactors .
In 1889 , Sir William Fraser conflated this uncorroborated remark with the one attributed to him by Count Charles de Montalembert 's `` C'est ici qu'a été gagné la bataille de Waterloo '' -LRB- `` It is here that the Battle of Waterloo was won . '' -RRB-
Many tablets in the cloisters and chapel commemorate the large number of dead Etonians of the Great War .
In the past , people at Eton have occasionally been guilty of antisemitism .
As the School grew , more students were allowed to attend provided that they paid their own fees and lived in the town , outside the College 's original buildings .
Although classes are organised on a School basis , most boys spend a large proportion of their time in their House .
Each House has a formal name , mainly used for post and people outside the Eton community .
Not all boys who pass the College election examination choose to become King 's Scholars .
A Library member was entitled to yell at any time and without notice , `` Boy , Up ! ''
or `` Boy , Queue ! ''
, and all first-year boys had to come running .
Captains of House and Games still sometimes give tasks to first-year boys , such as collecting the mail from School Office .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
`` Eton dress '' has undergone significant changes since its standardisation in the 19th century .
As stated above , King 's Scholars wear a black gown over the top of their tailcoats , and occasionally a surplice in Chapel .
It used paper tape to store programs .
Today , all boys must have laptop computers , and the school fibre-optic network connects all classrooms and all boys ' bedrooms to the internet .
Despite the introduction of modern technology , the external appearance and locations of many of the classrooms have remained unchanged for a long time .
Societies tend to come and go , of course , depending on the special enthusiasms of the masters and boys in the school at the time , but some have been in existence many years .
In addition , many subjects and activities have specially endowed prizes , several of which are awarded by visiting experts .
The most prestigious is the Newcastle Scholarship , awarded on the strength of an examination , consisting of two papers in philosophical theology , moral theory and applied ethics .
Various benefactions make it possible to give grants each year to boys who wish , for educational or cultural reasons , to work or travel abroad .
This award has been around since the 18th century .
As Sending Up For Good is fairly infrequent , the process is rather mysterious to many of Eton 's boys .
First , the master wishing to Send Up For Good must gain the permission of the relevant Head of Department .
In recent times , -LSB- when ? -RSB-
Tardy Book may also be issued for late work .
For more serious misdeeds , a boy is summoned from his lessons to the Head Master , or Lower Master if the boy is in the lower two years , to talk personally about his misdeeds .
John Keate , Head Master from 1809 to 1834 , took over at a time when discipline was poor .
Previously , House Captains were permitted to cane miscreants over the seat of the trousers .
This was a routine occurrence , carried out privately with the boy bending over with his head under the edge of a table .
This was the most severe form of physical punishment at Eton .
The School participates in many national competitions ; many pupils are part of the National Youth Orchestra , and the School gives scholarships for dedicated and talented musicians .
A former Precentor of the college , Ralph Allwood set up and organised Eton Choral Courses , which run at the School every summer .
Productions also take place in varying locations around the School , varying from the sports fields to more historic buildings such as Upper School and College Chapel .
Upcoming in May 2014 was a production of A Midsummer Night 's Dream .
Eton also observes St. Andrew 's Day , on which the Eton wall game is played .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Until 18 December 2010 , Eton College was an exempt charity under English law -LRB- Charities Act 1993 , Schedule 2 -RRB- .
Under the provisions of the Charities Act 2006 , it is now an excepted charity , and fully registered with the Charities Commission , and is now one of the 100 largest charities in the UK .
This subsidy has declined since the 2001 abolition by the Labour Government of state-funded scholarships -LRB- formerly known as `` assisted places '' -RRB- to independent schools .
However , no child attended Eton on this scheme , meaning that the actual level of state assistance to the School has always been lower .
The UK Sports Council defended the deal on the grounds that the whole community would benefit , while the bursar claimed that Windsor , Slough and Eton Athletic Club was `` deprived '' because local people -LRB- who were not pupils at the College -RRB- did not have a world-class running track and facilities to train with .
Steve Osborn , director of the Safe Neighbourhoods Unit , described the decision as `` staggering '' given the background of a substantial reduction in youth services by councils across the country , a matter over which , however , neither the College nor the UK Sports Council , had any control .
She also claimed she was instructed to do some of Prince Harry 's coursework to enable him to pass AS Art .
An employment tribunal in July 2005 found that she had been unfairly dismissed and criticised Burke for bullying her and for repeatedly changing his story .
A spokesperson from Clarence House said , `` We are delighted that Harry has been totally cleared of cheating . ''
The incident raised concerns over whether the charitable status of independent schools such as Eton should be reconsidered , and perhaps revoked .
She wrote to John Vickers , the OFT director-general , saying , `` They are not a group of businessmen meeting behind closed doors to fix the price of their products to the disadvantage of the consumer .
They are schools that have quite openly continued to follow a long-established practice because they were unaware that the law had changed . ''
Asked to explain under what grounds it was eligible to receive farming subsidies , Eton admitted that it was ' a bit of a mystery ' .
The TaxPayers ' Alliance also stated that Eton had received a total of # 5,300 in CAP subsidies between 2002 and 2007 .
According to The Economist , Oxford and Cambridge admit more Etonians each year than applicants from the whole country who qualify for free school meals .
In response , the school issued the following statement : `` This error was discovered within minutes and each family was immediately contacted to notify them that it should be disregarded and to apologise .
We take this type of incident very seriously indeed and so a thorough investigation , overseen by the headmaster Tony Little and led by the tutor for admissions , is being carried out to find out exactly what went wrong and ensure it can not happen again .
Eton College offers its sincere apologies to those boys concerned and their families .
We deeply regret the confusion and upset this must have caused . ''
We are investigating this allegation as a matter of urgency and will be co-operating fully with the relevant authorities . ''
Eton College has links with some private schools in India today , maintained from the days of the British Raj , such as The Doon School and Mayo College .
Eton has recently fostered -LSB- when ? -RSB-
Former Eton headmaster and provost Sir Eric Anderson shares a close friendship with Roxbury Latin Headmaster emeritus F. Washington Jarvis ; Anderson has visited Roxbury Latin on numerous occasions , while Jarvis briefly taught theology at Eton after retiring from his headmaster post at Roxbury Latin .
The reason it 's a good school is that it encourages people to find the thing they love and to go for it .
It has been proposed that , like Dublin , Cork was an important trading centre in the global Scandinavian trade network .
For much of the Middle Ages , Cork city was an outpost of Old English culture in the midst of a predominantly hostile Gaelic countryside and cut off from the English government in the Pale around Dublin .
The present extent of the city has exceeded the medieval boundaries of the Barony of Cork City ; it now takes in much of the neighbouring Barony of Cork .
The then mayor of Cork and several important citizens went with Warbeck to England but when the rebellion collapsed they were all captured and executed .
The title of Mayor of Cork was established by royal charter in 1318 , and the title was changed to Lord Mayor in 1900 following the knighthood of the incumbent Mayor by Queen Victoria on her Royal visit to the city .
Temperatures below 0 °C -LRB- 32 °F -RRB- or above 25 °C -LRB- 77 °F -RRB- are rare .
The low altitude of the city , and moderating influences of the harbour , mean that lying snow very rarely occurs in the city itself .
There are on average 204 `` rainy '' days a year -LRB- over 0.2 millimetres -LRB- 0.0079 in -RRB- of rainfall -RRB- , of which there are 73 days with `` heavy rain '' -LRB- over 5 millimetres -LRB- 0.20 in -RRB- -RRB- .
Despite this , however , Cork is also one of Ireland 's sunniest cities , with an average of 3.9 hours of sunshine every day and only having 67 days where there is no `` recordable sunshine '' , mostly during and around winter .
The Cork School of Music and the Crawford College of Art and Design provide a throughput of new blood , as do the active theatre components of several courses at University College Cork -LRB- UCC -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Jewish citizens such as Gerald Goldberg -LRB- several times Lord Mayor -RRB- , David Marcus -LRB- novelist -RRB- and Louis Marcus -LRB- documentary maker -RRB- played notable roles in 20th century Cork .
Today , the Jewish community is relatively small in population , although the city still has a Jewish quarter and synagogue .
The Cork accent , part of the Southwest dialect of Hiberno-English , displays various features which set it apart from other accents in Ireland .
English spoken in Cork has a number of dialect words that are peculiar to the city and environs .
The city 's FM radio band features RTÉ Radio 1 , RTÉ 2fm , RTÉ lyric fm , RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta , Today FM , 4fm , Newstalk and the religious station Spirit Radio .
Cork also has a temporary licensed city-wide community station ` Cork FM Community Radio ' on 100.5 FM , which is currently on-air on Saturdays and Sundays only .
Today some small pirates stations remain .
Today , the shouts of the vendors selling the Echo can still be heard in various parts of the city centre .
One of the biggest free newspapers in the city is the Cork Independent .
Its distinctive tower was added in the 1860s .
St Fin Barre 's Cathedral serves the Protestant faith and is possibly the more famous of the two .
It is built on the foundations of an earlier cathedral .
Work began in 1862 and ended in 1879 under the direction of architect William Burges .
The Grand Parade is a tree-lined avenue , home to offices , shops and financial institutions .
The old financial centre is the South Mall , with several banks whose interior derive from the 19th century , such as the Allied Irish Bank 's which was once an exchange .
Certain councillors are co-opted to represent the city at the South-West Regional Authority .
Department stores cater for all budgets , with expensive boutiques for one end of the market and high street stores also available .
Shopping centres can be found in many of Cork 's suburbs , including Blackpool , Ballincollig , Douglas , Ballyvolane , Wilton and Mahon Point .
Others are available in the city centre .
These include the recently -LSB- when ? -RSB-
completed development of two large malls The Cornmarket Centre on Cornmarket Street , and new the retail street called `` Opera Lane '' off St. Patrick 's Street/Academy Street .
Cork 's main shopping street is St. Patrick 's Street and is the most expensive street in the country per sq. metre after Dublin 's Grafton Street .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Other shopping areas in the city centre include Oliver Plunkett St. and Grand Parade .
Outside the city centre is Mahon Point Shopping Centre .
Cork City is at the heart of industry in the south of Ireland .
Three hospitals are also among the top ten employers in the city -LRB- see table below -RRB- .
Two of these bus routes provide orbital services across the Northern and Southern districts of the city respectively .
Buses to the outer suburbs , such as Ballincollig , Glanmire , Midleton and Carrigaline are provided from the city 's bus terminal at Parnell Place in the city centre .
The Cork area has seen improvements in road infrastructure in recent years .
Shortly afterwards , the first sections of the South Ring dual carriageway were opened .
Work continued through the 1990s on extending the N25 South Ring Road , with the opening of the Jack Lynch Tunnel under the River Lee being a significant addition .
Other projects completed at this time include the N20 Blackpool bypass and the N20 Cork to Mallow road projects .
The N22 Ballincollig dual carriageway bypass , which links to the Western end of the Cork Southern Ring road was opened in September 2004 .
The M8 motorway links Cork with Dublin .
This also connected to the seaside town of Youghal , until the 1980s .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Stations include Little Island , Mallow , Midleton , Fota and Cobh .
Research institutes linked to the third level colleges in the city support the research and innovation capacity of the city and region .
UCC and CIT also have start-up company incubation centres .
There are many Gaelic Athletic Association clubs in Cork City , including Blackrock National Hurling Club , St. Finbarr 's , Glen Rovers , Na Piarsaigh and Nemo Rangers .
The main public venues are Páirc Uí Chaoimh and Páirc Uí Rinn -LRB- named after the noted Glen Rovers player Christy Ring -RRB- .
Naomhóga Chorcaí is a rowing club whose members row traditional naomhóga on the Lee in occasional competitions .
The decision to move the National Rowing Center to Inniscarra has boosted numbers involved in the sport .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Cork 's maritime sailing heritage is maintained through its sailing clubs .
The Cork Cricket Academy operates within the city , with the stated aim of introducing the sport to schools in the city and county .
Cork 's other main cricket club , Harlequins Cricket Club , play close to Cork Airport .
The city is also the home of road bowling , which is played in the north-side and south-west suburbs .
Cork Racing , a motorsport team based in Cork , has raced in the Irish Formula Ford Championship since 2005 .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
One or other level of government could be sovereign to decide such matters , but not both simultaneously .
Therefore , it is now suggested that federalism is more appropriately conceived as ' a division of the powers flowing from sovereignty between two levels of government ' .
Leading examples of the federal state include the United States , Germany , Canada , Switzerland , Australia and India .
They were therefore initially synonyms .
neither a single large unitary state nor a league/confederation among several small states , but a hybrid of the two -RRB- .
In the course of the nineteenth century the meaning of federalism would come to shift , strengthening to refer uniquely to the novel compound political form , while the meaning of confederalism would remain at a league of states .
Thus , this article relates to the modern usage of the word ` federalism ' .
This is very different from the modern usage of `` federalism '' in Europe and the United States .
The U.S. Constitution was written as a reaction to the Articles of Confederation , under which the United States was a loose confederation with a weak central government .
The modern American usage of the word is much closer to the European sense .
As the power of the Federal government has increased , some people have perceived a much more unitary state than they believe the Founding Fathers intended .
In the 1890s the governments of these colonies all held referendums on becoming a unified , self-governing `` Commonwealth '' within the British Empire .
When all the colonies voted in favour of federation , the Federation of Australia commenced , resulting in the establishment of the Commonwealth of Australia in 1901 .
The 1937 Constitution , for example , granted the federal government the authority to appoint State Governors -LRB- called interventors -RRB- at will , thus centralizing power in the hands of President Getúlio Vargas .
Brazil is one of the biggest federal governments .
In the current arrangement , The Seventh Schedule of the Indian Constitution delimits the subjects of each level of governmental jurisdiction , dividing them into three lists :
Although the drafts of both the Maastricht treaty and the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe mentioned federalism , the representatives of the member countries -LRB- all of whom would have had to agree to use of the term -RRB- never formally adopted it .
These resolutions passed against the desires of Dutch-speaking parties , who are generally in favour of a federal system with two components -LRB- i.e. the Dutch and French Communities of Belgium -RRB- .
The chairman of the Walloon Parliament stated on July 17 , 2008 that , `` Brussels would take an attitude '' .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- However , the anarchist definition of federalism tends to differ from the definition of federalism assumed by pro-state political scientists .
The following is a brief description of federalism from section I. 5 of An Anarchist FAQ :
Still others have shown that federalism is only divisive when it lacks mechanisms tthat encourage political parties to compete across regional boundaries .
-LRB- 1 -RRB-
Other powers -- the reserved powers -- are reserved to the people or the states .
The power delegated to the federal government was significantly expanded by the Supreme Court decision in McCulloch v. Maryland -LRB- 1819 -RRB- , amendments to the Constitution following the Civil War , and by some later amendments -- as well as the overall claim of the Civil War , that the states were legally subject to the final dictates of the federal government .
The federalists , on the other hand , argued that it was impossible to list all the rights , and those that were not listed could be easily overlooked because they were not in the official bill of rights .
Similarly , in European Union politics , federalists mostly seek greater EU integration .
In contrast , in Spain and in post-war Germany , federal movements have sought decentralisation : the transfer of power from central authorities to local units .
In Canada , where Quebec separatism has been a political force for several decades , the `` federalist '' impulse aims to keep Quebec inside Canada .
With such issues , a final decision is possible only in the form of a compromise .
This tendency gives this dual federalism model a number of traits that generally are ascribed to confederalism , and makes the future of Belgian federalism contentious .
In Australia , if a proposed amendment will specifically impact one or more states , then it must be endorsed in the referendum held in each of those states .
This is often done in recognition of the existence of a distinct culture in a particular region or regions .
They have more powers than the later expanded arrangement for other Spanish regions , or the Spain of the autonomous communities -LRB- called also the `` coffee for everyone '' arrangement -RRB- , partly to deal with their separate identity and to appease peripheral nationalist leanings , partly out of respect to specific rights they had held earlier in history .
An amendment to the constitution of the United States must be ratified by three-quarters of either the state legislatures , or of constitutional conventions specially elected in each of the states , before it can come into effect .
In Australia , this latter requirement is known as a double majority .
A federal upper house may be based on a special scheme of apportionment , as is the case in the senates of the United States and Australia , where each state is represented by an equal number of senators irrespective of the size of its population .
Each municipality has a `` little constitution '' , called `` organic law '' -LRB- lei orgânica -RRB- .
Mexico is an intermediate case , in that municipalities are granted full-autonomy by the federal constitution and their existence as autonomous entities -LRB- municipio libre , `` free municipality '' -RRB- is established by the federal government and can not be revoked by the states ' constitutions .
Moreover , the federal constitution determines which powers and competencies belong exclusively to the municipalities and not to the constituent states .
However , municipalities do not have an elected legislative assembly .
There is also one autonomous region , the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao .
The current Spanish constitution has been implemented in such a way that , in many respects , Spain can be compared to countries which are undeniably federal .
This body was suspended in 1972 and Northern Ireland was governed by direct rule during the period of conflict known as The Troubles .
Government has been devolved to the Scottish Parliament , the National Assembly for Wales and the Northern Ireland Assembly .
In 1998 a set of eight unelected Regional assemblies , or chambers , was created to support the English Regional Development Agencies , but these were abolished between 2008 and 2010 .
For example , presbyterian church governance resembles parliamentary republicanism -LRB- a form of political federalism -RRB- to a large extent .
Each church then sends representatives or commissioners to presbyteries and further to a general assembly .
In this governmental structure , each component has some level of sovereignty over itself .
Beyond this the precise division of power varies from one nation to another .
The constitutions of Germany and the United States provide that all powers not specifically granted to the federal government are retained by the states .
The Constitution of some countries like Canada and India , on the other hand , state that powers not explicitly granted to the provincial governments are retained by the federal government .
Much like the US system , the Australian Constitution allocates to the Federal government -LRB- the Commonwealth of Australia -RRB- the power to make laws about certain specified matters which were considered too difficult for the States to manage , so that the States retain all other areas of responsibility .
It had a population of 2,765,940 in 2013 and has a total area of 29,574 km2 -LRB- 11,419 sq mi -RRB- .
In 410 , the Germanic Suebi established a kingdom with its capital in Braga -LRB- Portugal -RRB- which was incorporated into that of the Visigoths in 585 .
In 711 , the Arabs invaded the Iberian Peninsula , taking the Visigoth kingdom , but soon in 740 Galicia was incorporated into the Christian kingdom of Asturias .
During the Middle Ages , the kingdom of Galicia was occasionally ruled by its own kings , but most of the time it was leagued to the kingdom of Leon and later to that of Castile , while maintaining its own legal and customary practices and personality .
From the 13th century on , the kings of Castile , as kings of Galicia , appointed an Adiantado-mór , whose attributions passed to the Governor and Captain General of the Kingdom of Galiza from the last years of the 15th century .
The Governor also presided the Real Audiencia do Reino de Galicia , a royal tribunal and government body .
The coastal areas are mostly an alternate series of rías -LRB- submerged valleys where the sea penetrates tens of kilometres inland -RRB- and cliffs .
The climate of Galicia is temperate and rainy , but it is also markedly drier in the summer , being usually classified as Oceanic in the west and north , and Mediterranean in the southeast .
With the exception of shipbuilding and food processing , Galicia was largely a semi-subsistence farming and fishing economy and did not experience significant industrialization until after the mid-20th century .
In 2012 , the gross domestic product at purchasing power parity was $ 56,000 million , with a nominal GDP per capita of $ 20,700 .
To a lesser extent , there are smaller populations around the interior cities of Lugo , Ourense and Santiago de Compostela .
Vigo , in the province of Pontevedra , is the most populous municipality with 294,997 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- , while A Coruña is the most populous city with 215.227 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- .
Thousands of Megalithic tumuli are distributed throughout the country , but mostly along the coastal areas .
Within each tumulus is a stone burial chamber known locally as anta -LRB- dolmen -RRB- , frequently preceded by a corridor .
Galicia was later fully affected by the Bell Beaker culture .
It is usually considered a local evolution of the Atlantic Bronze Age , with later developments and influences and overlapping into the Roman era .
Geographically , it corresponds to the people Roman called Gallaeci , which were composed by a large series of nations or tribes , among them the Artabri , Bracari , Limici , Celtici , Albiones and Lemavi .
These were usually annular forts , with one or more concentric earthen or stony walls , with a trench in front of each one .
Under Roman rule , most Galician hillforts began to be -- sometimes forcibly -- abandoned , and Gallaeci served frequently in the Roman army as auxiliary troops .
In the 3rd century it was made a province , under the name Gallaecia , which included also northern Portugal , Asturias , and a large section of what today is known as Castile and León .
So , from 409 Galicia was taken by the Suebi , forming the first medieval kingdom to be created in Europe , in 411 , even before the fall of the Roman Empire , being also the first Germanic kingdom to mint coinage in Roman lands .
Nevertheless , in his Kingdom of Galicia the Galician language was the only language spoken , and the most used in government and legal uses , as well as in literature .
At the same time the kings began to call the Xunta or Cortes of the Kingdom of Galicia , an assembly of deputies or representatives of the cities of the Kingdom , to ask for monetary and military contributions .
This assembly soon developed into the voice and legal representation of the Kingdom , and the depositary of its will and laws .
Fearing a general revolt , the monarchs ordered the banishing of the rest of the great lords like Pedro de Bolaño , Diego de Andrade or Lope Sánchez de Moscoso , among others .
From that moment Galicia , which participated to a minor extent in the American expansion of the Spanish Empire , found itself at the center of the Atlantic wars fought by Spain against the French and the Protestant powers of England and the Netherlands , whose privateers attacked the coastal areas , but major assaults were not common as the coastline was difficult and the harbors easily defended .
The most famous Barbary attack was the bloody sack of the town of Cangas in 1617 .
At the time , the king 's petitions for money and troops became more frequent , due to the human and economic exhaustion of Castile ; the Junta of the Kingdom of Galicia -LRB- the local Cortes or representative assembly -RRB- was initially receptive to these petitions , raising large sums , accepting the conscription of the men of the kingdom , and even commissioning a new naval squadron which was sustained with the incomes of the Kingdom .
While there were no pitched battles , there was repression and death : all political parties were abolished , as were all labor unions and Galician nationalist organizations as the Seminario de Estudos Galegos .
According to Carlos Fernández Santander , at least 4,200 people were killed either extrajudicially or after summary trials , among them republicans , communists , Galician nationalists , socialists and anarchists .
Many others were forced to escape into exile , or were victims of other reprisals and removed from their jobs and positions .
Franco 's centralizing regime suppressed any official use of the Galician language , including the use of Galician names for newborns , although its everyday oral use was not forbidden .
In the 1960s , ministers such as Manuel Fraga Iribarne introduced some reforms allowing technocrats affiliated with Opus Dei to modernize administration in a way that facilitated capitalist economic development .
However , for decades Galicia was largely confined to the role of a supplier of raw materials and energy to the rest of Spain , causing environmental havoc and leading to a wave of migration to Venezuela and to various parts of Europe .
Fenosa , the monopolistic supplier of electricity , built hydroelectric dams , flooding many Galician river valleys .
Varying degrees of nationalist or independentist sentiment are evident at the political level .
In the 2005 Galician elections , the ` People 's Party ' lost its absolute majority , though remaining -LRB- barely -RRB- the largest party in the parliament , with 43 % of the total votes .
As a result , power passed to a coalition of the Partido dos Socialistas de Galicia -LRB- PSdeG -RRB- -LRB- ` Galician Socialists ' Party ' -RRB- , a federal sister-party of Spain 's main social-democratic party , the Partido Socialista Obrero Español -LRB- PSOE , ` Spanish Socialist Workers Party ' -RRB- and the nationalist Bloque Nacionalista Galego -LRB- BNG -RRB- .
The easternmost longitude is at 6 ° 42 ′ W on the border between the province of Ourense and the Castilian-Leonese province of Zamora -RRB- its westernmost at 9 ° 18 ′ W , reached in two places : the A Nave Cape in Fisterra -LRB- also known as Finisterre -RRB- , and Cape Touriñán , both in the province of A Coruña .
Topographically , a remarkable feature of Galicia is the presence of many firth-like inlets along the coast , estuaries that were drowned with rising sea levels after the ice age .
The Rías Altas include Ribadeo , Foz , Viveiro , Barqueiro , Ortigueira , Cedeira , Ferrol , Betanzos , A Coruña , Corme e Laxe and Camariñas .
The Rías Baixas , found south of Fisterra , include Corcubión , Muros e Noia , Arousa , Pontevedra and Vigo .
The Rías Altas can sometimes refer only to those east of Estaca de Bares , with the others being called Rías Medias -LRB- `` Intermediate Rías '' -RRB- .
All along the Galician coast are various archipelagos near the mouths of the rías .
These archipelagos provide protected deepwater harbors and also provide habitat for seagoing birds .
Among the most important of these are the archipelagos of Cíes , Ons , and Sálvora .
Other significant islands are Islas Malveiras , Islas Sisargas , and , the largest and holding the largest population , Arousa Island .
Galicia is quite mountainous , a fact which has contributed to isolate the rural areas , hampering communications , most notably in the inland .
Most of the rivers in the inland are tributaries of this fluvial system , which drains some 17,027 km2 -LRB- 6,574 sq mi -RRB- .
Other rivers run directly into the Atlantic Ocean as Lérez or the Cantabrian Sea , most of them having short courses .
Only the Navia , Ulla , Tambre , and Limia have courses longer than 100 km -LRB- 62 mi -RRB- .
Galicia is one of the more forested areas of Spain , but the majority of Galicia 's plantations , usually growing eucalyptus or pine , lack any formal management .
Massive eucalyptus , especially Eucalyptus globulus plantation , began in the Francisco Franco era , largely on behalf of the paper company Empresa Nacional de Celulosas de España -LRB- ENCE -RRB- in Pontevedra , which wanted it for its pulp .
Wood products figure significantly in Galicia 's economy .
Apart from tree plantations Galicia is also notable for the extensive surface occupied by meadows used for animal husbandry , especially cattle , an important activity .
The animals most often thought of as being `` typical '' of Galicia are the livestock raised there .
The latter is an endangered species , although it is showing signs of a comeback since 2001 .
Galicia 's woodlands and mountains are home to rabbits , hares , wild boars , and roe deer , all of which are popular with hunters .
From a domestic point of view , Galicia has been credited for author Manuel Rivas as the `` land of one million cows '' .
Galician Blond and Holstein cattle coexist on meadows and farms .
Being located on the Atlantic coastline , Galicia has a very mild climate for the latitude and the marine influence affects most of the province to various degrees .
In comparison to similar latitudes on the other side of the Atlantic , winters are exceptionally mild , with consistently heavy rainfall .
Snow is rare due to temperatures rarely dropping below freezing .
Due to its exposed north-westerly location , the climate is still very cool by Spanish standards .
In coastal areas summers are temperered , averaging around 25 °C -LRB- 77 °F -RRB- in Vigo .
Temperatures are further cooler in A Coruña , with a subdued 22.8 °C -LRB- 73.0 °F -RRB- normal .
Temperatures do however soar in inland areas such as Ourense , where days above 30 °C -LRB- 86 °F -RRB- are very regular .
However , precipitation in southern coastal areas are often classified as oceanic since the averages remain significantly higher than a typical mediterranean climate .
The more mountainous parts of the provinces of Ourense and Lugo receive significant snowfall during the winter months .
Municipalities are divided into parishes , which may be further divided into aldeas -LRB- `` hamlets '' -RRB- or lugares -LRB- `` places '' -RRB- .
This traditional breakdown into such small areas is unusual when compared to the rest of Spain .
Roughly half of the named population entities of Spain are in Galicia , which occupies only 5.8 percent of the country 's area .
Galicia is a land of economic contrast .
However , the rise of tourism , sustainable forestry and organic and traditional agriculture are bringing other possibilities to the Galician economy without compromising the preservation of the natural resources and the local culture .
85 % of tourists who visit Galicia visit Santiago de Compostela .
In 2007 the port took in 732,951 metric tons -LRB- 721,375 long tons ; 807,940 short tons -RRB- of fish and seafood , and about 4,000,000 metric tons -LRB- 3,900,000 long tons ; 4,400,000 short tons -RRB- of other cargoes .
Other important ports are Ferrol , A Coruña , and the smaller ports of Marín and Vilagarcía de Arousa , as well as important recreational ports in Pontevedra and Burela .
Additional roads under construction include Autovía A-54 from Santiago de Compostela to Lugo , and Autovía A-56 from Lugo to Ourense .
It ran from O Carril , Vilagarcía de Arousa to Cornes , Conxo , Santiago de Compostela .
A second line was inaugurated in 1875 , connecting A Coruña and Lugo .
In 1883 , Galicia was first connected by rail to the rest of Spain , by way of O Barco de Valdeorras .
Galicia today has roughly 1,100 kilometres -LRB- 680 mi -RRB- of rail lines .
Several 1,668 mm -LRB- 5 ft 5 21⁄32 in -RRB- Iberian gauge lines operated by Adif and Renfe Operadora connect all the important Galician cities .
A 1,000 mm -LRB- 3 ft 3 3⁄8 in -RRB- metre gauge line operated by FEVE connects Ferrol to Ribadeo and Oviedo .
Several high-speed rail lines are under construction .
Among these are the Olmedo-Zamora-Galicia high-speed rail line that opened partly in 2011 , and the AVE Atlantic Axis route , which will connect all of the major Galician Atlantic coast cities A Coruña , Santiago de Compostela , Pontevedra and Vigo to Portugal .
Another projected AVE line will connect Ourense to Pontevedra and Vigo .
The number of people working in the Tertiary and Quaternary sectors of the economy has increased significantly .
Over the many centuries of Castilian domination , Galician faded from day-to-day use in urban areas .
Nowadays , Galician is resurgent , though in the cities it remains a `` second language '' for most .
The first two numbers -LRB- understanding and speaking -RRB- remain roughly the same as a decade earlier ; the latter two -LRB- reading and writing -RRB- both show enormous gains : a decade earlier , only 49.3 percent of the population could read Galician , and only 34.85 percent could write it .
This fact can be easily explained because of the impossibility of teaching Galician during the Francisco Franco era , so older people speak the language but have no written competence .
Galician is the highest-percentage spoken language in its region among the regional languages of Spain .
The Foro do bo burgo do Castro Caldelas was granted by Alfonso IX of León to the town of Burgo , in Castro Caldelas , after the model of the constitutions of the town of Allariz .
During this period , Galician-Portuguese was considered the language of love poetry in the Iberian Romance linguistic culture .
The names and memories of Codax and other popular cultural figures are well preserved in modern Galicia and , despite the long period of Castilian linguistic domination , these names are again household words .
The largest form of Christianity practised in the present day is Catholicism , though only 20 % of the population described themselves as active members .
The Catholic Church in Galicia has had its primatial seat in Santiago de Compostela since the 12th century .
While these may have coincided with contemporary 15th-century civil provinces , they no longer have the same boundaries as the modern civil provincial divisions .
Moreover , of five dioceses , Galicia is divided between 163 districts and 3,792 parishes , a few of which are governed by administrators , the remainder by parish priests .
Hundreds of ancient standing stone monuments like dolmens , menhirs and megalithics Tumulus were erected during the prehistoric period in Galicia , amongst the best-known are the dolmens of Dombate , Corveira , Axeitos of Pedra da Arca , menhirs like the `` Lapa de Gargñáns '' .
From the Iron Age , Galicia has a rich heritage based mainly on a great number of Hill forts , few of them excavated like Baroña , Sta .
Tegra , San Cibrao de Lás and Formigueiros among others .
With the introduction of Ancient Roman architecture there was a development of basilicas , castra , city walls , cities , villas , Roman temples , Roman roads , and the Roman bridge of Ponte Vella .
Perhaps the best-known examples are the Roman Walls of Lugo and the Tower of Hercules in A Coruña .
After that date , the relics of Saint James became an extraordinary centre of pilgrimage and from the 9th century have been kept in the heart of the church -- the modern-day cathedral -- dedicated to him .
The population of the city of A Coruña in 1900 was 43,971 .
A Coruña 's growth occurred after the Spanish Civil War at the same speed as other major Galician cities , but it was the arrival of democracy in Spain after the death of Francisco Franco when A Coruña left all the other Galician cities behind .
Sometimes Galicia has lost population in absolute terms .
In 1857 , Galicia had Spain 's densest population and constituted 11.5 % of the national population .
As of 2007 , only 6.1 % of the Spanish population resides in the autonomous community .
This is due to an exodus of Galician people since the 19th century , first to South America and later to Central Europe .
The Galician road network includes autopistas and autovías connecting the major cities , as well as national and secondary roads to the rest of the municipalities .
The Autovía A-52 connects O Porriño , Ourense and Benavente , and enters Galicia at A Gudiña .
Two more autovías are under construction .
Autovía A-76 enters Galicia in Valdeorras ; it is an upgrade of the existing N-120 to Ourense and Vigo .
In surveys made in Europe and the United States , green is the color most commonly associated with nature , life , health , youth , spring , hope and envy .
Green is also the traditional color of safety and permission ; a green light means go ahead , a green card permits permanent residence in the United States .
It is the most important color in Islam .
It is also often associated with the culture of Gaelic Ireland , and is a color of the flag of Ireland .
Political groups advocating environmental protection and social justice describe themselves as part of the Green movement , some naming themselves Green parties .
This has led to similar campaigns in advertising , as companies have sold green , or environmentally friendly , products .
For example , the Slavic zelenъ is cognate with Sanskrit hari `` yellow , ochre , golden '' .
In some languages , including old Chinese , Thai , old Japanese , and Vietnamese , the same word can mean either blue or green .
The Chinese character 青 -LRB- pronounced qīng in Mandarin , ao in Japanese , and thanh in Sino-Vietnamese -RRB- has a meaning that covers both blue and green ; blue and green are traditionally considered shades of '' 青 '' .
In more contemporary terms , they are 藍 -LRB- lán , in Mandarin -RRB- and 綠 -LRB- lǜ , in Mandarin -RRB- respectively .
`` sky blue '' -RRB- , lam -LRB- blue -RRB- , and lục -LRB- green ; also xanh lá cây , lit .
`` leaf green '' -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- In the comparative study of color terms in the world 's languages , green is only found as a separate category in languages with the fully developed range of six colors -LRB- white , black , red , green , yellow , and blue -RRB- , or more rarely in systems with five colors -LRB- white , red , yellow , green , and black/blue -RRB- .
An infrared laser diode at 808 nm is used to pump a crystal of neodymium-doped yttrium vanadium oxide -LRB- Nd : YVO4 -RRB- or neodymium-doped yttrium aluminium garnet -LRB- Nd : YAG -RRB- and induces it to emit 281.76 THz -LRB- 1064 nm -RRB- .
This deeper infrared light is then passed through another crystal containing potassium , titanium and phosphorus -LRB- KTP -RRB- , whose non-linear properties generate light at a frequency that is twice that of the incident beam -LRB- 563.5 THz -RRB- ; in this case corresponding to the wavelength of 532 nm -LRB- `` green '' -RRB- .
Green wavelengths are also available from gas lasers , including the helium -- neon laser -LRB- 543 nm -RRB- , the Argon-ion laser -LRB- 514 nm -RRB- and the Krypton-ion laser -LRB- 521 nm and 531 nm -RRB- , as well as liquid dye lasers .
Green lasers have a wide variety of applications , including pointing , illumination , surgery , laser light shows , spectroscopy , interferometry , fluorescence , holography , machine vision , non-lethal weapons and bird control .
The large number of green pigments makes it impossible to mention them all .
Chromium -LRB- III -RRB- oxide -LRB- Cr2O3 -RRB- , is called chrome green , also called viridian or institutional green when used as a pigment .
For many years , the source of amazonite 's color was a mystery .
It was widely used in miniature paintings in Europe and Persia in the 16th and 17th centuries .
Its use largely ended in the late 19th century , when it was replaced by the safer and more stable chrome green .
Viridian , also called chrome green , is a pigment made with chromium oxide dihydrate , was patented in 1859 .
It became popular with painters , since , unlike other synthetic greens , it was stable and not toxic .
Vincent van Gogh used it , along with Prussian blue , to create a dark blue sky with a greenish tint in his painting Cafe terrace at night .
There is no natural source for green food colorings which has been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration .
Smoke can be turned green by a mixture : solvent yellow 33 , solvent green 3 , lactose , magnesium carbonate plus sodium carbonate added to potassium chlorate .
Their purple color arose because they extracted energy in the green portion of the spectrum using bacteriorhodopsin .
The new organisms that then later came to dominate the extraction of light were selected to exploit those portions of the spectrum not used by the halobacteria .
Green animals include , especially , amphibians , reptiles , and some fish , birds and insects .
Perception of color can also be affected by the surrounding environment .
For example , broadleaf forests typically have a yellow-green light about them as the trees filter the light .
Invertebrates such as insects or mollusks often display green colors because of porphyrin pigments , sometimes caused by diet .
This can causes their feces to look green as well .
Other chemicals which generally contribute to greenness among organisms are flavins -LRB- lychochromes -RRB- and hemanovadin .
Humans have imitated this by wearing green clothing as a camouflage in military and other fields .
They can also be found in Southern Europe , West Asia , Central Asia , and South Asia .
In Iceland , 89 % of women and 87 % of men have either blue or green eye color .
Among European Americans , green eyes are most common among those of recent Celtic and Germanic ancestry , about 16 % .
They also used less expensive green earth pigment , or mixed yellow ochre and blue azurite .
For the ancient Egyptians , green had very positive associations .
Palettes of green facial makeup , made with malachite , were found in tombs .
Tombs also often contained small green amulets in the shape of scarab beetles made of malachite , which would protect and give vigor to the deceased .
It also symbolized the sea , which was called the `` Very Green . ''
In Ancient Greece , green and blue were sometimes considered the same color , and the same word sometimes described the color of the sea and the color of trees .
Unfortunately for those who wanted or were required to wear green , there were no good vegetal green dyes which resisted washing and sunlight .
Painters such as John Constable and Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot depicted the lush green of rural landscapes and forests .
Green was contrasted to the smoky grays and blacks of the Industrial Revolution .
Describing his painting , The Night Cafe , to his brother Theo in 1888 , Van Gogh wrote : `` I sought to express with red and green the terrible human passions .
The hall is blood red and pale yellow , with a green billiard table in the center , and four lamps of lemon yellow , with rays of orange and green .
Everywhere it is a battle and antithesis of the most different reds and greens . ''
Green can communicate safety to proceed , as in traffic lights .
It exploded the following year , injuring the policeman who operated it .
Today green lights universally signal that a system is turned on and working as it should .
In many video games , green signifies both health and completed objectives , opposite red .
While it is the color most associated by Europeans and Americans with good health , it is also the color most often associated with toxicity and poison .
The flag of Hamas , as well as the flag of Iran , is green , symbolizing their Islamist ideology .
It was the only national flag in the world with just one color and no design , insignia , or other details .
Green was chosen for its association with nature , health , and growth .
In the 2009 federal elections , the party won 10.7 % of the votes and 68 out of 622 seats in the Bundestag .
This is shown on the national flag of Ireland .
There are cables with Type-A connectors on both ends , but they should be used carefully .
Therefore , in general , each of the different `` sizes '' requires four different connectors ; USB cables have the Type-A and Type-B plugs , and the corresponding receptacles are on the computer or electronic device .
Likewise , the springy part of the retention mechanism -LRB- parts that provide required gripping force -RRB- were also moved into plugs on the cable side .
Microsoft Windows 95 , OSR 2.1 provided OEM support for the devices .
The 12 Mbit/s data rate was intended for higher-speed devices such as disk drives , and the lower 1.5 Mbit/s rate for low data rate devices such as joysticks .
Apple Inc. 's iMac was the first mainstream product with USB and the iMac 's success popularized USB itself .
Following Apple 's design decision to remove all legacy ports from the iMac , many PC manufacturers began building legacy-free PCs , which led to the broader PC market using USB as a standard .
The payload throughput is 4 Gbit/s -LSB- citation needed -RSB- -LRB- due to the overhead incurred by 8b/10b encoding -RRB- , and the specification considers it reasonable to achieve around 3.2 Gbit/s -LRB- 0.4 GB/s or 400 MB/s -RRB- , which should increase with future hardware advances .
The Battery Charging Specification requires that the physical ports themselves be capable of handling 5 A of current -LSB- citation needed -RSB- but limits the maximum current drawn to 1.5 A.
The new mode 's logo features a `` Superspeed + '' caption -LRB- stylized as SUPERSPEED + -RRB- .
The first USB 3.1 implementation demonstrated transfer speeds of 7.2 Gbit/s .
Type-A and Type-B adaptors and cables are required for older devices to plug into Type-C hosts .
Adapters and cables with a Type-C receptacle are not allowed .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
USB Type-C devices also support power currents of 1.5 A and 3.0 A over the 5 V power bus in addition to baseline 900 mA ; devices can either negotiate increased USB current through the configuration line , or they can support the full Power Delivery specification using both BMC-coded configuration line and legacy BFSK-coded VBUS line .
Additional USB hubs may be included in the tiers , allowing branching into a tree structure with up to five tier levels .
This kind of device is called a composite device .
An alternative to this is compound device , in which the host assigns each logical device a distinctive address and all logical devices connect to a built-in hub that connects to the physical USB cable .
An endpoint is defined and numbered by the device during initialization -LRB- the period after physical connection called `` enumeration '' -RRB- and so is relatively permanent , whereas a pipe may be opened and closed .
An endpoint of a pipe is addressable with a tuple -LRB- device_address , endpoint_number -RRB- as specified in a TOKEN packet that the host sends when it wants to start a data transfer session .
If the destination endpoint is a uni-directional endpoint whose manufacturer 's designated direction does not match the TOKEN packet -LRB- e.g. the manufacturer 's designated direction is IN while the TOKEN packet is an OUT packet -RRB- , the TOKEN packet is ignored .
Otherwise , it is accepted and the data transaction can start .
If the device is supported by the host , the device drivers needed for communicating with the device are loaded and the device is set to a configured state .
The USB hub then uses either one transaction translator per hub to create a full/low-speed bus routed to all full and low speed devices on the hub , or uses one transaction translator per port to create an isolated full/low-speed bus per port on the hub .
This was at first intended for traditional magnetic and optical drives and has been extended to support flash drives .
It has also been extended to support a wide variety of novel devices as many systems can be controlled with the familiar metaphor of file manipulation within directories .
Buses such as Parallel ATA -LRB- PATA or IDE -RRB- , Serial ATA -LRB- SATA -RRB- , or SCSI fulfill that role in PC class computers .
Functionally , the drive appears to the user much like an internal drive .
It also has optional DRM features .
The main drawback is that MTP is not as well supported outside of Windows operating systems .
The specification also shows that the `` recommended '' `` Manufacturer 's logo '' -LRB- `` engraved '' on the diagram but not specified in the text -RRB- is on the opposite side of the USB icon .
However , the specification does not consider the height of the device compared to the eye level height of the user , so the side of the cable that is `` visible '' when mated to a computer on a desk can depend on whether the user is standing or kneeling .
The connector construction always ensures that the external sheath on the plug makes contact with its counterpart in the receptacle before any of the four connectors within make electrical contact .
In addition , because of the required sizes of the power and common connections , they are made after the system ground but before the data connections .
However the idea that these changes did in fact make the connector more durable in real world use has been widely disputed , with many contending that they are in fact , much less durable .
This was done to prevent a device from blocking adjacent ports due to the size of the cable strain relief mechanism -LRB- usually molding integral with the cable outer insulation -RRB- at the connector .
Type-A plugs mate only with Type-A receptacles , and the same applies to their Type-B counterparts ; they are deliberately physically incompatible .
However , an extension to the USB standard specification called USB On-The-Go -LRB- OTG -RRB- allows a single port to act as either a host or a device , which is selectable by the end of the cable that plugs into the receptacle on the OTG-enabled unit .
Even after the cable is hooked up and the units are communicating , the two units may `` swap '' ends under program control .
This capability is meant for units such as PDAs in which the USB link might connect to a PC 's host port as a device in one instance , yet connect as a host itself to a keyboard and mouse device in another instance .
These include the now-deprecated -LRB- i.e. de-certified but standardized -RRB- mini-A and mini-AB connectors ; mini-B connectors are still supported , but are not OTG-compliant -LRB- On The Go , used in mobile devices -RRB- .
The Universal Serial Bus Micro-USB Cables and Connectors Specification details the mechanical characteristics of micro-A plugs , micro-AB receptacles -LRB- which accept both micro-A and micro-B plugs -RRB- , and micro-B plugs and receptacles , along with a standard-A receptacle to micro-A plug adapter .
The micro-AB receptacle is capable of accepting both micro-A and micro-B plugs , attached to any of the legal cables and adapters as defined in revision 1.01 of the micro-USB specification .
Prior to the development of micro-USB , USB On-The-Go devices were required to use mini-AB receptacles to perform the equivalent job .
If an application on the B-device requires the role of host , then the Host Negotiation Protocol -LRB- HNP -RRB- is used to temporarily transfer the host role to the B-device .
Non-Return-to-Zero Inverted -LRB- NRZI -RRB- encoding scheme is used for transferring data , with a sync field to synchronize the host and receiver clocks .
D + and D − signals are transmitted on a twisted pair , providing half-duplex data transfers for USB 2.0 .
Mini and micro connectors have their GND connections moved from pin # 4 to pin # 5 , while their pin # 4 serves as an ID pin for the On-The-Go host/client identification .
The primary reason for this limit is the maximum allowed round-trip delay of about 1.5 μs .
If USB host commands are unanswered by the USB device within the allowed time , the host considers the command lost .
There are two types of devices : low-power and high-power .
A low-power device -LRB- such as a USB HID -RRB- draws at most one-unit load , with minimum operating voltage of 4.4 V in USB 2.0 , and 4 V in USB 3.0 .
A high-power device draws , at most , the maximum number of unit loads the standard permits .
Every device functions initially as low-power -LRB- including high-power functions during their low-power enumeration phases -RRB- , but may request high-power , and get it if available on the providing bus .
Such devices may come with an external power source or a Y-shaped cable that has two USB connectors -LRB- one for power and data , the other for power only -RRB- to plug into a computer .
With such a cable , a device can draw power from two USB ports simultaneously .
Contrary to the standard downstream port , for which current draw by a connected portable device can exceed 100 mA only after digital negotiation with the host or hub , a charging port can supply currents between 500 mA and 1.5 A without the digital negotiation .
The charger port may shut down if the load is too high .
-LRB- see ref pg .
2 , Section 1.4.5 , & Table 5-3 `` Resistances '' -- pg .
29 -RRB- .
On laptops , charging devices from the USB port when it is not being powered from AC drains the laptop battery faster ; most laptops have a facility to stop charging if their own battery charge level gets too low .
On some laptops such as Dell and Apple MacBook models , it is possible to plug a device in , close the laptop -LRB- putting it into sleep mode -RRB- and have the device continue to charge .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The EU 's common EPS specification -LRB- EN 62684:2010 -RRB- references the USB Battery Charging standard and is similar to the GSMA/OMTP and Chinese charging solutions .
This is common for external hard and optical disc drives , and generally for devices with motors or lamps .
Some USB ports and external hubs can , in practice , supply more power to USB devices than required by the specification but a standard-compliant device may not depend on this .
Otherwise , connecting a device could cause problems with the host 's internal power .
These are usually called USB decorations .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Examples include USB-powered keyboard lights , fans , mug coolers and heaters , battery chargers , miniature vacuum cleaners , and even miniature lava lamps .
In most cases , these items contain no digital circuitry , and thus are not standard compliant USB devices .
This may cause problems with some computers , such as drawing too much current and damaging circuitry .
Seven consecutive received 1 bits is always an error .
USB 3.0 has introduced additional data transmission encodings .
and 1 bit time of J state .
After this , the transmitter ceases to drive the D + / D − lines and the aforementioned pull up resistors hold it in the J -LRB- idle -RRB- state .
This bit should be ignored by receiver .
This indicates to the host that the device is high bandwidth .
If the host/hub is also HS capable , it chirps -LRB- returns alternating J and K states on D − and D + lines -RRB- letting the device know that the hub operates at high bandwidth .
The device has to receive at least three sets of KJ chirps before it changes to high bandwidth terminations and begins high bandwidth signaling .
Because USB 3.0 uses wiring separate and additional to that used by USB 2.0 and USB 1.x , such bandwidth negotiation is not required .
Mask Tests , also known as Eye Diagram Tests , are used to determine the quality of a signal in the time domain .
They are defined in the referenced document as part of the electrical test description for the high-speed -LRB- HS -RRB- mode at 480 Mbit/s .
The PID is actually 4 bits ; the byte consists of the 4-bit PID followed by its bitwise complement .
This redundancy helps detect errors .
-LRB- Note also that a PID byte contains at most four consecutive 1 bits , and thus never needs bit-stuffing , even when combined with the final 1 bit in the sync byte .
However , trailing 1 bits in the PID may require bit-stuffing within the first few bits of the payload . -RRB-
Three basic types are ACK , indicating that data was successfully received , NAK , indicating that the data can not be received and should be retried , and STALL , indicating that the device has an error condition and can not transfer data until some corrective action -LRB- such as device initialization -RRB- occurs .
The response may be a NAK or STALL response , or a DATAx frame .
In the latter case , the host issues an ACK handshake if appropriate .
The device responds with ACK , NAK , NYET , or STALL , as appropriate .
The two packet types provide the 1-bit sequence number required by Stop-and-wait ARQ .
If a USB host does not receive a response -LRB- such as an ACK -RRB- for data it has transmitted , it does not know if the data was received or not ; the data might have been lost in transit , or it might have been received but the handshake response was lost .
This marks the beginning of a low-bandwidth packet , and is used by hubs that normally do not send full-bandwidth packets to low-bandwidth devices .
It is followed by a brief pause , during which hubs enable their low-bandwidth outputs , already idling in the J state .
Then a low-bandwidth packet follows , beginning with a sync sequence and PID byte , and ending with a brief period of SE0 .
The newer FireWire 800 standard is twice as fast as FireWire 400 and faster than USB 2.0 Hi-Bandwidth both theoretically and practically .
However , Firewire 's speed advantages rely on low-level techniques such as direct memory access -LRB- DMA -RRB- , which in turn have created opportunities for security exploits such as the DMA attack .
It operates at 48 V DC and can supply more power -LRB- up to 12.95 W , PoE + 25.5 W -RRB- over a cable up to 100 meters compared to USB 2.0 , which provides 2.5 W with a maximum cable length of 5 meters .
This has made PoE popular for VoIP telephones , security cameras , wireless access points and other networked devices within buildings .
This gives Ethernet a significant safety advantage over USB with peripherals such as cable and DSL modems connected to external wiring that can assume hazardous voltages under certain fault conditions .
This is an increasing disadvantage compared to USB .
eSATAp -LRB- power over eSATA ; aka ESATA/USB -RRB- is a connector introduced in 2009 that supplies power to attached devices using a new , backward compatible , connector .
The HSIC physical layer uses about 50 % less power and 75 % less board area compared to traditional USB 2.0 .
HSIC uses two signals at 1.2 V and has a throughput of 480 Mbit/s .
Maximum PCB trace length for HSIC is 10 cm .
It does not have low enough latency to support RAM memory sharing between two chips .
The existence of the early state of Shu was poorly recorded in the main historical records of China .
The existence of a highly developed civilization with an independent bronze industry in Sichuan eventually came to light with an archaeological discovery in 1986 at a small village named Sanxingdui in Guanghan , Sichuan .
Excavations by archaeologists in the area yielded few significant finds until 1986 when two major sacrificial pits were found with spectacular bronze items as well as artefacts in jade , gold , earthenware , and stone .
This and other discoveries in Sichuan contest the conventional historiography that the local culture and technology of Sichuan were undeveloped in comparison to the technologically and culturally `` advanced '' Yellow River valley of north-central China .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Any written records and civil achievements of earlier kingdoms were destroyed .
The increased agricultural output and taxes made the area a source of provisions and men for Qin 's unification of China .
In response to the resistance from local elites , he massacred a large native population .
The Kuomintang general Wang Sheng wanted to stay behind with his troops to continue anticommunist guerilla war in Sichuan , but was recalled to Taiwan .
Many of his soldiers made their way there as well , via Burma .
Due to great differences in terrain , the climate of the province is highly variable .
In general it has strong monsoonal influences , with rainfall heavily concentrated in the summer .
Consequently , it has China 's lowest sunshine totals .
The western region has mountainous areas producing a cooler but sunnier climate .
Having cool to very cold winters and mild summers , temperatures generally decrease with greater elevation .
The region is geologically active with landslides and earthquakes .
The southern part of the province , including Panzhihua and Xichang , has a sunny climate with short , very mild winters and very warm to hot summers .
It is one of the major agricultural production bases of China .
Commercial crops include citrus fruits , sugar cane , sweet potatoes , peaches and grapes .
Sichuan is rich in mineral resources .
It has more than 132 kinds of proven underground mineral resources including vanadium , titanium , and lithium being the largest in China .
Sichuan is one of the major industrial centers of China .
These achievements were accomplished because of significant changes in China 's foreign trade policy , acceleration of the yuan 's appreciation , increase of commercial incentives and increase in production costs .
The 18 cities and counties witnessed a steady rate of increase .
Foreign trade in Zigong , Panzhihua , Guang ` an , Bazhong and Ganzi remained constant .
The government also reduced the four-tier minimum wage structure to three .
The top tier mandates a minimum of 650 yuan per month , or 7.1 yuan per hour .
The zone now has a developed area of 10.25 km2 -LRB- 3.96 sq mi -RRB- and has a planned area of 26 km2 -LRB- 10 sq mi -RRB- .
Industries encouraged in the zone include mechanical , electronic , new building materials , medicine and food processing .
In 2000 , it was open to APEC and has been recognized as a national advanced hi-tech development zone in successive assessment activities held by China 's Ministry of Science and Technology .
Located on both sides of the `` Chengdu-Dujiangyan-Jiuzhaigou '' golden tourism channel , the West Park aims at building a comprehensive industrial park targeting at industrial clustering with complete supportive functions .
After completion of the Chongqing section of the road , the 36.64 km -LRB- 22.77 mi -RRB- expressway connected Cheng-Nan Expressway and formed the shortest expressway from Chengdu to Chongqing .
Thus , significant minorities of Tibetan , Yi , Qiang and Nakhi people reside in the western portion that are impacted by inclement weather and natural disasters , environmentally fragile , and impoverished .
The Eastern Lipo , included with either the Yi or the Lisu people , as well as the A-Hmao , also are among the ethnic groups of the provinces .
It is currently 10th .
The Qiang speak Qiangic languages and often Tibetic languages as well .
In the minority inhabited regions of Sichuan , there is bi-lingual signage and public school instruction in non-Mandarin minority languages .
Unicode is a computing industry standard for the consistent encoding , representation , and handling of text expressed in most of the world 's writing systems .
The standard consists of a set of code charts for visual reference , an encoding method and set of standard character encodings , a set of reference data files , and a number of related items , such as character properties , rules for normalization , decomposition , collation , rendering , and bidirectional display order -LRB- for the correct display of text containing both right-to-left scripts , such as Arabic and Hebrew , and left-to-right scripts -RRB- .
Unicode can be implemented by different character encodings .
Many essentially identical characters were encoded multiple times at different code points to preserve distinctions used by legacy encodings and therefore , allow conversion from those encodings to Unicode -LRB- and back -RRB- without losing any information .
For other examples , see Duplicate characters in Unicode .
Often , other properties must be used to specify the characteristics and behaviour of a code point .
The possible General Categories are :
High and low surrogate code points are not valid by themselves .
The value of these code points -LRB- i.e. , excluding surrogates -RRB- is sometimes referred to as the character 's scalar value .
The set of graphic and format characters defined by Unicode does not correspond directly to the repertoire of abstract characters that is representable under Unicode .
Unicode maintains a list of uniquely named character sequences for abstract characters that are not directly encoded in Unicode .
All graphic , format , and private use characters have a unique and immutable name by which they may be identified .
For example , U+A 015 ꀕ YI SYLLABLE WU has the formal alias yi syllable iteration mark , and U+FE 18 PRESENTATION FORM FOR VERTICAL RIGHT WHITE LENTICULAR BRAKCET -LRB- sic -RRB- has the formal alias presentation form for vertical right white lenticular bracket .
The Unicode Standard enumerates a multitude of character properties , including those needed for supporting bidirectional text .
For some scripts on the Roadmap , such as Jurchen , Nü Shu , and Tangut , encoding proposals have been made and they are working their way through the approval process .
An encoding maps -LRB- possibly a subset of -RRB- the range of Unicode code points to sequences of values in some fixed-size range , termed code values .
UCS-2 is an obsolete subset of UTF-16 ; UCS-4 and UTF-32 are functionally equivalent .
The same character converted to UTF-8 becomes the byte sequence EF BB BF .
The Unicode Standard allows that the BOM `` can serve as signature for UTF-8 encoded text where the character set is unmarked '' .
Some software developers have adopted it for other encodings , including UTF-8 , in an attempt to distinguish UTF-8 from local 8-bit code pages .
In UTF-32 and UCS-4 , one 32-bit code value serves as a fairly direct representation of any character 's code point -LRB- although the endianness , which varies across different platforms , affects how the code value manifests as an octet sequence -RRB- .
In the other encodings , each code point may be represented by a variable number of code values .
Unicode includes a mechanism for modifying character shape that greatly extends the supported glyph repertoire .
This covers the use of combining diacritical marks .
They are inserted after the main character .
Multiple combining diacritics may be stacked over the same character .
These make conversion to and from legacy encodings simpler , and allow applications to use Unicode as an internal text format without having to implement combining characters .
Thus , in many cases , users have multiple ways of encoding the same character .
To deal with this , Unicode provides the mechanism of canonical equivalence .
The CJK ideographs currently have codes only for their precomposed form .
A similar idea is used by some input methods , such as Cangjie and Wubi .
Many scripts , including Arabic and Devanagari , have special orthographic rules that require certain combinations of letterforms to be combined into special ligature forms .
A mark handled this way will appear over whatever character precedes it , but will not adjust its position relative to the width or height of the base glyph ; it may be visually awkward and it may overlap some glyphs .
Generally this approach is only effective in monospaced fonts , but may be used as a fallback rendering method when more complex methods fail .
Some systems have made attempts to provide more information about such characters .
The best known such system is Windows NT -LRB- and its descendants , Windows 2000 , Windows XP , Windows Vista and Windows 7 -RRB- , which uses UTF-16 as the sole internal character encoding .
The Java and .
NET bytecode environments , Mac OS X , and KDE also use it for internal representation .
Several reasons justify this approach : applications and documents rarely need to render characters from more than one or two writing systems ; fonts tend to demand resources in computing environments ; and operating systems and applications show increasing intelligence in regard to obtaining glyph information from separate font files as needed , i.e. , font substitution .
Furthermore , designing a consistent set of rendering instructions for tens of thousands of glyphs constitutes a monumental task ; such a venture passes the point of diminishing returns for most typefaces .
This was an attempt to provide a Unicode solution to encoding paragraphs and lines semantically , potentially replacing all of the various platform solutions .
In doing so , Unicode does provide a way around the historical platform dependent solutions .
Nonetheless , few if any Unicode solutions have adopted these Unicode line and paragraph separators as the sole canonical line ending characters .
However , a common approach to solving this issue is through newline normalization .
In other words , the text system can correctly treat the character as a newline , regardless of the input 's actual encoding .
This is often due to the fact that Unicode encodes characters rather than glyphs -LRB- the visual representations of the basic character that often vary from one language to another -RRB- .
An example of one is TRON -LRB- although it is not widely adopted in Japan , there are some users who need to handle historical Japanese text and favor it -RRB- .
That has meant that inconsistent legacy architectures , such as combining diacritics and precomposed characters , both exist in Unicode , giving more than one method of representing some text .
Some local scholars argued in favor of assignments of Unicode code points to these ligatures , going against the practice for other writing systems , though Unicode contains some Arabic and other ligatures for backward compatibility purposes only .
Encoding of any new ligatures in Unicode will not happen , in part because the set of ligatures is font-dependent , and Unicode is an encoding independent of font variations .
The same kind of issue arose for Tibetan script -LSB- citation needed -RSB- -LRB- the Chinese National Standard organization failed to achieve a similar change -RRB- .
The vowels เ , แ , โ , ใ , ไ that are written to the left of the preceding consonant are in visual order instead of phonetic order , unlike the Unicode representations of other Indic scripts .
This ordering problem complicates the Unicode collation process slightly , requiring table lookups to reorder Thai characters for collation .
Even if Unicode had adopted encoding according to spoken order , it would still be problematic to collate words in dictionary order .
E.g. , the word แสดง -LSB- sa dɛːŋ -RSB- `` perform '' starts with a consonant cluster '' สด '' -LRB- with an inherent vowel for the consonant '' ส '' -RRB- , the vowel แ - , in spoken order would come after the ด , but in a dictionary , the word is collated as it is written , with the vowel following the ส .
Due to industrial restructuring and loss of jobs in the auto industry , Detroit lost considerable population from the late 20th century to present .
In 2010 , the city had a population of 713,777 , more than a 60 percent drop from a peak population of over 1.8 million at the 1950 census .
Following the shift of population and jobs to its suburbs or other states or nations , the city has focused on becoming the metropolitan region 's employment and economic center .
More recently , the population of Downtown Detroit , Midtown Detroit , and a handful of other neighborhoods has increased .
Detroit 's city flag reflects its French colonial heritage .
-LRB- See Flag of Detroit -RRB- .
From 1805 to 1847 , Detroit was the capital of Michigan -LRB- first the territory , then the state -RRB- .
Detroit was finally recaptured by the United States later that year .
When the First Volunteer Infantry Regiment arrived to fortify Washington , DC , President Abraham Lincoln is quoted as saying `` Thank God for Michigan ! ''
During the late 19th century , several Gilded Age mansions reflecting the wealth of industry and shipping magnates were built east and west of the current downtown , along the major avenues of the Woodward plan .
The city had grown steadily from the 1830s with the rise of shipping , shipbuilding , and manufacturing industries .
With the rapid growth of industrial workers in the auto factories , labor unions such as the American Federation of Labor and the United Auto Workers fought to organize workers to gain them better working conditions and wages .
Detroit , like many places in the United States , developed racial conflict and discrimination in the 20th century following rapid demographic changes as hundreds of thousands of new workers were attracted to the industrial city ; in a short period it became the 4th-largest city in the nation .
Immigration brought southern and eastern Europeans of Catholic and Jewish faith ; these new groups competed with native-born whites for jobs and housing in the booming city .
Detroit was one of the major Midwest cities that was a site for the dramatic urban revival of the Ku Klux Klan beginning in 1915 .
It was defeated after numerous prosecutions following the kidnapping and murder in 1936 of Charles Poole , a Catholic Works Progress Administration organizer .
Some European immigrants and their descendants feared black competition for jobs and housing .
It was the last line of what had once been a 534-mile network of electric streetcars .
While the African-American Civil Rights Movement gained significant federal civil rights laws in 1964 and 1965 , longstanding inequities resulted in confrontations between the police and inner city black youth wanting change .
Thousands of small businesses closed permanently or relocated to safer neighborhoods .
The affected district lay in ruins for decades .
It was the most costly riot in the United States .
The NAACP argued that although schools were not legally segregated , the city of Detroit and its surrounding counties had enacted policies to maintain racial segregation in public schools .
The NAACP also suggested a direct relationship between unfair housing practices and educational segregation , which followed segregated neighborhoods .
The District Court held all levels of government accountable for the segregation in its ruling .
The Sixth Circuit Court affirmed some of the decision , holding that it was the state 's responsibility to integrate across the segregated metropolitan area .
In a narrow decision , the Court found that schools were a subject of local control and that suburbs could not be forced to solve problems in the city 's school district .
`` Had that gone the other way , it would have opened the door to fixing nearly all of Detroit 's current problems . ''
Some people were leaving at that time but , really , it was after Milliken that you saw mass flight to the suburbs .
If the case had gone the other way , it is likely that Detroit would not have experienced the steep decline in its tax base that has occurred since then . ''
After taking office , Young emphasized increasing racial diversity in the police department .
Young also worked to improve Detroit 's transportation system , but tension between Young and his suburban counterparts over regional matters was problematic throughout his mayoral term .
Buyers chose smaller , more fuel-efficient cars made by foreign makers as the price of gas rose .
Efforts to revive the city were stymied by the struggles of the auto industry , as their sales and market share declined .
As mayor , Young sought to revive the city by seeking to increase investment in the city 's declining downtown .
This group of skyscrapers was an attempt to keep businesses in downtown .
Young also gave city support to other large developments to attract middle and upper-class residents back to the city .
Major stores and hotels closed and many large office buildings went vacant .
Long a major population center and site of worldwide automobile manufacturing , Detroit has suffered a long economic decline produced by numerous factors .
The city has declined in population in each census since 1950 .
The park has been cited as one of the best public spaces in the United States .
Construction activity , particularly rehabilitation of historic downtown buildings , has increased markedly .
-LSB- when ? -RSB-
Among the most notable redevelopment projects are the Book Cadillac Hotel and the Fort Shelby Hotel ; the David Broderick Tower ; and the David Whitney Building .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Some parts of Detroit are so sparsely populated that the city has difficulty providing municipal services .
The city has considered various solutions , such as demolishing abandoned homes and buildings ; removing street lighting from large portions of the city ; and encouraging the small population in certain areas to move to more populated locations .
The city slopes gently from the northwest to southeast on a till plain composed largely of glacial and lake clay .
The monthly daily mean temperature ranges from 25.6 °F -LRB- − 3.6 °C -RRB- in January to 73.6 °F -LRB- 23.1 °C -RRB- in July .
Official temperature extremes range from 105 °F -LRB- 41 °C -RRB- on July 24 , 1934 down to − 21 °F -LRB- − 29 °C -RRB- on January 21 , 1984 ; the record low maximum is − 4 °F -LRB- − 20 °C -RRB- on January 19 , 1994 , while , conversely the record high minimum is 80 °F -LRB- 27 °C -RRB- on August 1 , 2006 , the most recent of five occurrences .
A decade or two may pass between readings of 100 °F -LRB- 38 °C -RRB- or higher , which last occurred July 17 , 2012 .
The average window for freezing temperatures is October 20 thru April 22 , allowing a growing season of 180 days .
Thunderstorms are frequent in the Detroit area .
Seen in panorama , Detroit 's waterfront shows a variety of architectural styles .
Together with the Renaissance Center , they form a distinctive and recognizable skyline .
The Detroit International Riverfront includes a partially completed three-and-one-half mile riverfront promenade with a combination of parks , residential buildings , and commercial areas .
Civic planners envision that the pedestrian parks will stimulate residential redevelopment of riverfront properties condemned under eminent domain .
Immigrants have contributed to the city 's neighborhood revitalization , especially in southwest Detroit .
The city has numerous neighborhoods consisting of vacant properties resulting in low inhabited density in those areas , stretching city services and infrastructure .
Public funding and private investment have also been made with promises to rehabilitate neighborhoods .
The city 's working plans for neighborhood revitalizations include 7-Mile/Livernois , Brightmoor , East English Village , Grand River/Greenfield , North End , and Osborn .
Private organizations have pledged substantial funding to the efforts .
The loss of industrial and working-class jobs in the city has resulted in high rates of poverty and associated problems .
As of 2010 -LSB- update -RSB- the mean income of Detroit is below the overall U.S. average by several thousand dollars .
Oakland County in Metro Detroit , once rated amongst the wealthiest US counties per household , is no longer shown in the top 25 listing of Forbes magazine .
Detroit remains one of the most racially segregated cities in the United States .
White residents attacked black homes : breaking windows , starting fires , and exploding bombs .
The next largest population groups were Whites , at 10 percent , and Hispanics , at 6 percent .
According to the 2010 Census , segregation in Detroit has decreased in absolute and in relative terms .
In the first decade of the 21st century , about two-thirds of the total black population in metropolitan area resided within the city limits of Detroit .
The number of integrated neighborhoods has increased from 100 in 2000 to 204 in 2010 .
A 2011 op-ed in The New York Times attributed the decreased segregation rating to the overall exodus from the city , cautioning that these areas may soon become more segregated .
This pattern already happened in the 1970s , when apparent integration was actually a precursor to white flight and resegregation .
Over a 60-year period , white flight occurred in the city .
Detroit has a Mexican-American population .
In the early 20th century thousands of Mexicans came to Detroit to work in agricultural , automotive , and steel jobs .
The population significantly increased in the 1990s due to immigration from Jalisco .
The number of Hispanics was a 70 % increase from the number in 1990 .
As of 2002 there are four areas in Detroit with significant Asian and Asian American populations .
Northeast Detroit has population of Hmong with a smaller group of Lao people .
Many of those residents own small businesses or work in blue collar jobs , and the population in that area is mostly Muslim .
Few of them have permanent residency after schooling ends .
They are mostly Chinese and Indian but the population also includes Filipinos , Koreans , and Pakistanis .
In Southwest Detroit and western Detroit there are smaller , scattered Asian communities including an area in the westside adjacent to Dearborn and Redford Township that has a mostly Indian Asian population , and a community of Vietnamese and Laotians in Southwest Detroit .
A number of the city 's downtown employers are relatively new , as there has been a marked trend of companies moving from satellite suburbs around Metropolitan Detroit into the downtown core .
PricewaterhouseCoopers Plaza offices are adjacent to Ford Field , and Ernst & Young completed its office building at One Kennedy Square in 2006 .
Two years earlier , downtown reported $ 1.3 billion in restorations and new developments which increased the number of construction jobs in the city .
Despite the city 's recent financial issues , many developers remain unfazed by Detroit 's problems .
Numerous developments have been recently completely or are in various stages of construction .
It is the largest commitment made to any one city by the nation 's biggest bank .
Those investments are separate from Chase 's five-year , $ 100-million commitment .
A desire to be closer to the urban scene has also attracted some young professionals to reside in inner ring suburbs such as Grosse Pointe and Royal Oak , Detroit .
Known as the world 's automotive center , `` Detroit '' is a metonym for that industry .
Hooker , among other important blues musicians migrated from his home in Mississippi bringing the Delta blues to northern cities like Detroit .
Hooker recorded for Fortune Records , the biggest pre-Motown blues/soul label .
During the 1950s , the city became a center for jazz , with stars performing in the Black Bottom neighborhood .
According to Smokey Robinson , Strong was a primary influence on his voice as a teenager .
The city is also home to rappers Big Sean and Danny Brown .
Featuring science fiction imagery and robotic themes , its futuristic style was greatly influenced by the geography of Detroit 's urban decline and its industrial past .
Prominent Detroit techno artists include Juan Atkins , Derrick May , and Kevin Saunderson .
In the early years -LRB- 2000-2002 -RRB- , this was a landmark event , boasting over a million estimated attendees annually , coming from all over the world to celebrate Techno music in the city of its birth .
Many of the area 's prominent museums are located in the historic cultural center neighborhood around Wayne State University and the College for Creative Studies .
The Detroit Historical Society provides information about tours of area churches , skyscrapers , and mansions .
Inside Detroit , meanwhile , hosts tours , educational programming , and a downtown welcome center .
The Midtown and the New Center area are centered on Wayne State University and Henry Ford Hospital .
As the world 's traditional automotive center , the city hosts the North American International Auto Show .
The image is often used as a symbol of Detroit and the statue itself is occasionally dressed in sports jerseys to celebrate when a Detroit team is doing well .
A 1996 marketing campaign promoted the nickname `` Hockeytown '' .
The University of Detroit Mercy has a NCAA Division I program , and Wayne State University has both NCAA Division I and II programs .
City ordinances and substantially large contracts must be approved by the council .
The Detroit City Code is the codification of Detroit 's local ordinances .
Detroit 's courts are state-administered and elections are nonpartisan .
The city provides law enforcement through the Detroit Police Department and emergency services through the Detroit Fire Department .
Detroit has struggled with high crime for decades .
Although the murder rate increased by 6 % during the first half of 2015 , it was surpassed by St Louis and Baltimore which saw much greater spikes in violence .
Although the rate of violent crime dropped 11 percent in 2008 , violent crime in Detroit has not declined as much as the national average from 2007 to 2011 .
The violent crime rate is one of the highest in the United States .
Despite development efforts , his combative style during his five terms in office was not well received by many suburban residents .
By 2008 , three major casino resort hotels established operations in the city .
It has been making ends meet on a month-to-month basis with the help of bond money held in a state escrow account and has instituted mandatory unpaid days off for many city workers .
Those troubles , along with underfunded city services , such as police and fire departments , and ineffective turnaround plans from Bing and the City Council led the state of Michigan to appoint an emergency manager for Detroit on March 14 , 2013 .
On June 14 , 2013 Detroit defaulted on $ 2.5 billion of debt by withholding $ 39.7 million in interest payments , while Emergency Manager Kevyn Orr met with bondholders and other creditors in an attempt to restructure the city 's $ 18.5 billion debt and avoid bankruptcy .
The University of Detroit Mercy offers more than a hundred academic degrees and programs of study including business , dentistry , law , engineering , architecture , nursing and allied health professions .
Sacred Heart Major Seminary offers a variety of academic programs for both clerical and lay students .
Other institutions in the city include the College for Creative Studies , Lewis College of Business , Marygrove College and Wayne County Community College .
In 1959 , University of Michigan -- Dearborn was established in neighboring Dearborn .
Detroit is served by various private schools , as well as parochial Roman Catholic schools operated by the Archdiocese of Detroit .
The Archdiocese of Detroit lists a number of primary and secondary schools in the metro area as Catholic education has emigrated to the suburbs .
Media philanthropy includes the Detroit Free Press high school journalism program and the Old Newsboys ' Goodfellow Fund of Detroit .
Covering politics , entertainment , sports and community events .
The DMC , a regional Level I trauma center , consists of Detroit Receiving Hospital and University Health Center , Children 's Hospital of Michigan , Harper University Hospital , Hutzel Women 's Hospital , Kresge Eye Institute , Rehabilitation Institute of Michigan , Sinai-Grace Hospital , and the Karmanos Cancer Institute .
It is the largest private employer in the City of Detroit .
The center is staffed by physicians from the Wayne State University School of Medicine , the largest single-campus medical school in the United States , and the United States ' fourth largest medical school overall .
Vanguard has agreed to assume all debts and pension obligations .
`` This allows Canada and Michigan to move the project forward immediately to its next steps which include further design work and property acquisition on the U.S. side of the border , '' Raitt said in a statement issued after she spoke in the House of Commons .
Metro Detroit has an extensive toll-free network of freeways administered by the Michigan Department of Transportation .
Detroit is connected via Interstate 75 -LRB- I-75 -RRB- and I-96 to Kings Highway 401 and to major Southern Ontario cities such as London , Ontario and the Greater Toronto Area .
A portion was known as the Willow Run Expressway .
The I-96 freeway runs northwest -- southeast through Livingston , Oakland and Wayne counties and -LRB- as the Jeffries Freeway through Wayne County -RRB- has its eastern terminus in downtown Detroit .
Taken together , I-275 and I-696 form a semicircle around Detroit .
As a defining aspect of what it means to be human , culture is a central concept in anthropology , encompassing the range of phenomena that are transmitted through social learning in human societies .
The word is used in a general sense as the evolved ability to categorize and represent experiences with symbols and to act imaginatively and creatively .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- This capacity is often thought to be unique to humans , although some other species have demonstrated similar , though much less complex abilities for social learning .
It is also used to denote the complex networks of practices and accumulated knowledge and ideas that is transmitted through social interaction and exist in specific human groups , or cultures , using the plural form .
In the humanities , one sense of culture , as an attribute of the individual , has been the degree to which they have cultivated a particular level of sophistication , in the arts , sciences , education , or manners .
The level of cultural sophistication has also sometimes been seen to distinguish civilizations from less complex societies .
Such hierarchical perspectives on culture are also found in class-based distinctions between a high culture of the social elite and a low culture , popular culture or folk culture of the lower classes , distinguished by the stratified access to cultural capital .
In the wider social sciences , the theoretical perspective of cultural materialism holds that human symbolic culture arises from the material conditions of human life , as humans create the conditions for physical survival , and that the basis of culture is found in evolved biological dispositions .
In this sense , multiculturalism is a concept that values the peaceful coexistence and mutual respect between different cultures inhabiting the same territory .
Sometimes `` culture '' is also used to describe specific practices within a subgroup of a society , a subculture -LRB- e.g. `` bro culture '' -RRB- , or a counter culture .
His use , and that of many writers after him `` refers to all the ways in which human beings overcome their original barbarism , and through artifice , become fully human '' .
These social shifts may accompany ideological shifts and other types of cultural change .
Environmental conditions may also enter as factors .
Cultures are externally affected via contact between societies , which may also produce -- or inhibit -- social shifts and changes in cultural practices .
Additionally , cultural ideas may transfer from one society to another , through diffusion or acculturation .
In diffusion , the form of something -LRB- though not necessarily its meaning -RRB- moves from one culture to another .
`` Direct Borrowing '' on the other hand tends to refer to technological or tangible diffusion from one culture to another .
He argued that this immaturity comes not from a lack of understanding , but from a lack of courage to think independently .
Moreover , Herder proposed a collective form of bildung : `` For Herder , Bildung was the totality of experiences that provide a coherent identity , and sense of common destiny , to a people . ''
According to this school of thought , each ethnic group has a distinct worldview that is incommensurable with the worldviews of other groups .
Although more inclusive than earlier views , this approach to culture still allowed for distinctions between `` civilized '' and `` primitive '' or `` tribal '' cultures .
He proposed that a scientific comparison of all human societies would reveal that distinct worldviews consisted of the same basic elements .
This view paved the way for the modern understanding of culture .
civitas , city -RRB- .
Another facet of the Romantic movement was an interest in folklore , which led to identifying a `` culture '' among non-elites .
This distinction is often characterized as that between high culture , namely that of the ruling social group , and low culture .
According to this way of thinking , one could classify some countries and nations as more civilized than others and some people as more cultured than others .
This contrast led to Herbert Spencer 's theory of Social Darwinism and Lewis Henry Morgan 's theory of cultural evolution .
Just as some critics have argued that the distinction between high and low cultures is really an expression of the conflict between European elites and non-elites , some critics have argued that the distinction between civilized and uncivilized people is really an expression of the conflict between European colonial powers and their colonial subjects .
Other 19th-century critics , following Rousseau have accepted this differentiation between higher and lower culture , but have seen the refinement and sophistication of high culture as corrupting and unnatural developments that obscure and distort people 's essential nature .
The sociology of culture concerns culture -- usually understood as the ensemble of symbolic codes used by a society -- as manifested in society .
Culture can be any of two types , non-material culture or material culture .
While Material culture is the physical evidence of a culture in the objects and architecture they make , or have made .
Cultural sociology was then `` reinvented '' in the English-speaking world as a product of the `` cultural turn '' of the 1960s , which ushered in structuralist and postmodern approaches to social science .
This type of cultural sociology may loosely be regarded as an approach incorporating cultural analysis and critical theory .
`` Culture '' has since become an important concept across many branches of sociology , including resolutely scientific fields like social stratification and social network analysis .
As a result , there has been a recent influx of quantitative sociologists to the field .
Thus there is now a growing group of sociologists of culture who are , confusingly , not cultural sociologists .
These scholars reject the abstracted postmodern aspects of cultural sociology , and instead look for a theoretical backing in the more scientific vein of social psychology and cognitive science .
`` Cultural sociology '' is one of the largest sections of the American Sociological Association .
The British establishment of cultural studies means the latter is often taught as a loosely distinct discipline in the UK .
Cultural studies in this sense , then , can be viewed as a limited concentration scoped on the intricacies of consumerism , which belongs to a wider culture sometimes referred to as `` Western Civilization '' or as `` Globalism . ''
As the field developed it began to combine political economy , communication , sociology , social theory , literary theory , media theory , film/video studies , cultural anthropology , philosophy , museum studies and art history to study cultural phenomena or cultural texts .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Cultural studies has a concern with the meaning and practices of everyday life .
These practices comprise the ways people do particular things -LRB- such as watching television , or eating out -RRB- in a given culture .
This field studies the meanings and uses people attribute to various objects and practices .
Specifically , culture involves those meanings and practices held independently of reason .
Watching television in order to view a public perspective on a historical event should not be thought of as culture , unless referring to the medium of television itself , which may have been selected culturally ; however , schoolchildren watching television after school with their friends in order to `` fit in '' certainly qualifies , since there is no grounded reason for one 's participation in this practice .
to analyze local and global forms of resistance to Western hegemony .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Globalization in this context can be defined as western civilization in other ways , it undermines the cultural integrity of other culture and it is therefore repressive , exploitative and harmful to most people in different places .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Similarly , the discipline widens the concept of `` culture '' .
The last two , in fact , have become the main focus of cultural studies .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
This included overtly political , left-wing views , and criticisms of popular culture as `` capitalist '' mass culture ; it absorbed some of the ideas of the Frankfurt School critique of the `` culture industry '' -LRB- i.e. mass culture -RRB- .
This emerges in the writings of early British cultural-studies scholars and their influences : see the work of -LRB- for example -RRB- Raymond Williams , Stuart Hall , Paul Willis , and Paul Gilroy .
The American version of cultural studies initially concerned itself more with understanding the subjective and appropriative side of audience reactions to , and uses of , mass culture ; for example , American cultural-studies advocates wrote about the liberatory aspects of fandom .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The distinction between American and British strands , however , has faded .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Some researchers , especially in early British cultural studies , apply a Marxist model to the field .
This strain of thinking has some influence from the Frankfurt School , but especially from the structuralist Marxism of Louis Althusser and others .
The main focus of an orthodox Marxist approach concentrates on the production of meaning .
This model assumes a mass production of culture and identifies power as residing with those producing cultural artifacts .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Other approaches to cultural studies , such as feminist cultural studies and later American developments of the field , distance themselves from this view .
They criticize the Marxist assumption of a single , dominant meaning , shared by all , for any cultural product .
The non-Marxist approaches suggest that different ways of consuming cultural artifacts affect the meaning of the product .
This view comes through in the book Doing Cultural Studies : The Story of the Sony Walkman -LRB- by Paul du Gay et al. -RRB- , which seeks to challenge the notion that those who produce commodities control the meanings that people attribute to them .
Feminist cultural analyst , theorist and art historian Griselda Pollock contributed to cultural studies from viewpoints of art history and psychoanalysis .
The writer Julia Kristeva is among influential voices at the turn of the century , contributing to cultural studies from the field of art and psychoanalytical French feminism .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Some of these are : growth , development , evolution , involution , renovation , reconception , reform , innovation , revivalism , revolution , mutation , progress , diffusion , osmosis , borrowing , eclecticism , syncretism , modernization , indigenization , and transformation .
a belief in objectivity progress .
It is the third largest desert after Antarctica and the Arctic .
The desert comprises much of the land found within North Africa , excluding the fertile coastal region situated against the Mediterranean Sea , the Atlas Mountains of the Maghreb , and the Nile Valley of Egypt and Sudan .
The Sahara stretches from the Red Sea in the east and the Mediterranean in the north , to the Atlantic Ocean in the west , where the landscape gradually transitions to a coastal plain .
To the south , it is delimited by the Sahel , a belt of semi-arid tropical savanna around the Niger River valley and Sudan Region of Sub-Saharan Africa .
The Sahara can be divided into several regions , including the western Sahara , the central Ahaggar Mountains , the Tibesti Mountains , the Aïr Mountains , the Ténéré desert , and the Libyan Desert .
Its name is derived from the plural Arabic language word for desert -LRB- صحارى ṣaḥārā -LSB- ˈsˤɑħɑːrɑː -RSB- -RRB- .
In the central , hyperarid part , there are many subdivisions of the great desert such as the Tanezrouft , the Ténéré , the Libyan Desert , the Eastern Desert , the Nubian Desert and others .
According to the botanical criteria of Frank White and geographer Robert Capot-Rey , the northern limit of the Sahara corresponds to the northern limit of date palm cultivation and the southern limit of the range of esparto , a grass typical of the Mediterranean climate portion of the Maghreb and Iberia .
The northern limit also corresponds to the 100 mm -LRB- 3.9 in -RRB- isohyet of annual precipitation .
The southern limit of the Sahara is indicated botanically by the southern limit of Cornulaca monacantha -LRB- a drought-tolerant member of the Chenopodiaceae -RRB- , or northern limit of Cenchrus biflorus , a grass typical of the Sahel .
This steady descending airflow causes a warming and a drying effect in the upper troposphere .
As a consequence , the weather tends to be sunny , dry and stable with a minimal risk of rainfall .
Subsiding , diverging , dry air masses associated with subtropical high-pressure systems are extremely unfavorable for the development of convectional showers .
The subtropical ridge is the predominate factor that explains the hot desert climate -LRB- Köppen climate classification BWh -RRB- of this vast region .
Because of this extreme heating process , a thermal low is usually noticed near the surface , and is the strongest and the most developed during the summertime .
The Sahara High represents the eastern continental extension of the Azores High , centered over the North Atlantic Ocean .
The subsidence of the Sahara High nearly reaches the ground during the coolest part of the year while it limits to the upper troposphere during the hottest periods .
Also , to be protected against rain-bearing weather systems by the atmospheric circulation itself , the desert is made even drier by his geographical configuration and location .
Indeed , the extreme aridity of the Sahara ca n't be only explained by the subtropical high pressure .
These major mountain ranges act as a barrier causing a strong rain shadow effect on the leeward side by dropping much of the humidity brought by atmospheric disturbances along the polar front which affects the surrounding Mediterranean climates .
The sky is usually clear above the desert and the sunshine duration is extremely high everywhere in the Sahara .
A value of 4,300 h or 98 % of the time would be recorded in Upper Egypt -LRB- Aswan , Luxor -RRB- and in the Nubian Desert -LRB- Wadi Halfa -RRB- .
The Sahara has a huge potential for solar energy production .
The constantly high position of the sun , the extremely low relative humidity , the lack of vegetation and rainfall make the Great Desert the hottest continuously large area worldwide and certainly the hottest place on Earth during summertime in some spots .
The average high temperature exceeds 38 °C -LRB- 100.4 °F -RRB- - 40 °C -LRB- 104 °F -RRB- during the hottest month nearly everywhere in the desert except at very high mountainous areas .
The highest officially recorded average high temperature was 47 °C -LRB- 116.6 °F -RRB- in a remote desert town in the Algerian Desert called Bou Bernous with an elevation of 378 meters above sea level .
It 's the world 's highest recorded average high temperature and only Death Valley , California rivals it .
Other hot spots in Algeria such as Adrar , Timimoun , In Salah , Ouallene , Aoulef , Reggane with an elevation between 200 and 400 meters above sea level get slightly lower summer average highs around 46 °C -LRB- 114.8 °F -RRB- during the hottest months of the year .
Salah , well known in Algeria for its extreme heat , has an average high temperature of 43.8 °C -LRB- 110.8 °F -RRB- , 46.4 °C -LRB- 115.5 °F -RRB- , 45.5 -LRB- 113.9 °F -RRB- .
Furthermore , 41.9 °C -LRB- 107.4 °F -RRB- in June , July , August and September .
In fact , there are even hotter spots in the Sahara , but they are located in extremely remote areas , especially in the Azalai , lying in northern Mali .
The major part of the desert experiences around 3 -- 5 months when the average high strictly exceeds 40 °C -LRB- 104 °F -RRB- .
The southern central part of the desert experiences up to 6 -- 7 months when the average high temperature strictly exceeds 40 °C -LRB- 104 °F -RRB- which shows the constancy and the length of the really hot season in the Sahara .
Some examples of this are Bilma , Niger and Faya-Largeau , Chad .
The annual average daily temperature exceeds 20 °C -LRB- 68 °F -RRB- everywhere and can approach 30 °C -LRB- 86 °F -RRB- in the hottest regions year-round .
The sand and ground temperatures are even more extreme .
A sand temperature of 83.5 °C -LRB- 182.3 °F -RRB- has been recorded in Port Sudan .
Ground temperatures of 72 °C -LRB- 161.6 °F -RRB- have been recorded in the Adrar of Mauritania and a value of 75 °C -LRB- 167 °F -RRB- has been measured in Borkou , northern Chad .
Due to lack of cloud cover and very low humidity , the desert usually features high diurnal temperature variations between days and nights .
However , it 's a myth that the nights are cold after extremely hot days in the Sahara .
The average diurnal temperature range is typically between 13 °C -LRB- 55.4 °F -RRB- and 20 °C -LRB- 68 °F -RRB- .
The lowest values are found along the coastal regions due to high humidity and are often even lower than 10 °C -LRB- 50 °F -RRB- , while the highest values are found in inland desert areas where the humidity is the lowest , mainly in the southern Sahara .
Still , it 's true that winter nights can be cold as it can drop to the freezing point and even below , especially in high-elevation areas .
The average annual rainfall ranges from very low in the northern and southern fringes of the desert to nearly non-existent over the central and the eastern part .
For example , Biskra , Algeria and Ouarzazate , Morocco are found in this zone .
For example , Timbuktu , Mali and Agadez , Niger are found in this zone .
In fact , most of the Sahara receives less than 20 mm -LRB- 0.79 in -RRB- .
The annual average rainfall is virtually zero over a wide area of some 1,000,000 km2 in the eastern Sahara comprising deserts of Libya , Egypt and Sudan -LRB- Tazirbu , Kufra , Dakhla , Kharga , Farafra , Siwa , Asyut , Sohag , Luxor , Aswan , Abu Simbel , Wadi Halfa -RRB- where the long-term mean approximates 0.5 mm per year .
The rainfall is very unreliable and erratic in the Sahara as it may vary considerably year by year .
In full contrast to the negligible annual rainfall amounts , the annual rates of potential evaporation are extraordinarily high , roughly ranging from 2,500 mm/year to more than 6,000 mm/year in the whole desert .
Nowhere else on Earth has air been found as dry and evaporative as in the Sahara region .
With such an evaporative power , the Sahara can only be desiccated and dried out further more and the moisture deficit is tremendous .
These rains sustain summer pastures of grasses and herbs , with dry woodlands and shrublands along seasonal watercourses .
Plant leaves may dry out totally and then recover .
The Saharan cheetah -LRB- northwest African cheetah -RRB- lives in Algeria , Togo , Niger , Mali , Benin , and Burkina Faso .
They are unusually pale .
The other cheetah subspecies -LRB- northeast African cheetah -RRB- lives in Chad , Sudan and the eastern region of Niger .
However , it is currently extinct in the wild of Egypt and Libya .
The remaining populations of large mammals have been greatly reduced by hunting for food and recreation .
These schemes often lead to soil degradation and salinization .
The Sahara was then a much wetter place than it is today .
Fossils of dinosaurs , including Afrovenator , Jobaria and Ouranosaurus , have also been found here .
However , this theory has recently been called into dispute , when samples taken from several 7 million year old sand deposits led scientists to reconsider the timeline for desertification .
By the 5th millennium BCE , the people who inhabited what is now called Nubia , were full participants in the `` agricultural revolution '' , living a settled lifestyle with domesticated plants and animals .
This complexity , as observed at Nabta Playa , and as expressed by different levels of authority within the society there , likely formed the basis for the structure of both the Neolithic society at Nabta and the Old Kingdom of Egypt .
Subsistence in organized and permanent settlements in predynastic Egypt by the middle of the 6th millennium BCE centered predominantly on cereal and animal agriculture : cattle , goats , pigs and sheep .
Tanning of animal skins , pottery and weaving were commonplace in this era also .
There are indications of seasonal or only temporary occupation of the Al Fayyum in the 6th millennium BCE , with food activities centering on fishing , hunting and food-gathering .
Stone arrowheads , knives and scrapers from the era are commonly found .
Burial items included pottery , jewelry , farming and hunting equipment , and assorted foods including dried meat and fruit .
As a result of this aridification , it became a largely impenetrable barrier to humans , with the remaining settlements mainly being concentrated around the numerous oases that dot the landscape .
The Nile , however , was impassable at several cataracts , making trade and contact by boat difficult .
By 500 BCE , Greeks arrived in the desert .
Centralized states thus surrounded the desert on the north and east ; it remained outside the control of these states .
The Garamantes grew populous and strong , conquering their neighbors and capturing many slaves -LRB- which were put to work extending the tunnels -RRB- .
The ancient Greeks and the Romans knew of the Garamantes and regarded them as uncivilized nomads .
However , they traded with the Garamantes , and a Roman bath has been found in the Garamantes capital of Garama .
By the end of 641 all of Egypt was in Muslim hands .
The trade across the desert intensified .
A significant slave trade crossed the desert .
In the 16th century the northern fringe of the Sahara , such as coastal regencies in present-day Algeria and Tunisia , as well as some parts of present-day Libya , together with the semi-autonomous kingdom of Egypt , were occupied by the Ottoman Empire .
Trade exploited the Ottoman land routes to handle the spices , gold and silk from the East , manufactures from Europe , and the slave and gold traffic from Africa .
The Sahel and southern Sahara regions were home to several independent states or to roaming Tuareg clans .
The live in the Red Sea Hills of southeastern Egypt and eastern Sudan .
Arabic , Berber and its variants now regrouped under the term Amazigh -LRB- which includes the Guanche language spoken by the original Berber inhabitants of the Canary Islands -RRB- and Beja languages are part of the Afro-Asiatic or Hamito-Semitic family .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Unlike neighboring West Africa and the central governments of the states that comprise the Sahara , the French language bears little relevance to inter-personal discourse and commerce within the region , its people retaining staunch ethnic and political affiliations with Tuareg and Berber leaders and culture .
Diplomacy with local clients was primarily conducted in Arabic , which was the traditional language of bureaucratic affairs .
Mediation of disputes and inter-agency communication was served by interpreters contracted by the French government , who , according to Keenan , `` documented a space of intercultural mediation , '' contributing much to preserving indigenous cultural identities in the region .
It primarily refers to the influence and authority of law within society , particularly as a constraint upon behaviour , including behaviour of government officials .
More than Plato attempted to do , Aristotle flatly opposed letting the highest officials wield power beyond guarding and serving the laws .
. ''
Substantive conceptions of the rule of law go beyond this and include certain substantive rights that are said to be based on , or derived from , the rule of law .
Still , there are other views as well .
Research , like the Worldwide Governance Indicators , defines the rule of law as : `` the extent to which agents have confidence and abide by the rules of society , and in particular the quality of contract enforcement , the police and the courts , as well as the likelihood of crime or violence . ''
For much of American history , the dominant notion of the rule of law , in this setting , has been some version of A. V. Dicey 's : `` no man is punishable or can be lawfully made to suffer in body or goods except for a distinct breach of law established in the ordinary legal manner before the ordinary Courts of the land . ''
As the dockets of worker compensation commissions , public utility commissions and other agencies burgeoned , it soon became apparent that letting judges decide for themselves all the facts in a dispute -LRB- such as the extent of an injury in a worker 's compensation case -RRB- would overwhelm the courts and destroy the advantages of specialization that led to the creation of administrative agencies in the first place .
If administrators adopted procedures that more-or-less tracked `` the ordinary legal manner '' of the courts , further review of the facts by `` the ordinary Courts of the land '' was unnecessary .
That is , if you had your `` day in commission , '' the rule of law did not require a further `` day in court . ''
Thus Dicey 's rule of law was recast into a purely procedural form .
But with regard to every law , however unjust , oppressive or pernicious , which did not come plainly under this description , they would be under the necessity as judges to give it a free course . ''
The influence of one school of thought over the other has varied throughout the centuries .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
This was the Declaration of Delhi .
The Declaration of Delhi did not , however , suggest that the rule of law requires legislative power to be subject to judicial review .
It works to empower people and communities to claim their rights , and provides governments with the know-how to realize them .
The rule-of-law movement can not be fully successful in transitional and developing countries without an answer to the question : does the rule of law matter for economic development or not ?
It is the traditional homeland of the Tibetan people as well as some other ethnic groups such as Monpa , Qiang and Lhoba peoples and is now also inhabited by considerable numbers of Han Chinese and Hui people .
The bulk of western and central Tibet -LRB- Ü-Tsang -RRB- was often at least nominally unified under a series of Tibetan governments in Lhasa , Shigatse , or nearby locations ; these governments were at various times under Mongol and Chinese overlordship .
The region subsequently declared its independence in 1913 without recognition by the subsequent Chinese Republican government .
Later , Lhasa took control of the western part of Xikang , China .
There are tensions regarding Tibet 's political status and dissident groups that are active in exile .
It is also said that Tibetan activists in Tibet have been arrested or tortured .
Tibetan Buddhism is a primary influence on the art , music , and festivals of the region .
The Standard Tibetan pronunciation of Bod , -LSB- pʰøʔ˨˧˨ -RSB- , is transcribed Bhö in Tournadre Phonetic Transcription , Bö in the THL Simplified Phonetic Transcription and Poi in Tibetan pinyin .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The language has numerous regional dialects which are generally not mutually intelligible .
It is employed throughout the Tibetan plateau and Bhutan and is also spoken in parts of Nepal and northern India , such as Sikkim .
In general , the dialects of central Tibet -LRB- including Lhasa -RRB- , Kham , Amdo and some smaller nearby areas are considered Tibetan dialects .
He was assassinated and Zhang Zhung continued its dominance of the region until it was annexed by Songtsen Gampo in the 7th century .
He also brought in many reforms , and Tibetan power spread rapidly , creating a large and powerful empire .
Mongol rule of Tibet remained separate from the main provinces of China , but the region existed under the administration of the Yuan dynasty .
If the Sakya lama ever came into conflict with the dpon-chen , the dpon-chen had the authority to send Chinese troops into the region .
This existed as a `` diarchic structure '' under the Yuan emperor , with power primarily in favor of the Mongols .
However , internal strife within the dynasty and the strong localism of the various fiefs and political-religious factions led to a long series of internal conflicts .
Meanwhile , the Qing government sent resident commissioners called Ambans to Lhasa .
In 1750 the Ambans and the majority of the Han Chinese and Manchus living in Lhasa were killed in a riot , and Qing troops arrived quickly and suppressed the rebels in the next year .
Like the preceding Yuan dynasty , the Manchus of the Qing dynasty exerted military and administrative control of the region , while granting it a degree of political autonomy .
The Qing commander publicly executed a number of supporters of the rebels and , as in 1723 and 1728 , made changes in the political structure and drew up a formal organization plan .
At the same time the Qing took steps to counterbalance the power of the aristocracy by adding officials recruited from the clergy to key posts .
Qing military garrisons staffed with Qing troops were now also established near the Nepalese border .
The British Empire was encroaching from northern India into the Himalayas , the Emirate of Afghanistan and the Russian Empire were expanding into Central Asia and each power became suspicious of the others ' intentions in Tibet .
For the next 36 years , the 13th Dalai Lama and the regents who succeeded him governed Tibet .
During this time , Tibet fought Chinese warlords for control of the ethnically Tibetan areas in Xikang and Qinghai -LRB- parts of Kham and Amdo -RRB- along the upper reaches of the Yangtze River .
Afterwards , the Central People 's Government in Beijing renounced the agreement and began implementation of the halted social and political reforms .
Tibet has some of the world 's tallest mountains , with several of them making the top ten list .
These include the Yangtze , Yellow River , Indus River , Mekong , Ganges , Salween and the Yarlung Tsangpo River -LRB- Brahmaputra River -RRB- .
The Yarlung Tsangpo Grand Canyon , along the Yarlung Tsangpo River , is among the deepest and longest canyons in the world .
The mountain is a holy pilgrimage site for both Hindus and Tibetans .
Tibet has numerous high-altitude lakes referred to in Tibetan as tso or co. .
These include Qinghai Lake , Lake Manasarovar , Namtso , Pangong Tso , Yamdrok Lake , Siling Co , Lhamo La-tso , Lumajangdong Co , Lake Puma Yumco , Lake Paiku , Lake Rakshastal , Dagze Co and Dong Co. .
Western passes receive small amounts of fresh snow each year but remain traversible all year round .
Low temperatures are prevalent throughout these western regions , where bleak desolation is unrelieved by any vegetation bigger than a low bush , and where wind sweeps unchecked across vast expanses of arid plain .
The main crops grown are barley , wheat , buckwheat , rye , potatoes , and assorted fruits and vegetables .
These include Tibetan hats , jewelry -LRB- silver and gold -RRB- , wooden items , clothing , quilts , fabrics , Tibetan rugs and carpets .
However most of this investment goes to pay migrant workers who do not settle in Tibet and send much of their income home to other provinces .
`` Tibet 's GDP was expected to reach 43.7 billion yuan in 2009 , up 170 percent from that in 2000 and posting an annual growth of 12.3 percent over the past nine years . ''
Tibetan Buddhism is practiced not only in Tibet but also in Mongolia , parts of northern India , the Buryat Republic , the Tuva Republic , and in the Republic of Kalmykia and some other parts of China .
A few monasteries have begun to rebuild since the 1980s -LRB- with limited support from the Chinese government -RRB- and greater religious freedom has been granted -- although it is still limited .
Monks returned to monasteries across Tibet and monastic education resumed even though the number of monks imposed is strictly limited .
Muslims have been living in Tibet since as early as the 8th or 9th century .
Other Muslim ethnic groups who have long inhabited Tibet include Hui , Salar , Dongxiang and Bonan .
By 1627 , there were about a hundred local converts in the Guge kingdom .
He was followed by others who actually built a church in Lhasa .
Standing at 117 metres -LRB- 384 feet -RRB- in height and 360 metres -LRB- 1,180 feet -RRB- in width , the Potala Palace is the most important example of Tibetan architecture .
Preparations for the festive event are manifested by special offerings to family shrine deities , painted doors with religious symbols , and other painstaking jobs done to prepare for the event .
It involves dancing and participating in sports events , as well as sharing picnics .
Meat dishes are likely to be yak , goat , or mutton , often dried , or cooked into a spicy stew with potatoes .
Yak yogurt , butter and cheese are frequently eaten , and well-prepared yogurt is considered something of a prestige item .
In team sports , matches of this type are often used to help coaches and managers select players for the competitive matches of a league season or tournament .
If the players usually play in different teams in other leagues , exhibition games offer an opportunity for the players to learn to work with each other .
The games can be held between separate teams or between parts of the same team .
Friendly football matches are considered to be non-competitive and are only used to `` warm up '' players for a new season/competitive match .
Since the 2000s , some preseason games have been played in Europe against European teams , as part of the NHL Challenge and NHL Premiere series .
In addition to the standard preseason , there also exist prospect tournaments such as the Vancouver Canucks ' YoungStars tournament and the Detroit Red Wings ' training camp , in which NHL teams ' younger prospects face off against each other under their parent club 's banner .
The Major League Baseball 's preseason is also known as spring training .
They may also play exhibitions against a local college team or a minor-league team from their farm system .
Traditionally , major college basketball teams began their seasons with a few exhibition games .
Some teams have begun scheduling exhibition games against teams in NCAA Division II and NCAA Division III , or even against colleges and universities located in Canada .
Compared to other team sports , the National Football League preseason is very structured .
While the scheduling formula is not as rigid for preseason games as they are for the regular season , there are numerous restrictions and traditions that limit the choices of preseason opponents ; teams are also restricted on what days and times they can play these games .
Split-squad games , a practice common in baseball and hockey , where a team that is scheduled to play two games on the same day splits their team into two squads , are prohibited .
The NFL has played exhibition games in Europe , Japan , Canada , Australia -LRB- including the American Bowl in 1999 -RRB- and Mexico to spread the league 's popularity -LRB- a game of this type was proposed for China but , due to financial and logistical problems , was eventually canceled -RRB- .
The league has tacitly forbidden the playing of non-league opponents , with the last interleague game having come in 1972 and the last game against a team other than an NFL team -LRB- the all-NFL rookie College All-Stars -RRB- was held in 1976 .
Exhibition games are quite unpopular with many fans , who resent having to pay regular-season prices for two home exhibition games as part of a season-ticket package .
Numerous lawsuits have been brought by fans and classes of fans against the NFL or its member teams regarding this practice , but none have been successful in halting it .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The Pro Bowl , traditionally played after the end of the NFL season -LRB- since 2011 is played the week prior to the Super Bowl -RRB- , is also considered an exhibition game .
These games also receive the same criticism as NFL exhibition games , but instead it is targeted to schools scheduling low-quality opponents and the simplicity for a team to run up the score against a weak opponent .
However , these games are susceptible to backfiring , resulting in damage in poll position and public perception , especially if the higher ranked team loses , although the mere act of scheduling a weak opponent is harmful to a team 's overall strength of schedule itself .
Various auto racing organizations hold exhibition events ; these events usually award no championship points to participants , but they do offer prize money to participants .
Located close to the border with Germany , it is the capital of the Bas-Rhin département .
In 2013 , the city proper had 275,718 inhabitants , Eurométropole de Strasbourg -LRB- Greater Strasbourg -RRB- had 475,934 inhabitants and the Arrondissement of Strasbourg had 482,384 inhabitants .
-LRB- Hence the town is commonly called Argentina in medieval Latin . -RRB-
`` Argentorate '' as the toponym of the Gaulish settlement preceded it before being Latinized , but it is not known by how long .
It was under Trajan and after the fire of 97 that Argentoratum received its most extended and fortified shape .
It then included a cavalry section and covered an area of approximately 20 hectares .
Other Roman legions temporarily stationed in Argentoratum were the Legio XIV Gemina and the Legio XXI Rapax , the latter during the reign of Nero .
The outline of the Roman `` castrum '' is visible in the street pattern in the Grande Ile .
This was where the largest burial places were situated , as well as the densest concentration of civilian dwelling places and commerces next to the camp .
Archaeological excavations below the current Église Saint-Étienne in 1948 and 1956 unearthed the apse of a church dating back to the late fourth or early fifth century , considered to be the oldest church in Alsace .
It is supposed that this was the first seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Strasbourg .
This trilingual text contains , alongside texts in Latin and Old High German -LRB- teudisca lingua -RRB- , the oldest written variety of Gallo-Romance -LRB- lingua romana -RRB- clearly distinct from Latin , the ancestor of Old French .
The time to leave the city was signalled by a municipal herald blowing the Grüselhorn -LRB- see below , Museums , Musée historique -RRB- ; .
Their adherents established a Gymnasium , headed by Johannes Sturm , made into a University in the following century .
The city first followed the Tetrapolitan Confession , and then the Augsburg Confession .
Protestant iconoclasm caused much destruction to churches and cloisters , notwithstanding that Luther himself opposed such a practice .
Strasbourg was a centre of humanist scholarship and early book-printing in the Holy Roman Empire , and its intellectual and political influence contributed much to the establishment of Protestantism as an accepted denomination in the southwest of Germany .
The Strasbourg Councillor Sturm and guildmaster Matthias represented the city at the Imperial Diet of Speyer -LRB- 1529 -RRB- , where their protest led to the schism of the Catholic Church and the evolution of Protestantism .
Louis ' advisors believed that , as long as Strasbourg remained independent , it would endanger the King 's newly annexed territories in Alsace , and , that to defend these large rural lands effectively , a garrison had to be placed in towns such as Strasbourg .
The official policy of religious intolerance which drove most Protestants from France after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685 was not applied in Strasbourg and in Alsace , because both had a special status as a province à l'instar de l'étranger effectif -LRB- a kind of foreign province of the king of France -RRB- .
Its language also remained overwhelmingly German : the German Lutheran university persisted until the French Revolution .
During this time , many churches and monasteries were either destroyed or severely damaged .
The bombardment of the city was meant to break the morale of the people of Strasbourg .
As part of Imperial Germany , Strasbourg was rebuilt and developed on a grand and representative scale , such as the Neue Stadt , or `` new city '' around the present Place de la République .
A major street of the city now bears the name of that date -LRB- Rue du 22 Novembre -RRB- which celebrates the entry of the French in the city .
The date of the assignment was retroactively established on Armistice Day .
It is doubtful whether a referendum in Strasbourg would have ended in France 's favour since the political parties striving for an autonomous Alsace or a connection to France accounted only for a small proportion of votes in the last Reichstag as well as in the local elections .
This could explain the difference between the rural vote and the one in Strasbourg .
After the war , many Germans left Strasbourg and went back to Germany ; some of them were denounced by the locals or expelled by the newly appointed authorities .
It was composed by a group of 25 young men aged from 14 to 18 years old who led several attacks against the German occupation .
His last words will be : `` If I have to die , I shall die but with a pure heart '' .
While the First World War had not notably damaged the city , Anglo-American bombing caused extensive destruction in raids of which at least one was allegedly carried out by mistake .
In August 1944 , several buildings in the Old Town were damaged by bombs , particularly the Palais Rohan , the Old Customs House -LRB- Ancienne Douane -RRB- and the Cathedral .
He achieved the oath that he made with his soldiers , after the decisive Capture of Kufra .
With the Oath of Kuffra , they swore to keep up the fight until the French flag flew over the Cathedral of Strasbourg .
Many of these men , especially those who did not answer the call immediately , were pressured to `` volunteer '' for service with the SS , often by direct threats on their families .
This threat obliged the majority of them to remain in the German army .
After the war , the few that survived were often accused of being traitors or collaborationists , because this tough situation was not known in the rest of France , and they had to face the incomprehension of many .
Nowadays history recognizes the suffering of those people , and museums , public discussions and memorials have been built to commemorate this terrible period of history of this part of Eastern France -LRB- Alsace and Moselle -RRB- .
-LRB- This position was reconfirmed and given treaty status in the 1997 Treaty of Amsterdam -RRB- .
However , only the -LRB- four-day -RRB- plenary sessions of the Parliament are held in Strasbourg each month , with all other business being conducted in Brussels and Luxembourg .
Before that , the EP sessions had to take place in the main Council of Europe building , the Palace of Europe , whose unusual inner architecture had become a familiar sight to European TV audiences .
In 1992 , Strasbourg became the seat of the Franco-German TV channel and movie-production society Arte .
Among the numerous secular medieval buildings , the monumental Ancienne Douane -LRB- old custom-house -RRB- stands out .
The futuristic Parc des Poteries is an example of European park-conception in the late 1990s .
The Jardin des deux Rives , spread over Strasbourg and Kehl on both sides of the Rhine opened in 2004 and is the most extended -LRB- 60-hectare -RRB- park of the agglomeration .
The most recent park is Parc du Heyritz -LRB- 8,7 ha -RRB- , opened in 2014 along a canal facing the hôpital civil .
Unlike most other cities , Strasbourg 's collections of European art are divided into several museums according not only to type and area , but also to epoch .
The latter museum also displays the city 's photographic library .
Nowadays , Strasbourg is known to offer among the best university courses in France , after Paris .
A librarian from Munich later pointed out '' ... that the destruction of the precious collection was not the fault of a German artillery officer , who used the French map , but of the slovenly and inaccurate scholarship of a Frenchman . ''
The CTS also operates a comprehensive bus network throughout the city that is integrated with the trams .
The CTS , and its predecessors , also operated a previous generation of tram system between 1878 and 1960 , complemented by trolleybus routes between 1939 and 1962 .
That canal has since closed , but the subsequent Canal du Rhone au Rhine , Canal de la Marne au Rhin and Grand Canal d'Alsace are still in use , as is the important activity of the Port autonome de Strasbourg .
These attributes are accomplished by applying the principle of `` filtered permeability '' to the existing irregular network of streets .
It means that the network adaptations favour active transportation and , selectively , `` filter out '' the car by reducing the number of streets that run through the centre .
While certain streets are discontinuous for cars , they connect to a network of pedestrian and bike paths which permeate the entire centre .
The state 's name is derived from the Choctaw words okla and humma , meaning `` red people '' .
The name was settled upon statehood , Oklahoma Territory and Indian Territory were merged and Indian was dropped from the name .
On November 16 , 1907 , Oklahoma became the 46th state to enter the union .
Its residents are known as Oklahomans , or informally `` Okies '' , and its capital and largest city is Oklahoma City .
Equivalent to the English word Indian , okla humma was a phrase in the Choctaw language used to describe Native American people as a whole .
The western edge of the Oklahoma panhandle is out of alignment with its Texas border .
Surveying techniques were not as accurate in 1819 , and the actual 103rd Meridian was approximately 2.2 miles to the east .
It was much easier to leave the mistake as it was than for Texas to cede land to New Mexico to correct the original surveying error .
The Ouachita Mountains are home to black bear , red fox , grey fox , and river otter populations , which coexist with a total of 328 vertebrate species in southeastern Oklahoma .
In addition , the Black Kettle National Grassland covers 31,300 acres -LRB- 127 km2 -RRB- of prairie in southwestern Oklahoma .
Oklahoma lies in a transition zone between humid continental climate to the north , semi-arid climate to the west , and humid subtropical climate in the central , south and eastern portions of the state .
Because of Oklahoma 's position between zones of differing prevailing temperature and winds , weather patterns within the state can vary widely over relatively short distances and can change drastically in a short time .
Early June can still be wet , but most years see a marked decrease in rainfall during June and early July .
Average precipitation rises again from September to mid-October , representing a secondary wetter season , then declines from late October through December .
Evidence exists that native peoples traveled through Oklahoma as early as the last ice age .
The Panhandle culture peoples were precontact residents of the panhandle region .
The new state became a focal point for the emerging oil industry , as discoveries of oil pools prompted towns to grow rapidly in population and wealth .
In 1995 , Oklahoma City was the site of one of the most destructive acts of domestic terrorism in American history .
McVeigh 's army buddy , Michael Fortier , was sentenced to 12 years in federal prison and ordered to pay a $ 75,000 fine for his role in the bombing plot -LRB- i.e. assisting in the sale of guns to raise funds for the bombing , and examining the Murrah Federal building as a possible target before the terrorist attack -RRB- .
His wife , Lori Fortier , who has since died , was granted immunity from prosecution in return for her testimony in the case .
The variety of North American English spoken is called Oklahoma English , and this dialect is quite diverse with its uneven blending of features of North Midland , South Midland , and Southern dialects .
238,732 Oklahoma residents reported speaking a language other than English in the 2000 census , about 7.4 % of the total population of the state .
Cherokee is an official language in the Cherokee Nation tribal jurisdiction area and in the United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians .
Other languages include French with 8,258 speakers -LRB- 0.3 % -RRB- , Chinese with 6,413 -LRB- 0.2 % -RRB- , Korean with 3,948 -LRB- 0.1 % -RRB- , Arabic with 3,265 -LRB- 0.1 % -RRB- , other Asian languages with 3,134 -LRB- 0.1 % -RRB- , Tagalog with 2,888 -LRB- 0.1 % -RRB- , Japanese with 2,546 -LRB- 0.1 % -RRB- , and African languages with 2,546 -LRB- 0.1 % -RRB- .
The percentage of Oklahomans affiliated with Catholicism is half of the national average , while the percentage affiliated with Evangelical Protestantism is more than twice the national average -- tied with Arkansas for the largest percentage of any state .
Oklahoma is host to a diverse range of sectors including aviation , energy , transportation equipment , food processing , electronics , and telecommunications .
Oklahoma is an important producer of natural gas , aircraft , and food .
Oklahoma has no nuclear power .
Ranking 13th for total energy consumption per capita in 2009 , Oklahoma 's energy costs were 8th lowest in the nation .
The magazine also placed Devon Energy as the second-largest company in the mining and crude oil-producing industry in the nation , while Chesapeake Energy ranks seventh respectively in that sector and Oklahoma Gas & Electric ranks as the 25th-largest gas and electric utility company .
The New York Times rates the Tulsa Ballet as one of the top ballet companies in the United States .
is the official performance headquarters for the musical Oklahoma !
In 1953 he was featured along with the Oklahoma !
cast on a CBS Omnibus television broadcast .
Bond was instrumental in the title song becoming the Oklahoma state song and is also featured on the U.S. postage stamp commemorating the musical 's 50th anniversary .
Historically , the state has produced musical styles such as The Tulsa Sound and western swing , which was popularized at Cain 's Ballroom in Tulsa .
The building , known as the `` Carnegie Hall of Western Swing '' , served as the performance headquarters of Bob Wills and the Texas Playboys during the 1930s .
Stillwater is known as the epicenter of Red Dirt music , the best-known proponent of which is the late Bob Childers .
CityRep is a professional company affording equity points to those performers and technical theatre professionals .
The cities of Norman , Lawton , and Stillwater , among others , also host well-reviewed community theatre companies .
Large national pow-wows , various Latin and Asian heritage festivals , and cultural festivals such as the Juneteenth celebrations are held in Oklahoma City each year .
In 2006 , Tulsa 's Oktoberfest was named one of the top 10 in the world by USA Today and one of the top German food festivals in the nation by Bon Appetit magazine .
Norman plays host to the Norman Music Festival , a festival that highlights native Oklahoma bands and musicians .
The Medieval Fair of Norman is Oklahoma 's `` largest weekend event and the third largest event in Oklahoma , and was selected by Events Media Network as one of the top 100 events in the nation '' .
Six of the state 's universities were placed in the Princeton Review 's list of best 122 regional colleges in 2007 , and three made the list of top colleges for best value .
The state has 55 post-secondary technical institutions operated by Oklahoma 's CareerTech program for training in specific fields of industry or trade .
This means the state of Oklahoma produces an average of 38,278 degree-holders per completions component -LRB- i.e. July 1 , 2007 -- June 30 , 2008 -RRB- .
National average is 68,322 total degrees awarded per completions component .
Graduates are fluent speakers of the language .
Several universities offer Cherokee as a second language , including the University of Oklahoma and Northeastern State University .
Oklahoma has teams in basketball , football , arena football , baseball , soccer , hockey , and wrestling located in Oklahoma City , Tulsa , Enid , Norman , and Lawton .
Oklahoma supports teams in several minor leagues , including Minor League Baseball at the AAA and AA levels -LRB- Oklahoma City Dodgers and Tulsa Drillers , respectively -RRB- , hockey 's ECHL with the Tulsa Oilers , and a number of indoor football leagues .
In the last-named sport , the state 's most notable team was the Tulsa Talons , which played in the Arena Football League until 2012 , when the team was moved to San Antonio .
The Oklahoma Defenders replaced the Talons as Tulsa 's only professional arena football team , playing the CPIFL .
The Oklahoma City Blue , of the NBA Development League , relocated to Oklahoma City from Tulsa in 2014 , where they were formerly known as the Tulsa 66ers .
Tulsa is the base for the Tulsa Revolution , which plays in the American Indoor Soccer League .
Enid and Lawton host professional basketball teams in the USBL and the CBA .
Collegiate athletics are a popular draw in the state .
Sports Illustrated magazine rates Oklahoma and Oklahoma State among the top colleges for athletics in the nation .
Tulsa competes in FBS football and other sports in the American Athletic Conference , while Oral Roberts , which does not sponsor football , is a member of The Summit League .
In addition , 12 of the state 's smaller colleges and universities compete in NCAA Division II as members of four different conferences , and eight other Oklahoma institutions participate in the NAIA , mostly within the Sooner Athletic Conference .
Rodeos are popular throughout the state , and Guymon , in the state 's panhandle , hosts one of the largest in the nation .
Oklahoma 's first newspaper was established in 1844 , called the Cherokee Advocate , and was written in both Cherokee and English .
In 2006 , there were more than 220 newspapers located in the state , including 177 with weekly publications and 48 with daily publications .
Tulsa International Airport , the state 's second largest commercial airport , served more than 1.3 million boardings in 2010 .
In terms of traffic , R. L. Jones Jr. -LRB- Riverside -RRB- Airport in Tulsa is the state 's busiest airport , with 335,826 takeoffs and landings in 2008 .
The Oklahoma judiciary also contains two independent courts : a Court of Impeachment and the Oklahoma Court on the Judiciary .
Judges of those two courts , as well as the Court of Civil Appeals are appointed by the Governor upon the recommendation of the state Judicial Nominating Commission , and are subject to a non-partisan retention vote on a six-year rotating schedule .
While each municipality operates as a separate and independent local government with executive , legislative and judicial power , county governments maintain jurisdiction over both incorporated cities and non-incorporated areas within their boundaries , but have executive power but no legislative or judicial power .
Other local government units include school districts , technology center districts , community college districts , rural fire departments , rural water districts , and other special use districts .
This is not to say that every election has been a landslide for Republicans : Jimmy Carter lost the state by less than 1.5 % in 1976 , while Michael Dukakis and Bill Clinton both won 40 % or more of the state 's popular vote in 1988 and 1996 respectively .
Two of the fifty largest cities in the United States are located in Oklahoma , Oklahoma City and Tulsa , and 65 percent of Oklahomans live within their metropolitan areas , or spheres of economic and social influence defined by the United States Census Bureau as a metropolitan statistical area .
Between 2000 and 2010 , the cities that led the state in population growth were Blanchard -LRB- 172.4 % -RRB- , Elgin -LRB- 78.2 % -RRB- , Jenks -LRB- 77.0 % -RRB- , Piedmont -LRB- 56.7 % -RRB- , Bixby -LRB- 56.6 % -RRB- , and Owasso -LRB- 56.3 % -RRB- .
State law codifies Oklahoma 's state emblems and honorary positions ; the Oklahoma Senate or House of Representatives may adopt resolutions designating others for special events and to benefit organizations .
Currently the State Senate is waiting to vote on a change to the state 's motto .
This civilization collapsed at the start of the second millennium BCE and was later followed by the Iron Age Vedic Civilization , which extended over much of the Indo-Gangetic plain and which witnessed the rise of major polities known as the Mahajanapadas .
In one of these kingdoms , Magadha , Mahavira and Gautama Buddha propagated their Shramanic philosophies during the fifth and sixth century BCE .
During this period , aspects of Indian civilization , administration , culture , and religion -LRB- Hinduism and Buddhism -RRB- spread to much of Asia , while kingdoms in southern India had maritime business links with the Roman Empire from around 77 CE .
Indian cultural influence spread over many parts of Southeast Asia which led to the establishment of Indianized kingdoms in Southeast Asia -LRB- Greater India -RRB- .
Southern India was ruled by the Chalukya , Chola , Pallava , Chera , Pandyan , and Western Chalukya Empires .
In the 16th century , Mughals came from Central Asia and gradually covered most of India .
The subcontinent gained independence from the United Kingdom in 1947 , after the British provinces were partitioned into the dominions of India and Pakistan and the princely states all acceded to one of the new states .
According to Thapar , a periodisation could also be based on `` significant social and economic changes '' , which are not strictly related to a change of ruling powers .
-LSB- note 1 -RSB-
The ancient history of the region includes some of South Asia 's oldest settlements and some of its major civilisations .
Soanian sites are found in the Sivalik region across what are now India , Pakistan , and Nepal .
The civilisation included urban centres such as Dholavira , Kalibangan , Ropar , Rakhigarhi , and Lothal in modern-day India , as well as Harappa , Ganeriwala , and Mohenjo-daro in modern-day Pakistan .
In terms of culture , many regions of the subcontinent transitioned from the Chalcolithic to the Iron Age in this period .
The Kuru state organized the Vedic hymns into collections , and developed the orthodox srauta ritual to uphold the social order .
The archaeological Painted Grey Ware culture , which flourished in the Haryana and western Uttar Pradesh regions of northern India from about 1100 to 600 BCE , is believed to correspond to the Kuru and Panchala kingdoms .
Historians formerly postulated an `` epic age '' as the milieu of these two epic poems , but now recognize that the texts -LRB- which are both familiar with each other -RRB- went through multiple stages of development over centuries .
There is no conclusive proof from archaeology as to whether the specific events of the Mahabharat have any historical basis .
The existing texts of these epics are believed to belong to the post-Vedic age , between c. 400 BCE and 400 CE .
Some even attempted to date the events using methods of archaeoastronomy which have produced , depending on which passages are chosen and how they are interpreted , estimated dates ranging up to mid 2nd millennium BCE .
In the same period the first Upanishads were written .
-LSB- note 3 -RSB- It was influenced by the Vedic culture , but differed markedly from the Kuru-Panchala region .
It `` was the area of the earliest known cultivation of rice in South Asia and by 1800 BC was the location of an advanced neolithic population associated with the sites of Chirand and Chechar '' .
In this region the Shramanic movements flourished , and Jainism and Buddhism originated .
Many smaller clans mentioned within early literature seem to have been present across the rest of the subcontinent .
Some of these kings were hereditary ; other states elected their rulers .
Many of the sixteen kingdoms had coalesced to four major ones by 500/400 BCE , by the time of Gautama Buddha .
These four were Vatsa , Avanti , Kosala , and Magadha .
The Life of Gautam Budhha was mainly associated with these four kingdoms .
The Mundaka launches the most scathing attack on the ritual by comparing those who value sacrifice with an unsafe boat that is endlessly overtaken by old age and death .
Magadha expanded to include most of Bihar and Bengal with the conquest of Licchavi and Anga respectively , followed by much of eastern Uttar Pradesh and Orissa .
The ancient kingdom of Magadha is heavily mentioned in Jain and Buddhist texts .
It is also mentioned in the Ramayana , Mahabharata , Puranas .
Magadha Empire had great rulers like Bimbisara and Ajatshatru .
The Magadha kingdom included republican communities such as the community of Rajakumara .
Their administrations were divided into executive , judicial , and military functions .
Alexander 's march east put him in confrontation with the Nanda Empire of Magadha and the Gangaridai of Bengal .
At its greatest extent , the Mauryan Empire stretched to the north up to the natural boundaries of the Himalayas and to the east into what is now Assam .
To the west , it reached beyond modern Pakistan , to the Hindu Kush mountains in what is now Afghanistan .
By the time he died in c. 272 BC , a large part of the subcontinent was under Mauryan suzerainty .
However , the region of Kalinga -LRB- around modern day Odisha -RRB- remained outside Mauryan control , perhaps interfering with their trade with the south .
The Mauryan Empire was based on a modern and efficient economy and society .
Although there was no banking in the Mauryan society , usury was customary .
A significant amount of written records on slavery are found , suggesting a prevalence thereof .
The Sangam literature deals with the history , politics , wars and culture of the Tamil people of this period .
The scholars of the Sangam period rose from among the common people who sought the patronage of the Tamil Kings but who mainly wrote about the common people and their concerns .
They belonged to different faiths and professions like farmers , artisans , merchants , monks , priests and even princes and quite few of them were even women .
The territory of the empire covered much of India from 230 BCE onward .
Sātavāhanas started out as feudatories to the Mauryan dynasty , but declared independence with its decline .
They formed a cultural bridge and played a vital role in trade as well as the transfer of ideas and culture to and from the Indo-Gangetic Plain to the southern tip of India .
They had to compete with the Shunga Empire and then the Kanva dynasty of Magadha to establish their rule .
In particular their struggles with the Western Kshatrapas went on for a long time .
The notable rulers of the Satavahana Dynasty Gautamiputra Satakarni and Sri Yajna Sātakarni were able to defeat the foreign invaders like the Western Kshatrapas and to stop their expansion .
Its capital was Pataliputra , but later emperors such as Bhagabhadra also held court at Besnagar , modern Vidisha in Eastern Malwa .
There were ten Shunga rulers .
The empire is noted for its numerous wars with both foreign and indigenous powers .
They fought battles with the Kalingas , Satavahanas , the Indo-Greeks , and possibly the Panchalas and Mathuras .
Art , education , philosophy , and other forms of learning flowered during this period including small terracotta images , larger stone sculptures , and architectural monuments such as the Stupa at Bharhut , and the renowned Great Stupa at Sanchi .
The Shunga Empire played an imperative role in patronizing Indian culture at a time when some of the most important developments in Hindu thought were taking place .
Khārabēḷa led many successful campaigns against the states of Magadha , Anga , Satavahanas till the southern most regions of Pandyan Empire -LRB- modern Tamil Nadu -RRB- .
Early Hindu numerals had only nine symbols , until 600 to 800 CE , when a symbol for zero was developed for the numeral system .
The peace and prosperity created under leadership of Guptas enabled the pursuit of scientific and artistic endeavors in India .
The high points of this cultural creativity are magnificent architecture , sculpture , and painting .
The Gupta period produced scholars such as Kalidasa , Aryabhata , Varahamihira , Vishnu Sharma , and Vatsyayana who made great advancements in many academic fields .
Science and political administration reached new heights during the Gupta era .
For these reasons , historian Dr.Barnett remarked :
King Mayurasharma defeated the armies of Pallavas of Kanchi possibly with help of some native tribes .
The Kadambas were contemporaries of the Western Ganga Dynasty and together they formed the earliest native kingdoms to rule the land with absolute autonomy .
The dynasty later continued to rule as a feudatory of larger Kannada empires , the Chalukya and the Rashtrakuta empires , for over five hundred years during which time they branched into minor dynasties known as the Kadambas of Goa , Kadambas of Halasi and Kadambas of Hangal .
Toramana 's son Mihirakula , a Saivite Hindu , moved up to near Pataliputra to the east and Gwalior to the central India .
Hiuen Tsiang narrates Mihirakula 's merciless persecution of Buddhists and destruction of monasteries , though the description is disputed as far as the authenticity is concerned .
The Huns were defeated by the Indian kings Yasodharman of Malwa and Narasimhagupta in the 6th century .
Some of them were driven out of India and others were assimilated in the Indian society .
Harsha belonged to Kanojia .
He brought all of northern India under his control .
The peace and prosperity that prevailed made his court a center of cosmopolitanism , attracting scholars , artists and religious visitors from far and wide .
The Chinese traveler Xuan Zang visited the court of Harsha and wrote a very favorable account of him , praising his justice and generosity .
The Sena dynasty would later assume control of the Pala Empire , and the Gurjara Pratiharas fragmented into various states .
These were the first of the Rajput states .
He is known primarily for his successful battles against the Muslim and Tibetan advances into Kashmiri-dominated regions .
Kalhana in his Rajatarangini credits king Lalitaditya with leading an aggressive military campaign in Northern India and Central Asia .
He broke into the Uttarapatha and defeated the rebellious tribes of the Kambojas , Tukharas -LRB- Turks in Turkmenistan and Tocharians in Badakhshan -RRB- , Bhautas -LRB- Tibetans in Baltistan and Tibet -RRB- and Daradas -LRB- Dards -RRB- .
His campaign then led him to subjugate the kingdoms of Pragjyotisha , Strirajya and the Uttarakurus .
The Shahi dynasty ruled portions of eastern Afghanistan , northern Pakistan , and Kashmir from the mid-7th century to the early 11th century .
During this period , they ruled as three related yet individual dynasties .
The earliest dynasty , known as the `` Badami Chalukyas '' , ruled from Vatapi -LRB- modern Badami -RRB- from the middle of the 6th century .
The Badami Chalukyas began to assert their independence at the decline of the Kadamba kingdom of Banavasi and rapidly rose to prominence during the reign of Pulakeshin II .
The rule of the Chalukyas marks an important milestone in the history of South India and a golden age in the history of Karnataka .
The political atmosphere in South India shifted from smaller kingdoms to large empires with the ascendancy of Badami Chalukyas .
A Southern India-based kingdom took control and consolidated the entire region between the Kaveri and the Narmada rivers .
At its peak , the Rashtrakutas ruled from the Ganges River and Yamuna River doab in the north to Cape Comorin in the south , a fruitful time of political expansion , architectural achievements and famous literary contributions .
Govinda III and Amoghavarsha were the most famous of the long line of able administrators produced by the dynasty .
Architecture reached a milestone in the Dravidian style , the finest example of which is seen in the Kailasanath Temple at Ellora .
Other important contributions are the sculptures of Elephanta Caves in modern Maharashtra as well as the Kashivishvanatha temple and the Jain Narayana temple at Pattadakal in modern Karnataka , all of which are UNESCO World Heritage Sites .
The Arab traveler Suleiman described the Rashtrakuta Empire as one of the four great Empires of the world .
The Rashtrakuta period marked the beginning of the golden age of southern Indian mathematics .
The great south Indian mathematician Mahāvīra -LRB- mathematician -RRB- lived in the Rashtrakuta Empire and his text had a huge impact on the medieval south Indian mathematicians who lived after him .
The Rashtrakuta rulers also patronised men of letters , who wrote in a variety of languages from Sanskrit to the Apabhraṃśas .
Though the Palas were followers of the Mahayana and Tantric schools of Buddhism , they also patronised Shaivism and Vaishnavism .
The morpheme Pala , meaning `` protector '' , was used as an ending for the names of all the Pala monarchs .
The empire reached its peak under Dharmapala and Devapala .
Dharmapala is believed to have conquered Kanauj and extended his sway up to the farthest limits of India in the northwest .
Dharmapala founded the Vikramashila and revived Nalanda , considered one of the first great universities in recorded history .
The Palas also built many viharas .
They maintained close cultural and commercial ties with countries of Southeast Asia and Tibet .
Sea trade added greatly to the prosperity of the Pala kingdom .
The Arab merchant Suleiman notes the enormity of the Pala army in his memoirs .
Medieval Cholas rose to prominence during the middle of the 9th century C.E. and established the greatest empire South India had seen .
Rajendra Chola I 's navies went even further , occupying the sea coasts from Burma to Vietnam , the Andaman and Nicobar Islands , the Lakshadweep -LRB- Laccadive -RRB- islands , Sumatra , and the Malay Peninsula in Southeast Asia and the Pegu islands .
The power of the new empire was proclaimed to the eastern world by the expedition to the Ganges which Rajendra Chola I undertook and by the occupation of cities of the maritime empire of Srivijaya in Southeast Asia , as well as by the repeated embassies to China .
They dominated the political affairs of Sri Lanka for over two centuries through repeated invasions and occupation .
They also had continuing trade contacts with the Arabs in the west and with the Chinese empire in the east .
Under the Cholas , the South India reached new heights of excellence in art , religion and literature .
In all of these spheres , the Chola period marked the culmination of movements that had begun in an earlier age under the Pallavas .
Vast areas between the Narmada River in the north and Kaveri River in the south came under Chalukya control .
During this period the other major ruling families of the Deccan , the Hoysalas , the Seuna Yadavas of Devagiri , the Kakatiya dynasty and the Southern Kalachuri , were subordinates of the Western Chalukyas and gained their independence only when the power of the Chalukya waned during the later half of the 12th century .
Well known examples are the Kasivisvesvara Temple at Lakkundi , the Mallikarjuna Temple at Kuruvatti , the Kallesvara Temple at Bagali and the Mahadeva Temple at Itagi .
From the 10th century , Sindh was ruled by the Rajput Soomra dynasty , and later , in the mid-13th century by the Rajput Samma dynasty .
Mahmud of Ghazni in the early 11th century raided mainly the north-western parts of the Indian sub-continent 17 times , but he did not seek to establish `` permanent dominion '' in those areas .
The Hindu Shahis under Jayapala , is known for his struggles in defending his kingdom against the Ghaznavids in the modern-day eastern Afghanistan and Pakistan region .
Like other settled , agrarian societies in history , those in the Indian subcontinent have been attacked by nomadic tribes throughout its long history .
They also introduced new cultural codes that in some ways were very different from the existing cultural codes .
At the same time it must be noted that overwhelming majority of Muslims in India are Indian natives converted to Islam .
This factor also played an important role in the synthesis of cultures .
The Sultanate ushered in a period of Indian cultural renaissance .
The Sultanate suffered significantly from the sacking of Delhi revived briefly under the Lodi Dynasty , but it was a shadow of the former .
The empire rose to prominence as a culmination of attempts by the southern powers to ward off Islamic invasions by the end of the 13th century .
The empire is named after its capital city of Vijayanagara , whose ruins surround present day Hampi , now a World Heritage Site in Karnataka , India .
The previous temple building traditions in South India came together in the Vijayanagara Architecture style .
The mingling of all faiths and vernaculars inspired architectural innovation of Hindu temple construction , first in the Deccan and later in the Dravidian idioms using the local granite .
South Indian mathematics flourished under the protection of the Vijayanagara Empire in Kerala .
Efficient administration and vigorous overseas trade brought new technologies such as water management systems for irrigation .
The empire 's patronage enabled fine arts and literature to reach new heights in Kannada , Telugu , Tamil and Sanskrit , while Carnatic music evolved into its current form .
The empire reached its peak during the rule of Sri Krishnadevaraya when Vijayanagara armies were consistently victorious .
The empire annexed areas formerly under the Sultanates in the northern Deccan and the territories in the eastern Deccan , including Kalinga , while simultaneously maintaining control over all its subordinates in the south .
Many important monuments were either completed or commissioned during the time of Krishna Deva Raya .
Vijayanagara went into decline after the defeat in the Battle of Talikota -LRB- 1565 -RRB- .
However , there were other regional powers present as well .
Their power reached to the zenith under Rana Sanga during whose time Rajput armies were constantly victorious against the Sultanate army .
In the South , the Bahmani Sultanate was the chief rival of the Vijaynagara and gave Vijayanagara tough days many a times .
It was established either by a Brahman convert or patronized by a Brahman and form that source it got the name Bahmani .
In the early 16th century , it collapsed and got split into five small Deccan sultanates .
After Sher Shah 's death , his son Islam Shah Suri and the Hindu emperor Hemu Vikramaditya , who had won 22 battles against Afghan rebels and forces of Akbar , from Punjab to Bengal and had established a secular rule in North India from Delhi till 1556 after winning Battle of Delhi .
Akbar 's son , Jahangir more or less followed father 's policy .
Historian Sir .
J.N. Sarkar wrote , `` All seemed to have been gained by Aurangzeb now , but in reality all was lost . ''
The same was echoed by Vincent Smith : `` The Deccan proved to be the graveyard not only of Aurangzeb 's body but also of his empire '' .
The empire went into decline thereafter .
During the decline of the Mughal Empire , several smaller states rose to fill the power vacuum and themselves were contributing factors to the decline .
Under the general Amir Khan Umrao Al Udat , the Mughal Emperor sent 8,000 troops to drive away the 5,000 Maratha cavalry soldiers .
Baji Rao , however , easily routed the novice Mughal general and the rest of the imperial Mughal army fled .
This essentially brought an end to the Mughal Empire .
In 1739 , Nader Shah , emperor of Iran , defeated the Mughal army at the Battle of Karnal .
After this victory , Nader captured and sacked Delhi , carrying away many treasures , including the Peacock Throne .
The Mughal dynasty was reduced to puppet rulers by 1757 .
During the Mughal era , the dominant political forces consisted of the Mughal Empire and its tributaries and , later on , the rising successor states -- including the Maratha Empire -- which fought an increasingly weak Mughal dynasty .
This period marked vast social change in the subcontinent as the Hindu majority were ruled over by the Mughal emperors , most of whom showed religious tolerance , liberally patronising Hindu culture .
Akbar declared `` Amari '' or non-killing of animals in the holy days of Jainism .
He rolled back the jizya tax for non-Muslims .
It was the erosion of this tradition coupled with increased brutality and centralization that played a large part in the dynasty 's downfall after Aurangzeb , who unlike previous emperors , imposed relatively non-pluralistic policies on the general population , which often inflamed the majority Hindu population .
In 1737 , the Marathas defeated a Mughal army in their capital , Delhi itself in Battle of Delhi -LRB- 1737 -RRB- .
The Marathas continued their military campaigns against Mughals , Nizam , Nawab of Bengal and Durrani Empire to further extend their boundaries .
Gordon explained how the Maratha systematically took control over new regions .
They would start with annual raids , followed by collecting ransom from villages and towns while the declining Mughal Empire retained nominal control and finally taking over the region .
He explained it with the example of Malwa region .
Marathas built an efficient system of public administration known for its attention to detail .
It succeeded in raising revenue in districts that recovered from years of raids , up to levels previously enjoyed by the Mughals .
For example , the cornerstone of the Maratha rule in Malwa rested on the 60 or so local tax collectors who advanced the Maratha ruler Peshwa a portion of their district revenues at interest .
The north-western expansion of the Marathas was stopped after the Third Battle of Panipat -LRB- 1761 -RRB- .
However , the Maratha authority in the north was re-established within a decade under Peshwa Madhavrao I .
The last peshwa , Baji Rao II , was defeated by the British in the Third Anglo-Maratha War .
With the defeat of the Marathas , no native power represented any significant threat for the British afterwards .
He consolidated many parts of northern India into a kingdom .
Ranjit Singh proved himself to be a master strategist and selected well qualified generals for his army .
In stages , he added the central Punjab , the provinces of Multan and Kashmir , the Peshawar Valley , and the Derajat to his kingdom .
This came in the face of the powerful British East India Company .
At its peak , in the 19th century , the empire extended from the Khyber Pass in the west , to Kashmir in the north , to Sindh in the south , running along Sutlej river to Himachal in the east .
The first Anglo-Sikh war and second Anglo-Sikh war marked the downfall of the Sikh Empire .
There were several other kingdoms which ruled over parts of India in the later medieval period prior to the British occupation .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
This was the first real political foothold with territorial implications that the British acquired in India .
Clive was appointed by the company as its first ` Governor of Bengal ' in 1757 .
This was combined with British victories over the French at Madras , Wandiwash and Pondichéry that , along with wider British successes during the Seven Years ' War , reduced French influence in India .
The British East India Company extended its control over the whole of Bengal .
After the Battle of Buxar in 1764 , the company acquired the rights of administration in Bengal from de jure Mughal Emperor Shah Alam II ; this marked the beginning of its formal rule , which within the next century engulfed most of India .
Ahom Kingdom of North-east India first fell to Burmese invasion and then to British after Treaty of Yandabo in 1826 .
The border dispute between Nepal and British India , which sharpened after 1801 , had caused the Anglo-Nepalese War of 1814 -- 16 and brought the defeated Gurkhas under British influence .
In 1854 , Berar was annexed , and the state of Oudh was added two years later .
The rebels were disorganized , had differing goals , and were poorly equipped , led , and trained , and had no outside support or funding .
They were absorbed into the independent nation in 1947 -- 48 .
By 1890 some 60,000 Indians had matriculated .
The Indian economy grew at about 1 % per year from 1880 to 1920 , and the population also grew at 1 % .
However , from 1910s Indian private industry began to grow significantly .
However , historians have been bitterly divided on issues of economic history , with the Nationalist school arguing that India was poorer at the end of British rule than at the beginning and that impoverishment occurred because of the British .
The British goal was said to be for efficient administration but the people of Bengal were outraged at the apparent `` divide and rule '' strategy .
When the Liberal party in Britain came to power in 1906 , he was removed .
Bengal was reunified in 1911 .
The new Viceroy Gilbert Minto and the new Secretary of State for India John Morley consulted with Congress leaders on political reforms .
The Morley-Minto reforms of 1909 provided for Indian membership of the provincial executive councils as well as the Viceroy 's executive council .
The Imperial Legislative Council was enlarged from 25 to 60 members and separate communal representation for Muslims was established in a dramatic step towards representative and responsible government .
Several socio-religious organizations came into being at that time .
Muslims set up the All India Muslim League in 1906 .
It was not a mass party but was designed to protect the interests of the aristocratic Muslims .
It was internally divided by conflicting loyalties to Islam , the British , and India , and by distrust of Hindus .
The Akhil Bharatiya Hindu Mahasabha and Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh -LRB- RSS -RRB- sought to represent Hindu interests though the later always claimed it to be a `` cultural '' organization .
Sikhs founded the Shiromani Akali Dal in 1920 .
Despite persistent diseases and famines , the population of the Indian subcontinent , which stood at about 125 million in 1750 , had reached 389 million by 1941 .
The councillors ' participation was subsequently widened into legislative councils .
The civil service was increasingly filled with natives at the lower levels , with the British holding the more senior positions .
His popular sentence `` Swaraj is my birthright , and I shall have it '' became the source of inspiration for Indians .
Tilak was backed by rising public leaders like Bipin Chandra Pal and Lala Lajpat Rai , who held the same point of view .
The Gandhi-led independence movement opposed the British rule using non-violent methods like non-cooperation , civil disobedience and economic resistance .
Along with the desire for independence , tensions between Hindus and Muslims had also been developing over the years .
The British Indian territories gained independence in 1947 , after being partitioned into the Union of India and Dominion of Pakistan .
In 1971 , Bangladesh , formerly East Pakistan and East Bengal , seceded from Pakistan .
In 1962 , Nasser began a series of major socialist measures and modernization reforms in Egypt .
Following Egypt 's defeat by Israel in the 1967 Six-Day War , Nasser resigned , but he returned to office after popular demonstrations called for his reinstatement .
By 1968 , Nasser had appointed himself prime minister , launched the War of Attrition to regain lost territory , began a process of depoliticizing the military , and issued a set of political liberalization reforms .
After the conclusion of the 1970 Arab League summit , Nasser suffered a heart attack and died .
It was in Alexandria that Nasser became involved in political activism .
Nasser was arrested and detained for a night before his father bailed him out .
The incident garnered his first mention in the press : the nationalist newspaper Al Gihad reported that Nasser led the protest and was among the wounded .
Nasser later credited the novel as his inspiration to launch the 1952 revolution .
Nasser focused on his military career from then on , and had little contact with his family .
At the academy , he met Abdel Hakim Amer and Anwar Sadat , both of whom became important aides during his presidency .
After graduating from the academy in July 1938 , he was commissioned a second lieutenant in the infantry , and posted to Mankabad .
Sadat would later write that because of his `` energy , clear-thinking , and balanced judgement '' , Nasser emerged as the group 's natural leader .
Nasser saw the incident as a blatant violation of Egyptian sovereignty and wrote , `` I am ashamed that our army has not reacted against this attack '' , and wished for `` calamity '' to overtake the British .
Nasser was accepted into the General Staff College later that year .
During the war , he wrote of the Egyptian army 's unpreparedness , saying `` our soldiers were dashed against fortifications '' .
Nasser was deputy commander of the Egyptian forces that secured the Faluja pocket .
Appeals for help from Jordan 's Arab Legion went unheeded , but the brigade refused to surrender .
According to veteran journalist Eric Margolis , the defenders of Faluja , `` including young army officer Gamal Abdel Nasser , became national heroes '' for enduring Israeli bombardment while isolated from their command .
Nasser had also felt bitter that his brigade had not been relieved despite the resilience it displayed .
From then on , Nasser prevented the Brotherhood 's influence over his cadres ' activities without severing ties with the organization .
Its success and evident popular support among the Syrian people encouraged Nasser 's revolutionary pursuits .
Abdel Hadi was also hesitant to take drastic measures against the army , especially in front of its chief of staff , who was present during the interrogation , and subsequently released Nasser .
By then , the organization had expanded to around ninety members ; according to Khaled Mohieddin , `` nobody knew all of them and where they belonged in the hierarchy except Nasser '' .
The popularity of this move , as well as that of government-sponsored guerrilla attacks against the British , put pressure on Nasser to act .
According to Sadat , Nasser decided to wage `` a large scale assassination campaign '' .
Nasser recalled that her wails `` haunted '' him and firmly dissuaded him from undertaking similar actions in the future .
Nasser was determined to establish the independence of the army from the monarchy , and with Amer as the intercessor , resolved to field a nominee for the Free Officers .
The Free Officers seized control of all government buildings , radio stations , and police stations , as well as army headquarters in Cairo .
In a move to stave off foreign intervention two days before the revolution , Nasser had notified the American and British governments of his intentions , and both had agreed not to aid Farouk .
Relations between the RCC and Maher grew tense , however , as the latter viewed many of Nasser 's schemes -- agrarian reform , abolition of the monarchy , reorganization of political parties -- as too radical , culminating in Maher 's resignation on 7 September .
Naguib assumed the additional role of prime minister , and Nasser that of deputy prime minister .
In Nasser 's eyes , this law gave the RCC its own identity and transformed the coup into a revolution .
Nonetheless , the sentences were carried out .
Although outvoted , he still advocated holding elections by 1956 .
As Naguib intended , a mutiny immediately followed , demanding Naguib 's reinstatement and the RCC 's dissolution .
While visiting the striking officers at Military Headquarters -LRB- GHQ -RRB- to call for the mutiny 's end , Nasser was initially intimidated into accepting their demands .
However , on 27 February , Nasser 's supporters in the army launched a raid on the GHQ , ending the mutiny .
In response , a sizable group within the RCC , led by Khaled Mohieddin , demanded Naguib 's release and return to the presidency .
On 5 March , Nasser 's security coterie arrested thousands of participants in the uprising .
Naguib sought to crackdown on the protesters , but his requests were rebuffed by the heads of the security forces .
On 29 March , Nasser announced the decrees ' revocation in response to the `` impulse of the street . ''
The crowd roared in approval and Arab audiences were electrified .
Others produced plays denigrating his political opponents .
According to his associates , Nasser orchestrated the campaign himself .
The Israelis re-militarized the al-Auja Demilitarized Zone on the Egyptian border on 21 September .
Nasser considered the Baghdad Pact a threat to his efforts to eliminate British military influence in the Middle East , and a mechanism to undermine the Arab League and `` perpetuate -LSB- Arab -RSB- subservience to Zionism and -LSB- Western -RSB- imperialism '' .
He succeeded in lobbying the attendees to pass resolutions on each of these issues , notably securing the strong support of China and India .
Consequently , Nasser 's prestige was greatly boosted as was his self-confidence and image .
The NU would select a nominee for the presidential election whose name would be provided for public approval .
Nasser 's nomination for the post and the new constitution were put to public referendum on 23 June and each was approved by an overwhelming majority .
A 350-member National Assembly was established , elections for which were held in July 1957 .
Nasser himself would later state that he decided on 23 July , after studying the issue and deliberating with some of his advisers from the dissolved RCC , namely Boghdadi and technical specialist Mahmoud Younis , beginning on 21 July .
According to Ramadan , Nasser 's decision to nationalize the canal was a solitary decision , taken without consultation .
According to Aburish , this was Nasser 's largest pan-Arab triumph at the time and `` soon his pictures were to be found in the tents of Yemen , the souks of Marrakesh , and the posh villas of Syria '' .
The official reason given for the nationalization was that funds from the canal would be used for the construction of the dam in Aswan .
Nasser was aware that the canal 's nationalization would instigate an international crisis and believed the prospect of military intervention by the two countries was 80 per cent likely .
He believed , however , that the UK would not be able to intervene militarily for at least two months after the announcement , and dismissed Israeli action as `` impossible '' .
According to Heikal , after this agreement , `` Nasser estimated that the danger of invasion had dropped to 10 per cent '' .
Nasser ordered the military 's high command to withdraw the Egyptian Army from Sinai to bolster the canal 's defenses .
The two had a heated exchange on 3 November , and Amer conceded .
Nasser berated Amer and Salem , and vowed , `` Nobody is going to surrender . ''
Nasser assumed military command .
It was at Port Said that Nasser saw a confrontation with the invading forces as being the strategic and psychological focal point of Egypt 's defense .
A third infantry battalion and hundreds of national guardsmen were sent to the city as reinforcements , while two regular companies were dispatched to organize popular resistance .
Nasser and Boghdadi traveled to the canal zone to boost the morale of the armed volunteers .
When British and French forces landed in Port Said on 5 -- 6 November , its local militia put up a stiff resistance , resulting in street-to-street fighting .
The Egyptian Army commander in the city was preparing to request terms for a ceasefire , but Nasser ordered him to desist .
Nasser commended Eisenhower , stating he played the `` greatest and most decisive role '' in stopping the `` tripartite conspiracy '' .
By the end of December , British and French forces had totally withdrawn from Egyptian territory , while Israel completed its withdrawal in March 1957 and released all Egyptian prisoners of war .
By 1957 , pan-Arabism was the dominant ideology of the Arab world , and the average Arab citizen considered Nasser his undisputed leader .
Historian Adeed Dawisha credited Nasser 's status to his `` charisma , bolstered by his perceived victory in the Suez Crisis '' .
Lebanese sympathizers of Nasser and the Egyptian embassy in Beirut -- the press center of the Arab world -- bought out Lebanese media outlets to further disseminate Nasser 's ideals .
Nasser also enjoyed the support of Arab nationalist organizations , both civilian and paramilitary , throughout the region .
When efforts to offer tax incentives and attract outside investments yielded no tangible results , he nationalized more companies and made them a part of his economic development organization .
This effort achieved a measure of success , with increased agricultural production and investment in industrialization .
Nasser initially turned down the request , citing the two countries ' incompatible political and economic systems , lack of contiguity , the Syrian military 's record of intervention in politics , and the deep factionalism among Syria 's political forces .
Nasser subsequently opted for union , albeit on the condition that it would be a total political merger with him as its president , to which the delegates and Syrian president Shukri al-Quwatli agreed .
Nasser then left for Moscow to meet with Nikita Khrushchev .
Khrushchev was reportedly taken aback and denied he had meant to interfere in the UAR 's affairs .
The matter was settled as both leaders sought to prevent a rift between their two countries .
Nasser recognized the new government and stated that `` any attack on Iraq was tantamount to an attack on the UAR '' .
On 19 July , for the first time , he declared that he was opting for full Arab union , although he had no plan to merge Iraq with the UAR .
While most members of the Iraqi Revolutionary Command Council -LRB- RCC -RRB- favored Iraqi-UAR unity , Qasim sought to keep Iraq independent and resented Nasser 's large popular base in the country .
In the fall of 1958 , Nasser formed a tripartite committee consisting of Zakaria Mohieddin , al-Hawrani , and Salah Bitar to oversee developments in Syria .
By moving the latter two , who were Ba'athists , to Cairo , he neutralized important political figures who had their own ideas about how Syria should be run .
Nasser had considered dispatching troops to aid his Iraqi sympathizers , but decided against it .
Aburish states that Nasser was not fully capable of addressing Syrian problems because they were `` foreign to him '' .
In Egypt , the economic situation was more positive , with a GNP growth of 4.5 percent and a rapid growth of industry .
In response , pro-union army units in northern Syria revolted and pro-Nasser protests occurred in major Syrian cities .
Addressing the UAR 's breakup on 5 October , Nasser accepted personal responsibility and declared that Egypt would recognize an elected Syrian government .
He privately blamed interference by hostile Arab governments .
Most of Nasser 's old colleagues had questioned the wisdom of continuing the war , but Amer reassured Nasser of their coming victory .
A similar alliance toppled the Syrian government on 8 March .
On 14 March , the new Iraqi and Syrian governments sent Nasser delegations to push for a new Arab union .
At the meeting , Nasser lambasted the Ba'athists for `` facilitating '' Syria 's split from the UAR , and asserted that he was the `` leader of the Arabs '' .
A transitional unity agreement stipulating a federal system was signed by the parties on 17 April and the new union was set to be established in May 1965 .
Nasser blamed Arab divisions for what he deemed `` the disastrous situation '' .
He discouraged Syria and Palestinian guerrillas from provoking the Israelis , conceding that he had no plans for war with Israel .
In practice , Nasser used the PLO to wield control over the Palestinian fedayeen .
Nasser played a significant part in the strengthening of African solidarity in the late 1950s and early 1960s , although his continental leadership role had increasingly passed to Algeria since 1962 .
Nasser had used al-Azhar 's most willing ulema -LRB- scholars -RRB- as a counterweight to the Brotherhood 's Islamic influence , starting in 1953 .
Following Syria 's secession , Nasser grew concerned with Amer 's inability to train and modernize the army , and with the state within a state Amer had created in the military command and intelligence apparatus .
Nasser also attempted to maintain oversight of the country 's civil service to prevent it from inflating and consequently becoming a burden to the state .
New laws provided workers with a minimum wage , profit shares , free education , free health care , reduced working hours , and encouragement to participate in management .
Land reforms guaranteed the security of tenant farmers , promoted agricultural growth , and reduced rural poverty .
During the presidential referendum in Egypt , Nasser was re-elected to a second term as UAR president and took his oath on 25 March 1965 .
The message had been originally received by Amer on 2 May , but was withheld from Nasser until the Sinai deployment on 14 May .
In turn , he also reassured both powers that Egypt would only act defensively .
Amer reassured him that the army was prepared for confrontation , but Nasser doubted Amer 's assessment of the military 's readiness .
Moreover , Amer anticipated an impending Israeli attack and advocated a preemptive strike .
Nasser refused the call upon determination that the air force lacked pilots and Amer 's handpicked officers were incompetent .
Towards the end of May , Nasser increasingly exchanged his positions of deterrence for deference to the inevitability of war , under increased pressure to act by both the general Arab populace and various Arab governments .
On 26 May Nasser declared , `` our basic objective will be to destroy Israel '' .
After hearing of the attack , he rushed to army headquarters to inquire about the military situation .
The simmering conflict between Nasser and Amer subsequently came to the fore , and officers present reported the pair burst into `` a nonstop shouting match '' .
Hundreds of thousands of sympathizers poured into the streets in mass demonstrations throughout Egypt and across the Arab world rejecting his resignation , chanting , `` We are your soldiers , Gamal ! ''
After Nasser sacked thirty of the loyalists in response , Amer and his allies devised a plan to topple him on 27 August .
Nasser was tipped off about their activities and , after several invitations , he convinced Amer to meet him at his home on 24 August .
Nasser confronted Amer about the coup plot , which he denied before being arrested by Mohieddin .
Despite his souring relationship with Amer , Nasser spoke of losing `` the person closest to -LSB- him -RSB- '' .
Nasser cut relations with the US following the war , and , according to Aburish , his policy of `` playing the superpowers against each other '' ended .
His supporters claimed Nasser 's move was meant to buy time to prepare for another confrontation with Israel , while his detractors believed his acceptance of the resolution signaled a waning interest in Palestinian independence .
A public referendum approved the proposed measures in May , and held subsequent elections for the Supreme Executive Committee , the ASU 's highest decision-making body .
He also advised Arafat to think of peace with Israel and the establishment of a Palestinian state comprising the West Bank and the Gaza Strip .
Israel retaliated against Egyptian shelling with commando raids , artillery shelling and air strikes .
This resulted in an exodus of civilians from Egyptian cities along the Suez Canal 's western bank .
Nasser forestalled any movement toward direct negotiations with Israel .
He was immediately transported to his house , where his physicians tended to him .
According to his doctor , al-Sawi Habibi , Nasser 's likely cause of death was arteriosclerosis , varicose veins , and complications from long-standing diabetes .
The state of Nasser 's health was not known to the public prior to his death .
Following the announcement of Nasser 's death , Egypt and the Arab world were in a state of shock .
His flag-draped coffin was attached to a gun carriage pulled by six horses and led by a column of cavalrymen .
Because of his ability to motivate nationalistic passions , `` men , women , and children wept and wailed in the streets '' after hearing of his death , according to Nutting .
The general Arab reaction was one of mourning , with thousands of people pouring onto the streets of major cities throughout the Arab world .
The world will never again see five million people crying together . ''
During his presidency , ordinary citizens enjoyed unprecedented access to housing , education , jobs , health services and nourishment , as well as other forms of social welfare , while feudalistic influence waned .
However , the marked economic growth of the early 1960s took a downturn for the remainder of the decade , only recovering in 1970 .
Egypt under Nasser dominated the Arab world in these fields , producing cultural icons .
The party carried minor political influence , and splits between its members beginning in 1995 resulted in the gradual establishment of splinter parties , including Hamdeen Sabahi 's 1997 founding of Al-Karama .
Nasserist activists were among the founders of Kefaya , a major opposition force during Mubarak 's rule .
Historian Elie Podeh wrote that a constant theme of Nasser 's image was `` his ability to represent Egyptian authenticity , in triumph or defeat '' .
Historian Tarek Osman wrote :
According to political scientist Mahmoud Hamad , writing in 2008 , `` nostalgia for Nasser is easily sensed in Egypt and all Arab countries today '' .
Islamists in Egypt , particularly members of the politically persecuted Brotherhood , viewed Nasser as oppressive , tyrannical , and demonic .
He ceased consulting his colleagues and made more and more of the decisions himself .
In this case Nasser 's opponent could see his hand in the mirror and knew he was only holding a pair of deuces '' and Nasser knew that his army is not prepared yet .
To varying degrees , Nasser 's statist system of government was continued in Egypt and emulated by virtually all Arab republics , namely Algeria , Syria , Iraq , Tunisia , Yemen , Sudan , and Libya .
Other coups influenced by Nasser included those that occurred in Iraq in July 1958 and Syria in 1963 .
While many regional heads of state tried to emulate Nasser , Podeh opined that the `` parochialism '' of successive Arab leaders `` transformed imitation -LSB- of Nasser -RSB- into parody '' .
It is also considered a milestone in Egyptian and Arab cinema as the first film to dramatize the role of a modern-day Arab leader .
The combination of smoking and working long hours contributed to his poor health .
He suffered two major heart attacks -LRB- in 1966 and 1969 -RRB- , and was on bed rest for six weeks after the second episode .
Angelo Giuseppe Roncalli was the fourth of fourteen children born to a family of sharecroppers who lived in a village in Lombardy .
In a consistory on 12 January 1953 Pope Pius XII made Roncalli a cardinal as the Cardinal-Priest of Santa Prisca in addition to naming him as the Patriarch of Venice .
His selection was unexpected , and Roncalli himself had come to Rome with a return train ticket to Venice .
His passionate views on equality were summed up in his famous statement , `` We were all made in God 's image , and thus , we are all Godly alike . ''
John XXIII made many passionate speeches during his pontificate , one of which was on the day that he opened the Second Vatican Council in the middle of the night to the crowd gathered in St. Peter 's Square : `` Dear children , returning home , you will find children : give your children a hug and say : This is a hug from the Pope ! ''
Pope John XXIII did not live to see the Vatican Council to completion .
Following his beatification , his body was moved on 3 June 2001 from its original place to the altar of Saint Jerome where it could be seen by the faithful .
On 5 July 2013 , Pope Francis -- bypassing the traditionally required second miracle -- declared John XXIII a saint , after unanimous agreement by a consistory , or meeting , of the College of Cardinals , based on the fact that he was considered to have lived a virtuous , model lifestyle , and because of the good for the Church which had come from his having opened the Second Vatican Council .
He was canonised alongside Pope Saint John Paul II on 27 April 2014 .
This is understandable , since he was the one who had had the idea for it and had convened it .
On 3 March , Pius XI also named him for consecration as titular archbishop of Areopolis , Jordan .
Roncalli was initially reluctant about a mission to Bulgaria , but he would soon relent .
After he was consecrated , he introduced his family to Pope Pius XI .
He chose as his episcopal motto Obedientia et Pax -LRB- `` Obedience and Peace '' -RRB- , which became his guiding motto .
While he was in Bulgaria , an earthquake struck in a town not too far from where he was .
Unaffected , he wrote to his sisters Ancilla and Maria and told them both that he was fine .
Roncalli was unable to see his mother for the end as the death of a pontiff meant that he would have to stay at his post until the election of a new pontiff .
Roncalli expressed happiness that Pacelli was elected , and , on radio , listened to the coronation of the new pontiff .
It was around this time that he , with the aid of Monsignor Bruno Heim , formed his coat of arms with a lion of Saint Mark on a white ground .
Auriol also awarded Roncalli three months later with the award of Commander of the Legion of Honour .
He attended her funeral back in his hometown .
His journal was specifically concerned with the funeral and the abused state of the late pontiff 's corpse .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
At the time , as opposed to contemporary practice , the participating Cardinals did not have to be below age 80 to vote , there were few Eastern-rite Cardinals , and no Cardinals who were just priests at the time of their elevation .
After the long pontificate of Pope Pius XII , the cardinals chose a man who -- it was presumed because of his advanced age -- would be a short-term or `` stop-gap '' pope .
They wished to choose a candidate who would do little during the new pontificate .
Upon his election , Cardinal Eugene Tisserant asked him the ritual questions of whether he would accept and if so , what name he would take for himself .
Roncalli gave the first of his many surprises when he chose `` John '' as his regnal name .
From the Second Vatican Council came changes that reshaped the face of Catholicism : a comprehensively revised liturgy , a stronger emphasis on ecumenism , and a new approach to the world .
He wrote , `` Man has the right to live .
He has the right to bodily integrity and to the means necessary for the proper development of life , particularly food , clothing , shelter , medical care , rest , and , finally , the necessary social services .
In consequence , he has the right to be looked after in the event of ill health ; disability stemming from his work ; widowhood ; old age ; enforced unemployment ; or whenever through no fault of his own he is deprived of the means of livelihood . ''
The day was basically electing members for several council commissions that would work on the issues presented in the council .
In his journal in 1959 during a spiritual retreat , John XXIII made this remark : `` I always think of Pius IX of holy and glorious memory , and by imitating him in his sacrifices , I would like to be worthy to celebrate his canonization '' .
Both men applauded the pope for his deep commitment to peace .
Khrushchev would later send a message via Norman Cousins and the letter expressed his best wishes for the pontiff 's ailing health .
John XXIII personally typed and sent a message back to him , thanking him for his letter .
He stated that it would have been an insult to honour a pontiff on the remains of the crucified Saint Peter .
It was the pope 's last public appearance .
Around this time , his remaining siblings arrived to be with him .
The pope began to speak for the very last time : `` I had the great grace to be born into a Christian family , modest and poor , but with the fear of the Lord .
My time on earth is drawing to a close .
But Christ lives on and continues his work in the Church .
Souls , souls , ut omnes unum sint . ''
-LSB- c -RSB- Van Lierde then anointed his eyes , ears , mouth , hands and feet .
Overcome by emotion , Van Lierde forgot the right order of anointing .
John XXIII gently helped him before bidding those present a last farewell .
After he died , his brow was ritually tapped to see if he was dead , and those with him in the room said prayers .
Then the room was illuminated , thus informing the people of what had happened .
Two wreaths , placed on the two sides of his tomb , were donated by the prisoners of the Regina Coeli prison and the Mantova jail in Verona .
On 22 June 1963 , one day after his friend and successor Pope Paul VI was elected , the latter prayed at his tomb .
He was a man of simple origins , of simple faith , of simple charity .
In this exalted office he was still the gentle pastor .
He believed in discussion and persuasion .
He profoundly respected the dignity of man .
He gave the world immortal statements of the rights of man , of the obligations of men to each other , of their duty to strive for a world community in which all can live in peace and fraternal friendship .
His goodness reached across temporal boundaries to warm the hearts of men of all nations and of all faiths '' .
Following his beatification , his body was moved from its original burial place in the grottoes below the Vatican to the altar of St. Jerome and displayed for the veneration of the faithful .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Instead , Francis based this decision on John XXIII 's merits for the Second Vatican Council .
Two contrasting viewpoints on time divide many prominent philosophers .
This second view , in the tradition of Gottfried Leibniz and Immanuel Kant , holds that time is neither an event nor a thing , and thus is not itself measurable nor can it be travelled .
An operational definition of time , wherein one says that observing a certain number of repetitions of one or another standard cyclical event -LRB- such as the passage of a free-swinging pendulum -RRB- constitutes one standard unit such as the second , is highly useful in the conduct of both advanced experiments and everyday affairs of life .
The operational definition leaves aside the question whether there is something called time , apart from the counting activity just mentioned , that flows and that can be measured .
Examples include the apparent motion of the sun across the sky , the phases of the moon , the swing of a pendulum , and the beat of a heart .
Increasingly , personal electronic devices display both calendars and clocks simultaneously .
Without intercalation to add days or months to some years , seasons quickly drift in a calendar based solely on twelve lunar months .
Lunisolar calendars have a thirteenth month added to some years to make up for the difference between a full year -LRB- now known to be about 365.24 days -RRB- and a year of just twelve lunar months .
The numbers twelve and thirteen came to feature prominently in many cultures , at least partly due to this relationship of months to years .
They could be used to measure the hours even at night , but required manual upkeep to replenish the flow of water .
The Ancient Greeks and the people from Chaldea -LRB- southeastern Mesopotamia -RRB- regularly maintained timekeeping records as an essential part of their astronomical observations .
They were used in navigation .
Waterclocks , and later , mechanical clocks , were used to mark the events of the abbeys and monasteries of the Middle Ages .
One of the most common atoms used is caesium , most modern atomic clocks probe caesium with microwaves to determine the frequency of these electron vibrations .
SI defines the second as 9,192,631,770 cycles of the radiation that corresponds to the transition between two electron spin energy levels of the ground state of the 133Cs atom .
Universal Time -LRB- UT -RRB- is the modern term for the international telescope-based system , adopted to replace `` Greenwich Mean Time '' in 1928 by the International Astronomical Union .
Because the rotational period of Earth is not perfectly constant , the duration of a second would vary if calibrated to a telescope-based standard like GMT or UT -- in which a second was defined as a fraction of a day or year .
This second view , in the tradition of Gottfried Leibniz and Immanuel Kant , holds that space and time `` do not exist in and of themselves , but ... are the product of the way we represent things '' , because we can know objects only as they appear to us .
Plato , in the Timaeus , identified time with the period of motion of the heavenly bodies .
If no one asks me , I know : if I wish to explain it to one that asketh , I know not . ''
In this view , time does not refer to any kind of entity that `` flows , '' that objects `` move through , '' or that is a `` container '' for events .
Time was designated by Kant as the purest possible schema of a pure concept or category .
Hence , the relationship to the past is a present awareness of having been , which allows the past to exist in the present .
It is related to the human propensity for caring and being concerned , which causes `` being ahead of oneself '' when thinking of a pending occurrence .
Therefore , this concern for a potential occurrence also allows the future to exist in the present .
Heidegger seems to think this is the way that a linear relationship with time , or temporal existence , is broken or transcended .
We are not stuck in sequential time .
Events that have a time-like separation can not be simultaneous in any frame of reference , there must be a temporal component -LRB- and possibly a spatial one -RRB- to their separation .
Events that have a space-like separation will be simultaneous in some frame of reference , and there is no frame of reference in which they do not have a spatial separation .
Events seen by two different observers in motion relative to each other produce a mathematical concept of time that works sufficiently well for describing the everyday phenomena of most people 's experience .
This led directly to the result that observers in motion relative to one another measure different elapsed times for the same event .
Because the outside universe appears flattened to the spaceship , the crew perceives themselves as quickly traveling between regions of space that -LRB- to the stationary observer -RRB- are many light years apart .
According to the special theory of relativity , in the high-speed particle 's frame of reference , it exists , on the average , for a standard amount of time known as its mean lifetime , and the distance it travels in that time is zero , because its velocity is zero .
Relative to a frame of reference at rest , time seems to `` slow down '' for the particle .
Relative to the high-speed particle , distances seem to shorten .
Time appears to have a direction -- the past lies behind , fixed and immutable , while the future lies ahead and is not necessarily fixed .
Little is known about the earliest moments of the universe 's history .
Time travel is the concept of moving backwards or forwards to different points in time , in a manner analogous to moving through space , and different from the normal `` flow '' of time to an earthbound observer .
In this view , all points in time -LRB- including future times -RRB- `` persist '' in some way .
This view does n't simply hold that history is an unchangeable constant , but that any change made by a hypothetical future time traveler would already have happened in his or her past , resulting in the reality that the traveler moves from .
The question concerns how time is allocated across a number of activities -LRB- such as time spent at home , at work , shopping , etc. -RRB- .
A sequence of events may be focused on past events -LRB- e.g. , stories , history , chronology -RRB- , on future events that must be in a predetermined order -LRB- e.g. , plans , schedules , procedures , timetables -RRB- , or focused on the observation of past events with the expectation that the events will occur in the future -LRB- e.g. , processes -RRB- .
It is one of the world 's most important central banks and is one of the seven institutions of the European Union -LRB- EU -RRB- listed in the Treaty on European Union -LRB- TEU -RRB- .
The bank primarily occupied the Eurotower prior to , and during , the construction of the new headquarters .
This was opposed by the German , Dutch and Belgian governments who saw Duisenberg as a guarantor of a strong euro .
-LRB- Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices -RRB- Unlike for example the United States Federal Reserve Bank , the ECB has only one primary objective but this objective has never been defined in statutory law , and the HICP target can be termed ad-hoc .
The banks in effect borrow cash and must pay it back ; the short durations allow interest rates to be adjusted continually .
When the repo notes come due the participating banks bid again .
-LSB- a -RSB-
It can issue decisions to national central banks and may also exercise powers delegated to it by the Governing Council .
They are appointed `` from among persons of recognised standing and professional experience in monetary or banking matters by common accord of the governments of the Member States at the level of Heads of State or Government , on a recommendation from the Council , after it has consulted the European Parliament and the Governing Council of the ECB '' .
The Executive Board normally meets every Tuesday .
It proposes draft decisions to the Governing Council under the non-objection procedure .
In such cases , the representatives are together considered as one member for the purposes of the voting procedure .
Shares in the ECB are not transferable and can not be used as collateral .
Seeing a sovereign default in the eurozone as a shock , the general public , international and European institutions , and the financial community started to intensively reassess the economic situation and creditworthiness of eurozone states .
Those eurozone states being assessed as not financially sustainable enough on their current path , faced waves of credit rating downgrades and rising borrowing costs including increasing interest rate spreads .
There is also a widespread view -LSB- vague -RSB- -LSB- who ? -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
This has led to public discussions if Greece , Portugal , and even Italy would be better off leaving the eurozone to regain economical and financial stability if they would not implement reforms to strengthen their competitiveness as part of the eurozone in time .
Their position is to keep Greece within the eurozone , but not at any cost .
Private-sector bond holders are an integral part of the public and private banking system .
These two transactions are similar , i.e. bonds are used as collaterals for loans , the difference being of legal nature .
This changed with the recent sovereign-debt crisis .
Certain techniques can minimise the impact .
On the other hand , certain financial techniques can reduce the impact of such purchases on the currency .
On 4 September 2014 , the bank went further by announcing it would buy bonds and other debt instruments primarily from banks in a bid to boost the availability of credit for businesses .
This preference has typically led the ECB to argue that the weaker member countries must :
If the European central bank were to deal directly with failing banking systems sovereign debt would not look as leveraged relative to national income in the financially weaker member states .
The bank must also co-operate within the EU and internationally with third bodies and entities .
While it was designed to accommodate double the number of staff who operate in the former Eurotower , that building has been retained since the ECB took responsibility for banking supervision and more space was hence required .
On 21 December 2011 the bank instituted a programme of making low-interest loans with a term of three years -LRB- 36 months -RRB- and 1 % interest to European banks accepting loans from the portfolio of the banks as collateral .
Loans totalling $ 489.2 bn -LRB- US$ 640 bn -RRB- were announced .
The loans were not offered to European states , but government securities issued by European states would be acceptable collateral as would mortgage-backed securities and other commercial paper that can be demonstrated to be secure .
The programme was announced on 8 December 2011 but observers were surprised by the volume of the loans made when it was implemented .
Under its LTRO it loaned $ 489bn to 523 banks for an exceptionally long period of three years at a rate of just one percent .
It announced two 3-month and one 6-month full allotment of Long Term Refinancing Operations -LRB- LTROs -RRB- .
The first tender was settled 3 April , and was more than four times oversubscribed .
The $ 25 billion auction drew bids amounting to $ 103.1 billion , from 177 banks .
Another six-month tender was allotted on 9 July , again to the amount of $ 25 billion .
St. John 's was incorporated as a city in 1888 , yet is considered by some to be the oldest English-founded city in North America .
It is one of the world 's top ten oceanside destinations , according to National Geographic Magazine .
Its name has been attributed to the feast day of John the Baptist , when John Cabot was believed to have sailed into the harbour in 1497 , and also to a Basque fishing town with the same name .
Other permanent English settlements in the Americas that predate St. John 's include : St. George 's , Bermuda -LRB- 1612 -RRB- and Jamestown , Virginia -LRB- 1607 -RRB- .
However , the exact locations of Cabot 's landfalls are disputed .
The earliest record of the location appears as São João on a Portuguese map by Pedro Reinel in 1519 .
St. Jehan is shown on Nicholas Desliens ' world map of 1541 and San Joham is found in João Freire 's Atlas of 1546 .
It was during this time that Water Street was first developed , making it the oldest street in North America .
-LSB- dubious -- discuss -RSB-
Martin landed six cannons from his vessel , the Elias Andrews , and constructed an earthen breastwork and battery near chain Rock commanding the Narrows leading into the harbour .
When 1500 English reinforcements arrived in late 1697 they found nothing but rubble where the town and fortifications had stood .
As a result , the St. John 's area now accounts for about half of the province 's economic output .
The city of St. John 's is located at a distance by air of 3,636 kilometres -LRB- 2,259 mi -RRB- from Lorient , France which lies on a nearly precisely identical latitude across the Atlantic on the French western coast .
Its downtown area lies to the west and north of St. John 's Harbour , and the rest of the city expands from the downtown to the north , south , east and west .
Mean temperatures range from − 4.9 °C -LRB- 23.2 °F -RRB- in February to 16.1 °C -LRB- 61.0 °F -RRB- in August , showing somewhat of a seasonal lag in the climate .
This is partly due to its propensity for tropical storm activity as well as moist , Atlantic air frequently blowing ashore and creating precipitation .
Precipitation is frequent and often heavy , falling year round .
This winter precipitation maximum is quite unusual for humid continental climates , which most commonly have a late spring or early summer precipitation maximum -LRB- for example , most of the Midwestern U.S. -RRB- .
Most heavy precipitation events in St. John 's are the product of intense mid-latitude storms migrating from the Northeastern U.S. and New England states , and these are most common and intense from October to March , bringing heavy precipitation -LRB- commonly 4 to 8 centimetres of rainfall equivalent in a single storm -RRB- , and strong winds .
In winter , two or more types of precipitation -LRB- rain , freezing rain , sleet and snow -RRB- can fall from passage of a single storm .
Snowfall is heavy , averaging nearly 335 centimetres per winter season .
However , winter storms can bring changing precipitation types .
Heavy snow can transition to heavy rain , melting the snow cover , and possibly back to snow or ice -LRB- perhaps briefly -RRB- all in the same storm , resulting in little or no net snow accumulation .
Snow cover in St. John 's is variable , and especially early in the winter season , may be slow to develop , but can extend deeply into the spring months -LRB- March , April -RRB- .
Like many other cities of the time , as the Industrial Revolution took hold and new methods and materials for construction were introduced , the landscape changed as the city grew in width and height .
Heritage advocates argue that the current regulations should be enforced while others believe the regulations should be relaxed to encourage economic development .
The new zone will allow for buildings of greater height .
Thus , St. John 's is Newfoundland and Labrador 's largest city and Canada 's 20th largest CMA .
Philip 's , Torbay , Logy Bay-Middle Cove-Outer Cove , Pouch Cove , Flatrock , Bay Bulls , Witless Bay , Petty Harbour-Maddox Cove and Bauline .
St. John 's is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archbishop of St. John 's , and the Anglican Bishop of Eastern Newfoundland and Labrador .
St. John 's economy is connected to both its role as the provincial capital of Newfoundland and Labrador and to the ocean .
The city is the centre of the oil and gas industry in Eastern Canada and is one of 19 World Energy Cities .
ExxonMobil Canada is headquartered in St. John 's and companies such as Chevron , Husky Energy , Suncor Energy and Statoil have major regional operations in the city .
In both 2010 and 2011 , the metro area 's gross domestic product -LRB- GDP -RRB- led 27 other metropolitan areas in the country , according to the Conference Board of Canada , recording growth of 6.6 per cent and 5.8 per cent respectively .
Economic forecasts suggest that the city will continue its strong economic growth in the coming years not only in the `` oceanic '' industries mentioned above , but also in tourism and new home construction as the population continues to grow .
Pippy Park is also home to the Fluvarium , an environmental education centre which offers a cross section view of Nagle 's Hill Brook .
Today the park contains a public swimming pool , playground , a baseball diamond and many large open grassy areas .
Bannerman Park plays host to many festivals and sporting events , most notably the Newfoundland and Labrador Folk Festival and St. John 's Peace-a-chord .
The park is also the finishing location for the annual Tely 10 Mile Road Race .
Today , Signal Hill is a National Historic Site of Canada and remains incredibly popular amongst tourists and locals alike ; 97 % of all tourists to St. John 's visit Signal Hill .
Amongst its popular attractions are the Signal Hill Tattoo , showcasing the Royal Newfoundland Regiment of foot , c. 1795 , and the North Head Trail which grants an impressive view of the Atlantic Ocean and the surrounding coast .
The rugby union team The Rock is the Eastern Canadian entry in the Americas Rugby Championship .
The city now serves as the capital of Newfoundland and Labrador , therefore the provincial legislature is located in the city .
The city is represented by ten MHAs , four who are members of the governing Progressive Conservative Party , three that belong to the New Democratic Party -LRB- NDP -RRB- , and three that belong to the Liberal Party .
St. John 's has traditionally been one of the safest cities in Canada to live ; however , in recent years crime in the city has steadily increased .
During this same time violent crime in the city decreased 6 % , compared to a 1 % decrease nationally .
In 2010 the total crime severity index for the city was 101.9 , an increase of 10 % from 2009 and 19.2 % above the national average .
The violent crime severity index was 90.1 , an increase of 29 % from 2009 and 1.2 % above the national average .
Regular destinations include Halifax , Montreal , Ottawa , Toronto , as well as destinations throughout the province .
International locations include Dublin , London , New York City , Saint Pierre and Miquelon , Glasgow and Varadero .
Scheduled service providers include Air Canada , Air Canada Jazz , Air Saint-Pierre , Air Transat , United Airlines , Porter Airlines , Provincial Airlines , Sunwing Airlines and Westjet .
Pitts Memorial Drive runs from Conception Bay South , through the city of Mount Pearl and into downtown St. John 's , with interchanges for Goulds , Water Street and Hamilton Avenue-New Gower Street .
St. John 's is served by the Eastern School District , the largest school district in Newfoundland and Labrador by student population .
St. John 's also includes one school that is part of the province-wide Conseil Scolaire Francophone -LRB- CSF -RRB- , the Francophone public school district .
Atlantic Canada 's largest university , Memorial University of Newfoundland -LRB- MUN -RRB- , is located in St. John 's .
MUN provides comprehensive education and grants degrees in several fields and its historical strengths in engineering , business , geology , and medicine , make MUN one of the top comprehensive universities in Canada .
CJON-DT , known on air as `` NTV '' , is an independent station .
The station sublicenses entertainment programming from Global and news programming from CTV and Global , rather than purchasing primary broadcast rights .
St. John 's is the only Canadian city served by radio stations whose call letters do not all begin with the letter C .
However , other commercial radio stations in St. John 's which went to air after 1949 use the same range of prefixes -LRB- CF -- CK -RRB- currently in use elsewhere in Canada , with the exception of VOCM-FM , which was permitted to adopt the VOCM callsign because of its corporate association with the AM station that already bore that callsign .
VO also remains in use in amateur radio .
It was the first console to use Blu-ray Disc as its primary storage medium .
Its successor , the PlayStation 4 , was released later in November 2013 .
Both models were announced for a simultaneous worldwide release : November 11 , 2006 , for Japan and November 17 , 2006 , for North America and Europe .
At the Tokyo Game Show on September 22 , 2006 , Sony announced that it would include an HDMI port on the 20 GB system , but a chrome trim , flash card readers , silver logo and Wi-Fi would not be included .
The console was originally planned for a global release through November , but at the start of September the release in Europe and the rest of the world was delayed until March .
With it being a somewhat last-minute delay , some companies had taken deposits for pre-orders , at which Sony informed customers that they were eligible for full refunds or could continue the pre-order .
The system sold about 600,000 units in its first two days .
It was released in major territories by September 2009 .
It instead reverted to a more traditional PlayStation - and PlayStation 2-like ` PlayStation 3 ' logo with `` PS3 '' imprinted on the console .
The storage of 12 GB model is upgradable with an official standalone 250 GB hard drive .
A vertical stand was also released for the model .
In the United States , the PS3 Super Slim was first released as a bundled console .
The 250 GB was model was bundled with Game of the Year edition of Uncharted 3 : Drake 's Deception and released on September 25 , 2012 ; and the 500 GB model was bundled with Assassin 's Creed III and released on October 30 , 2012 .
In Japan , the black colored Super Slim model was released on October 4 , 2012 ; and the white colored Super Slim model was released on November 22 , 2012 .
The Super Slim model is 20 percent smaller and 25 percent lighter than the Slim model and features a manual sliding disc cover instead of a motorized slot-loading disc cover of the Slim model .
The white colored Super Slim model was released in the United States on January 27 , 2013 as part of the Instant Game Collection Bundle .
The Garnet Red and Azurite Blue colored models were launched in Japan on February 28 , 2013 .
The Azurite Blue model was released as a GameStop exclusive with 250GB storage .
The game was heavily praised by numerous video game websites , including GameSpot and IGN , both of whom awarded it their PlayStation 3 Game of the Year award for 2006 .
Some titles missed the launch window and were delayed until early 2007 , such as The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion , F.E.A.R. and Sonic the Hedgehog .
This was first demonstrated publicly on PS3 using Sony 's own technology in January 2009 at the Consumer Electronics Show .
Titles with such patches include Wipeout HD , Pain , and Super Stardust HD .
PS3 's hardware has also been used to build supercomputers for high-performance computing .
Mueller commented that the 256 MB of system RAM is a limitation for this particular application and is considering attempting to retrofit more RAM .
Software includes : Fedora Core 5 Linux ppc64 , MPICH2 , OpenMP v 2.5 , GNU Compiler Collection and CellSDK 1.1 .
Retail PS3 Slim units can not be used for supercomputing , because PS3 Slim lacks the ability to boot into a third-party OS .
The eighth SPE is disabled to improve chip yields .
Only six of the seven SPEs are accessible to developers as the seventh SPE is reserved by the console 's operating system .
These are : Users , Settings , Photo , Music , Video , TV/Video Services , Game , Network , PlayStation Network and Friends -LRB- similar to the PlayStation Portable media bar -RRB- .
PS3 includes the ability to store various master and secondary user profiles , manage and explore photos with or without a musical slide show , play music and copy audio CD tracks to an attached data storage device , play movies and video files from the hard disk drive , an optical disc -LRB- Blu-ray Disc or DVD-Video -RRB- or an optional USB mass storage or Flash card , compatibility for a USB keyboard and mouse and a web browser supporting compatible-file download function .
Additionally , UPnP media will appear in the respective audio/video/photo categories if a compatible media server or DLNA server is detected on the local network .
The Network menu allows online shopping through the PlayStation Store and connectivity to PlayStation Portable via Remote Play .
PlayStation 3 console protects certain types of data and uses digital rights management to limit the data 's use .
The key feature of this application is that it can organize photos into groups according to various criteria .
Slideshows can be viewed with the application , along with music and playlists .
The service became available in November 2009 .
The error had many symptoms .
However , the root cause of the problem was unrelated to the PlayStation Network , since even users who had never been online also had problems playing installed offline games -LRB- which queried the system timer as part of startup -RRB- and using system themes .
Sony confirmed that there was an error and stated that they were narrowing down the issue and were continuing to work to restore service .
PlayStation Portable can connect with PlayStation 3 in many ways , including in-game connectivity .
The network enables online gaming , the PlayStation Store , PlayStation Home and other services .
Rumors of such service had been in speculation since Kaz Hirai 's announcement at TGS 2009 of a possible paid service for PSN but with the current PSN service still available .
These enhancements include the ability to have demos , game and system software updates download automatically to PlayStation 3 .
Subscribers also get early or exclusive access to some betas , game demos , premium downloadable content and other PlayStation Store items .
North American users also get a free subscription to Qore .
The Store offers a range of downloadable content both for purchase and available free of charge .
Available content includes full games , add-on content , playable demos , themes and game and movie trailers .
The concept was developed further into a major PlayStation Network feature , which interacts with the -LSB- Status Indicator -RSB- to display a ticker of all content , excluding recently played content -LRB- currently in North America and Japan only -RRB- .
There are four kinds of content the What 's New screen displays and links to , on the sections .
Users can shop for new items or win prizes from PS3 games , or Home activities .
Users interact and connect with friends and customise content in a virtual world .
The third channel was the United Village channel .
United Village was designed to share information about communities and cultures worldwide .
An update allowed video and photo viewing in the application .
The fourth channel was the USA exclusive PlayStation Network Game Trailers Channel for direct streaming of game trailers .
They also stated that it was possible that users ' profile data , including purchase history and billing address , and PlayStation Network/Qriocity password security answers may have been obtained .
There was no evidence that any credit card data had been taken , but the possibility could not be ruled out , and Sony advised customers that their credit card data may have been obtained .
Additionally , the credit card numbers were encrypted and Sony never collected the three digit CVC or CSC number from the back of the credit cards which is required for authenticating some transactions .
Although its PlayStation predecessors had been very dominant against the competition and were hugely profitable for Sony , PlayStation 3 had an inauspicious start , and Sony chairman and CEO Sir Howard Stringer initially could not convince investors of a turnaround in its fortunes .
Various news agencies , including The Times and The Wall Street Journal reported that this was due to poor sales , while SCEI maintains that Kutaragi had been planning his retirement for six months prior to the announcement .
In January 2009 Sony announced that their gaming division was profitable in Q3 2008 .
Critical and commercial reception to PS3 improved over time , after a series of price revisions , Blu-ray 's victory over HD DVD , and the release of several well received titles .
IGN judged PlayStation 3 to have the best game line-up of 2008 , based on their review scores in comparison to those of Wii and Xbox 360 .
Business Week summed up the general opinion by stating that it was `` more impressed with what -LSB- the PlayStation 3 -RSB- could do than with what it currently does '' .
Developers also found the machine difficult to program for .
He continued `` I 'd say , even at this late date , they should just cancel it and do a do over .
Just say , ` This was a horrible disaster and we 're sorry and we 're going to stop selling this and stop trying to convince people to develop for it ' '' .
He later restated Valve 's position , `` Until we have the ability to get a PS3 team together , until we find the people who want to come to Valve or who are at Valve who want to work on that , I do n't really see us moving to that platform '' .
He continued , `` It 's expensive to develop for the console , and the Wii and the Xbox are just selling better .
Kotick also claimed that Activision Blizzard may stop supporting the system if the situation is not addressed . ''
-LSB- Sony has -RSB- to cut the -LSB- PS3 's retail -RSB- price , because if they do n't , the attach rates are likely to slow .
If we are being realistic , we might have to stop supporting Sony . ''
It regained the number-one position again one day later .
It 's amazing that something so small can do so much '' .
The Super Slim model of PS3 has received positive reviews .
They also said there is no real drop in retail price .
In short , it feels cheap .
You do n't realize how convenient autoloading disc trays are until they 're gone .
Whether it was to cut costs or save space , this move is ultimately a step back . ''
Simply sliding off the side panel reveals the drive bay , which can quickly be unscrewed . ''
They also stated that whilst the Super Slim model is not in any way an upgrade , it could be an indicator as to what 's to come .
`` It may not be revolutionary , but the Super Slim PS3 is the same impressive machine in a much smaller package .
There does n't seem to be any reason for existing PS3 owners to upgrade , but for the prospective PS3 buyer , the Super Slim is probably the way to go if you can deal with not having a slot-loading disc drive . ''
An exception is sometimes stated to be if bills are not passed in good faith , though it is difficult to make an interpretation on what this circumstance might constitute .
The so-called Model Parliament included bishops , abbots , earls , barons , and two knights from each shire and two burgesses from each borough among its members .
The King would seek the advice and consent of both houses before making any law .
Hence , all acts include the clause `` Be it enacted by the Queen 's -LRB- King 's -RRB- most Excellent Majesty , by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons , in this present Parliament assembled , and by the authority of the same , as follows ... '' .
The Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949 provide a second potential preamble if the House of Lords were to be excluded from the process .
The power of parliament to pass bills was often thwarted by monarchs .
In 1678 , Charles II withheld his assent from a bill `` for preserving the Peace of the Kingdom by raising the Militia , and continuing them in Duty for Two and Forty Days , '' suggesting that he , not parliament , should control the militia .
No monarch has since withheld royal assent on a bill passed by the British parliament .
Thus , as the concept of ministerial responsibility has evolved , the power to withhold royal assent has fallen into disuse , both in the United Kingdom and in the other Commonwealth realms .
Royal assent is the final stage in the legislative process for acts of the Scottish parliament .
-LRB- A revised version of the proposed reforms was subsequently given assent . -RRB-
In 2011 , campaigners against a law that sought to reduce the number of senators in the states of Jersey petitioned the Privy Council to advise the Queen to refuse royal assent .
Royal assent is not sufficient to give legal effect to an Act of Tynwald .
If approved by Tynwald , a measure `` shall have the force and effect of an Act of Tynwald upon the Royal Assent thereto being announced to Tynwald '' .
A Measure does not require promulgation .
It is not actually necessary for the governor general to sign a bill passed by a legislature , the signature being merely an attestation .
In each case , the parliament must be apprised of the granting of assent before the bill is considered to have become law .
In Australia , a technical issue arose with the royal assent in both 1976 and 2001 .
In federated realms , assent in each state , province , or territory is granted or withheld by the representatives of the sovereign .
In Australia , this is the governors of the states , administrators of the territories , or the governor-general in the Australian Capital Territory .
They , therefore , are unlikely to advise the sovereign or his or her representative to withhold assent .
Two bills sought to put banks under the authority of the province , thereby interfering with the federal government 's powers .
It may be granted in parliament or outside parliament ; in the latter case , each house must be separately notified before the bill takes effect .
For personal bills , the phrase is `` Soit fait comme il est désiré '' -LRB- `` let it be as it is desired '' -RRB- .
When the sovereign is male , Le Roy is substituted for La Reyne .
The Commons , led by their speaker , would listen from the Bar of the Lords , just outside the chamber .
The Clerk of the Parliaments presented the bills awaiting assent to the monarch , save that supply bills were traditionally brought up by the speaker .
A new device for granting assent was created during the reign of King Henry VIII .
Henry decided that `` the repetition of so grievous a Story and the recital of so infamous a crime '' in his presence `` might reopen a Wound already closing in the Royal Bosom '' .
Therefore , parliament inserted a clause into the Act of Attainder , providing that assent granted by Commissioners `` is and ever was and ever shall be , as good '' as assent granted by the sovereign personally .
The debacle was repeated in 1965 ; this time , when the Speaker left the chair to go to the House of Lords , some members continued to make speeches .
As the attorney-general explained , `` there has been a good deal of resentment not only at the loss of Parliamentary time that has been involved but at the breaking of the thread of a possibly eloquent speech and the disruption of a debate that may be caused . ''
The granting of assent by the monarch in person , or by commission , is still possible , but this third form is used on a day-to-day basis .
Then , the presiding officer makes a formal , but simple statement to the house , acquainting each house that royal assent has been granted to the acts mentioned .
In practice this remains the standard method , a fact that is belied by the wording of the letters patent for the appointment of the Royal Commissioners and by the wording of the letters patent for the granting of royal assent in writing under the 1967 Act -LRB- '' ... And forasmuch as We can not at this time be present in the Higher House of Our said Parliament being the accustomed place for giving Our Royal Assent ... '' -RRB- .
This is important because , under British Law , unless there is any provision to the contrary , an act takes effect on the date on which it receives royal assent and that date is not regarded as being the date when the letters patent are signed , or when they are delivered to the presiding officers of each house , but the date on which both houses have been formally acquainted of the assent .
The clerk signs one authentic copy of the bill and inserts the date -LRB- in English -RRB- on which the assent was notified to the two houses after the title of the act .
However , the date on which the assent was notified is printed in brackets .
Now , the bill is sent to the governor-general 's residence by the house in which it originated .
As the act also provides , royal assent is to be signified -- by the governor general , or , more often , by a deputy , usually a Justice of the Supreme Court , at least twice each calendar year : for the first appropriation measure and for at least one other act , usually the first non-appropriation measure passed .
However , the act provides that a grant of royal assent is not rendered invalid by a failure to employ the traditional ceremony where required .
On the day of the event , the Speaker of the Senate will read to the chamber a notice from the secretary to the governor general indicating when the viceroy or a deputy thereof will arrive .
The Senate thereafter can not adjourn until after the ceremony .
The speaker moves to sit beside the throne , the Mace Bearer , with mace in hand , stands adjacent to him or her , and the governor general enters to take the speaker 's chair .
The Usher of the Black Rod is then commanded by the speaker to summon the Members of Parliament , who follow Black Rod back to the Senate , the Sergeant-at-Arms carrying the mace of the House of Commons .
In the Senate , those from the commons stand behind the bar , while Black Rod proceeds to stand next to the governor general , who then nods his or her head to signify Royal Assent to the presented bills -LRB- which do not include appropriations bills -RRB- .
When these bills have all been assented to , the Clerk of the Senate recites `` in Her Majesty 's name , His -LSB- or Her -RSB- Excellency the Governor General -LSB- or the deputy -RSB- thanks her loyal subjects , accepts their benevolence and assents to these bills .
The monarch promulgates the law , meaning that he or she formally orders that the law be officially published and executed .
In accordance with the Belgian constitution , upon the declaration of the sovereign 's incapacity , the Council of Ministers assumed the powers of the head of state until parliament could rule on the King 's incapacity and appoint a regent .
The bill was then assented to by all members of the Council of Ministers `` on behalf of the Belgian People '' .
The constitution of Jordan grants its monarch the right to withhold assent to laws passed by its parliament .
The government , consisting of the monarch and the ministers , will then usually approve the proposal and the sovereign and one of the ministers signs the proposal with the addition of an enacting clause , thereafter notifying the States General that `` The King assents to the proposal . ''
It has happened in exceptional circumstances that the government does not approve a law that has been passed in parliament .
No provision within the constitution grants the monarch an ability to veto legislation directly ; however , no provision prohibits the sovereign from withholding royal assent , which effectively constitutes a veto .
If the sovereign were ever declared incapable of discharging royal authority , his or her powers would not be transferred to the Cabinet , pending the parliamentary appointment of a regency .
Therefore , had Juan Carlos followed the Belgian example in 2005 or 2010 , a declaration of incapacity would have transferred power to Felipe , then the heir apparent .
Nonetheless , this does not preclude an independent royal decision to exercise a right of veto .
The bill was adopted by ten votes to eight .
Two members of the assembly had recently been charged with the illicit possession of firearms .
The Prime Minister , Lord Tuʻivakanō , voted in favour of the amendment .
It allows entities with highly diverse mathematical origins in abstract algebra and beyond to be handled in a flexible way while retaining their essential structural aspects .
The ubiquity of groups in numerous areas within and outside mathematics makes them a central organizing principle of contemporary mathematics .
For example , a symmetry group encodes symmetry features of a geometrical object : the group consists of the set of transformations that leave the object unchanged and the operation of combining two such transformations by performing one after the other .
In addition to their abstract properties , group theorists also study the different ways in which a group can be expressed concretely -LRB- its group representations -RRB- , both from a theoretical and a computational point of view .
aa -LSB- ' -RSB- Since the mid-1980s , geometric group theory , which studies finitely generated groups as geometric objects , has become a particularly active area in group theory .
Usually , it is clear from the context whether a symbol like G refers to a group or to an underlying set .
These symmetries are represented by functions .
For example , r1 sends a point to its rotation 90 ° clockwise around the square 's center , and fh sends a point to its reflection across the square 's vertical middle line .
The underlying set of the group is the above set of symmetry functions , and the group operation is function composition .
Two symmetries are combined by composing them as functions , that is , applying the first one to the square , and the second one to the result of the first application .
The result of performing first a and then b is written symbolically from right to left as
The elements of such a Galois group correspond to certain permutations of the roots .
At first , Galois ' ideas were rejected by his contemporaries , and published only posthumously .
More general permutation groups were investigated in particular by Augustin Louis Cauchy .
As of the 20th century , groups gained wide recognition by the pioneering work of Ferdinand Georg Frobenius and William Burnside , who worked on representation theory of finite groups , Richard Brauer 's modular representation theory and Issai Schur 's papers .
Research is ongoing to simplify the proof of this classification .
These days , group theory is still a highly active mathematical branch , impacting many other fields.a -LSB- ' -RSB-
This compatibility manifests itself in the following notions in various ways .
By the mentioned principle , they are required to respect the group structures in a precise sense .
The structure of groups can also be understood by breaking them into pieces called subgroups and quotient groups .
The principle of `` preserving structures '' -- a recurring topic in mathematics throughout -- is an instance of working in a category , in this case the category of groups .
In many situations it is desirable to consider two group elements the same if they differ by an element of a given subgroup .
In symbolic terms , the left and right cosets of H containing g are
This definition is motivated by the idea -LRB- itself an instance of general structural considerations outlined above -RRB- that the map G → G / N that associates to any element g its coset gN be a group homomorphism , or by general abstract considerations called universal properties .
Together with the relations
In general , homomorphisms are neither injective nor surjective .
Groups are also applied in many other mathematical areas .
The second image at the right shows some loops in a plane minus a point .
The blue loop is considered null-homotopic -LRB- and thus irrelevant -RRB- , because it can be continuously shrunk to a point .
The presence of the hole prevents the orange loop from being shrunk to a point .
The fundamental group of the plane with a point deleted turns out to be infinite cyclic , generated by the orange loop -LRB- or any other loop winding once around the hole -RRB- .
This way , the fundamental group detects the hole .
For any modulus , n , the set of integers from 0 to n − 1 forms a group under modular addition : the inverse of any element a is n − a , and 0 is the identity element .
This is expressed by saying that 9 + 4 equals 1 `` modulo 12 '' or , in symbols ,
The group operation is multiplication modulo p .
That is , the usual product is divided by p and the remainder of this division is the result of modular multiplication .
In this group , 4 · 4 = 1 , because the usual product 16 is equivalent to 1 , which divided by 5 yields a remainder of 1 .
for 5 divides 16 − 1 = 15 , denoted
Indeed , each element is expressible as a sum all of whose terms are 1 .
These numbers can be visualized as the vertices on a regular n-gon , as shown in blue at the right for n = 6 .
The group operation is multiplication of complex numbers .
In the picture , multiplying with z corresponds to a counter-clockwise rotation by 60 ° .
Using some field theory , the group Fp × can be shown to be cyclic : for example , if p = 5 , 3 is a generator since 31 = 3 , 32 = 9 ≡ 4 , 33 ≡ 2 , and 34 ≡ 1 .
In the rightmost example below , an element of order 7 of the -LRB- 2,3,7 -RRB- triangle group acts on the tiling by permuting the highlighted warped triangles -LRB- and the other ones , too -RRB- .
The dihedral group example mentioned above can be viewed as a -LRB- very small -RRB- matrix group .
It describes all possible rotations in n dimensions .
Exchanging '' + '' and '' − '' in the expression , i.e. permuting the two solutions of the equation can be viewed as a -LRB- very simple -RRB- group operation .
An important class is the symmetric groups SN , the groups of permutations of N letters .
For example , the symmetric group on 3 letters S3 is the group consisting of all possible orderings of the three letters ABC , i.e. contains the elements ABC , ACB , ... , up to CBA , in total 6 -LRB- or 3 factorial -RRB- elements .
Groups of order p2 can also be shown to be abelian , a statement which does not generalize to order p3 , as the non-abelian group D4 of order 8 = 23 above shows .
Listing all finite simple groups was a major achievement in contemporary group theory .
1998 Fields Medal winner Richard Borcherds succeeded in proving the monstrous moonshine conjectures , a surprising and deep relation between the largest finite simple sporadic group -- the `` monster group '' -- and certain modular functions , a piece of classical complex analysis , and string theory , a theory supposed to unify the description of many physical phenomena .
Some topological spaces may be endowed with a group law .
Such groups are called topological groups , and they are the group objects in the category of topological spaces .
The former offer an abstract formalism of invariant integrals .
Invariance means , in the case of real numbers for example :
They can be deduced in a purely group-theoretical way , by expressing the transformations as a rotational symmetry of Minkowski space .
The latter serves -- in the absence of significant gravitation -- as a model of space time in special relativity .
By the above , it plays a pivotal role in special relativity and , by implication , for quantum field theories .
Symmetries that vary with location are central to the modern description of physical interactions with the help of gauge theory .
In abstract algebra , more general structures are defined by relaxing some of the axioms defining a group .
Groupoids are similar to groups except that the composition a • b need not be defined for all a and b .
They arise in the study of more complicated forms of symmetry , often in topological and analytical structures , such as the fundamental groupoid or stacks .
With the proper generalization of the group axioms this gives rise to an n-ary group .
The table gives a list of several structures generalizing groups .
-LSB- when ? -RSB-
Products were often moved in ceramic pots , which are the first known examples of artistic expression from the region 's inhabitants .
New forms of forced labor were also introduced and a large number of Ubangians were sent to work on the Congo-Ocean Railway .
Many of these forced laborers died of exhaustion , illness , or the poor conditions which claimed between 20 % and 25 % of the 127,000 workers .
Within a year , he declared the establishment of the Central African Republic and served as the country 's first prime minister .
MESAN continued to exist , but its role was limited .
Dacko threw out his political rivals , including former Prime Minister and Mouvement d'évolution démocratique de l'Afrique centrale -LRB- MEDAC -RRB- , leader Abel Goumba , whom he forced into exile in France .
With all opposition parties suppressed by November 1962 , Dacko declared MESAN as the official party of the state .
Bokassa himself may have been personally involved in some of the killings .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Patassé purged many of the Kolingba elements from the government and Kolingba supporters accused Patassé 's government of conducting a `` witch hunt '' against the Yakoma .
To date , the Peace Corps has not returned to the Central African Republic .
The inter-African military mission was later replaced by a U.N. peacekeeping force -LRB- MINURCA -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Several groups continued to fight but other groups signed on to the agreement , or similar agreements with the government -LRB- e.g. UFR on 15 December 2008 -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Three priority areas were identified : first , the reform of the security sector ; second , the promotion of good governance and the rule of law ; and third , the revitalization of communities affected by conflicts .
For most Central Africans , the informal economy of the CAR is more important than the formal economy .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Food crops are not exported in large quantities , but still constitute the principal cash crops of the country , because Central Africans derive far more income from the periodic sale of surplus food crops than from exported cash crops such as cotton or coffee .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
It may also be classified as atopic or non-atopic where atopy refers to a predisposition toward developing a type 1 hypersensitivity reaction .
Long-acting beta agonists -LRB- LABA -RRB- or antileukotriene agents may be used in addition to inhaled corticosteroids if asthma symptoms remain uncontrolled .
During recovery from an attack , it may appear pus-like due to high levels of white blood cells called eosinophils .
However , it is not known if asthma causes psychological problems or if psychological problems lead to asthma .
Also , phthalates in certain types of PVC are associated with asthma in children and adults .
Even among this list of genes supported by highly replicated studies , results have not been consistent among all populations tested .
This among other factors leads to bouts of narrowing of the airway and the classic symptoms of wheezing .
The narrowing is typically reversible with or without treatment .
Occasionally the airways themselves change .
Chronically the airways ' smooth muscle may increase in size along with an increase in the numbers of mucous glands .
It however may be normal in those with a history of mild asthma , not currently acting up .
It is reasonable to perform spirometry every one or two years to follow how well a person 's asthma is controlled .
Testing peak expiratory flow is more variable than spirometry , however , and thus not recommended for routine diagnosis .
It may be useful for daily self-monitoring in those with moderate to severe disease and for checking the effectiveness of new medications .
It may also be helpful in guiding treatment in those with acute exacerbations .
Exercise can trigger bronchoconstriction both in people with or without asthma .
It occurs in most people with asthma and up to 20 % of people without asthma .
Many cases however are not reported or recognized as such .
Many other conditions can cause symptoms similar to those of asthma .
In both populations vocal cord dysfunction may present similarly .
It closely resembles asthma in symptoms , is correlated with more exposure to cigarette smoke , an older age , less symptom reversibility after bronchodilator administration , and decreased likelihood of family history of atopy .
Early pet exposure may be useful .
Results from exposure to pets at other times are inconclusive and it is only recommended that pets be removed from the home if a person has allergic symptoms to said pet .
Reducing or eliminating compounds known to sensitive people from the work place may be effective .
It is not clear if annual influenza vaccinations effects the risk of exacerbations .
Dust mite control measures , including air filtration , chemicals to kill mites , vacuuming , mattress covers and others methods had no effect on asthma symptoms .
Overall , exercise is beneficial in people with stable asthma .
Effects beyond one year are unknown .
Airway remodeling is observed , but it is unknown whether these represent harmful or beneficial changes .
Early treatment with corticosteroids seems to prevent or ameliorates a decline in lung function .
Rates vary between countries with prevalences between 1 and 18 % .
One thus sees lower rates in Asia , Eastern Europe and Africa .
Within developed countries it is more common in those who are economically disadvantaged while in contrast in developing countries it is more common in the affluent .
Low and middle income countries make up more than 80 % of the mortality .
In 1886 , F.H. Bosworth theorized a connection between asthma and hay fever .
Epinephrine was first referred to in the treatment of asthma in 1905 .
It also remained a largely obscure format in Europe and Australia .
The Philips-MCA cooperation was not successful , and discontinued after a few years .
Players were still exported to North America from Japan until the end of 2001 .
In Europe , LaserDisc always remained an obscure format .
From 1991 up until the early 2000s , the BBC also used LaserDisc technology to play out the channel idents .
Although appearing similar to compact discs or DVDs , LaserDiscs used analog video stored in the composite domain -LRB- having a video bandwidth approximately equivalent to the 1-inch -LRB- 25 mm -RRB- C-Type VTR format -RRB- with analog FM stereo sound and PCM digital audio .
The LaserDisc at its most fundamental level was still recorded as a series of pits and lands much like CDs , DVDs , and even Blu-ray Discs are today .
However , while the encoding is of a binary nature , the information is encoded as analog pulse width modulation with a 50 % duty cycle , where the information is contained in the lengths and spacing of the pits .
As Pioneer introduced Digital Audio to LaserDisc in 1985 , they further refined the CAA format .
Pioneer further refined CAA , offering CAA45 , encoding 45 minutes of material , but filling the entire playback surface of the side .
Used on only a handful of titles , CAA65 offered 65 minutes 5 seconds of playback time per side .
There are a handful of titles pressed by Technidisc that used CAA50 .
The final variant of CAA is CAA70 , which could accommodate 70 minutes of playback time per side .
Sound could be stored in either analog or digital format and in a variety of surround sound formats ; NTSC discs could carry two analog audio tracks , plus two uncompressed PCM digital audio tracks , which were -LRB- EFM , CIRC , 16-bit and 44.056 kHz sample rate -RRB- .
The digital sound signal in both formats are EFM-encoded as in CD .
Extracting Dolby Digital from a LaserDisc required a player equipped with a special `` AC-3 RF '' output and an external demodulator in addition to an AC-3 decoder .
The demodulator was necessary to convert the 2.88 MHz modulated AC-3 information on the disc into a 384 kbit/s signal that the decoder could handle .
DTS audio , when available on a disc , replaced the digital audio tracks ; hearing DTS sound required only an S/PDIF compliant digital connection to a DTS decoder .
Although DVD players were capable of playing Dolby Digital tracks , the signal out of DVD player were not in a modulated form and not compatible with the inputs designed for LaserDisc AC-3 .
Outboard demodulators were available for a period that convert the AC-3 signal to standard Dolby Digital signal that was compatible with the standard Dolby Digital/PCM inputs on capable AV receivers .
Many discs that had originally carried old analog stereo tracks received new Dolby Stereo and Dolby Surround tracks instead , often in addition to digital tracks , helping boost sound quality .
Both AC-3 and DTS surround audio were clumsily implemented on LaserDiscs , leading to some interesting player - and disc-dependent issues .
The reason for this is the RF signal needs to bypass the audio circuitry in order to be properly processed by the demodulator .
If either the player did not support digital audio tracks -LRB- common in older players -RRB- , or the disc did not include digital audio tracks at all -LRB- uncommon for a disc which is mastered with an AC-3 track -RRB- , the only remaining option was to fall back to a monophonic presentation of the left analog audio track .
However , many older analog-only players not only failed to output AC-3 streams correctly , but were not even aware of their potential existence .
A fully capable LaserDisc playback system includes a newer LaserDisc player that is capable of playing digital tracks , has a digital optical output for digital PCM and DTS audio , is aware of AC-3 audio tracks , and has an AC-3 coaxial output ; an external or internal AC-3 RF demodulator and AC-3 decoder ; and a DTS decoder .
In comparison , later NTSC LDs are capable of carrying four tracks -LRB- two analog and two digital -RRB- .
On certain releases , one of the analog tracks is used to carry a modulated AC-3 signal for 5.1 channel audio -LRB- for decoding and playback by newer LD players with an `` AC-3 RF '' output -RRB- .
However , older NTSC LDs made before 1984 -LRB- such as the original DiscoVision discs -RRB- only have two analog audio tracks .
One year earlier Hitachi introduced an expensive industrial player with a laser diode , but the player , which had poor picture quality due to an inadequate dropout compensator , was made only in limited quantities .
Technical documents and brochures produced by MCA Disco-Vision during the early and mid - '70s also used the term `` Disco-Vision Records '' to refer to the pressed discs .
For a while in the early and mid-1970s , Philips also discussed a compatible audio-only format they called `` ALP '' , but that was soon dropped as the Compact Disc system became a non-compatible project in the Philips corporation .
Until early 1980 , the format had no `` official '' name .
In 1981 , `` LaserDisc '' was used exclusively for the medium itself , although the official name was `` LaserVision '' -LRB- as seen at the beginning of many LaserDisc releases just before the start of the film -RRB- .
However , as Pioneer reminded numerous video magazines and stores in 1984 , LaserDisc was a trademarked word , standing only for LaserVision products manufactured for sale by Pioneer Video or Pioneer Electronics .
From 1981 until the early 1990s , all properly licensed discs carried the LaserVision name and logo , even Pioneer Artists titles .
Some of them added their own names to the disc jacket to signify that the movie was not owned by MCA .
After Discovision Associates shut down in early 1982 , Universal Studio 's videodisc software label , called MCA Videodisc until 1984 , began reissuing many DiscoVision titles .
Unfortunately , quite a few , such as Battlestar Galactica and Jaws , were time-compressed versions of their CAV or CLV Disco Vision originals .
The time-compressed CLV re-issue of Jaws no longer had the original soundtrack , having had incidental background music replaced for the video disc version due to licensing cost -LRB- the music would not be available until the THX LaserDisc box set was released in 1995 -RRB- .
For many years this was the only disc-based release of the film , until widescreen DVD formats were released with extras .
It could handle analog and digital audio where VHS was mostly analog only -LRB- VHS can have PCM audio in professional applications but is uncommon -RRB- , and the NTSC discs could store multiple audio tracks .
This allowed for extras like director 's commentary tracks and other features to be added onto a film , creating `` Special Edition '' releases that would not have been possible with VHS .
Disc access was random and chapter based , like the DVD format , meaning that one could jump to any point on a given disc very quickly .
By comparison , VHS would require tedious rewinding and fast-forwarding to get to specific points .
A disc can be stamped out in a matter of seconds whereas duplicating videotape required a complex bulk tape duplication mechanism and was a time-consuming process .
Because the discs were read optically instead of magnetically , no physical contact needs to be made between the player and the disc , except for the player 's clamp that holds the disc at its center as it is spun and read .
As a result , playback would not wear the information-bearing part of the discs , and properly manufactured LDs would theoretically last beyond one 's lifetime .
Also , the tape was thin and delicate , and it was easy for a player mechanism , especially on a low quality or malfunctioning model , to mishandle the tape and damage it by creasing it , frilling -LRB- stretching -RRB- its edges , or even breaking it .
While good comb filters can do so adequately , these two signals can not be completely separated .
The signal produced is dependent on the equipment used to master the disc .
Signals range from composite and split , to YUV and RGB .
Early DVD releases held the potential to surpass their LaserDisc counterparts , but often managed only to match them for image quality , and in some cases , the LaserDisc version was preferred .
However , proprietary human-assisted encoders manually operated by specialists can vastly reduce the incidence of artifacts , depending on playing time and image complexity .
By the end of LaserDisc 's run , DVDs were living up to their potential as a superior format .
-LRB- Some DVD players , particularly higher-end units , do have the ability to ignore the blocking code and play the video without restrictions , but this feature is not common in the usual consumer market . -RRB-
Damaged spots on a LaserDisc can be played through or skipped over , while a DVD will often become unplayable past the damage .
The success of this feature depends upon the amount of damage .
Direct comparison here is almost impossible due to the sheer size differences between the two media .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Early DVD demo discs often had compression or encoding problems , lending additional support to such claims at the time .
Another advantage , at least to some consumers , was the lack of any sort of anti-piracy technology .
The industry simply decided to engineer it into the DVD specification .
Many players , especially units built after the mid-1980s , can `` flip '' discs automatically by rotating the optical pickup to the other side of the disc , but this is accompanied by a pause in the movie during the side change .
If the movie is longer than what could be stored on two sides of a single disc , manually swapping to a second disc is necessary at some point during the film .
In addition , perfect still frames and random access to individual still frames is limited only to the more expensive CAV discs , which only had a playing time of approximately 30 minutes per side .
In later years , Pioneer and other manufacturers overcame this limitation by incorporating a digital memory buffer , which `` grabbed '' a single frame from a CLV disc .
In these instances , the issue arose due to the fact that CLV discs require subtle changes in rotating speed at various points during playback .
However , if the player calibration is out of order or if the CAV disc is faulty or damaged , other problems affecting tracking accuracy can occur .
On most televisions , a given DVD player will produce a picture that is visually indistinguishable from other units .
Differences in image quality between players only becomes easily apparent on large televisions and substantial leaps in image quality are generally only obtained with expensive , high-end players that allow for post-processing of the MPEG-2 stream during playback .
Major variances in picture quality appear between different makers and models of LD players , even when tested on a low to mid-range television .
The obvious benefits of using high quality equipment has helped keep demand for some players high , thus also keeping pricing for those units comparably high .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The adhesive contained impurities that were able to penetrate the lacquer seal layer and chemically attack the metalized reflective aluminium layer , causing it to oxidize and lose its reflective characteristics .
But , for the most part , rotted discs could actually appear perfectly fine to the naked eye .
Anime collectors in every country the LD format was released , which includes both North America and Japan , also quickly became familiar with this format , and sought the higher video and sound quality of LaserDisc and the availability of numerous titles not available on VHS .
This created a market for multi-system TVs and multi-system VCRs which could display or play both PAL and NTSC materials in addition to SECAM materials -LRB- which were never popular in Hong Kong -RRB- .
Some LD players could convert NTSC signals to PAL so that most TVs used in Hong Kong could display the LD materials .
This is largely because there are many films that are still only available on LD and many other LD releases contain supplemental material not available on subsequent DVD versions of those films .
When connected to a PC this combination could be used to display images or information for educational or archival purposes , for example thousands of scanned medieval manuscripts .
This strange device could be considered a very early equivalent of a CD-ROM .
Instead of printing dailies out on film , processed negatives from the day 's shoot would be sent to a mastering plant to be assembled from their 10-minute camera elements into 20-minute film segments .
These were then mastered onto single-sided blank LaserDiscs , just as a DVD would be burnt at home today , allowing for much easier selection and preparation of an Edit Decision List .
In the days before video assist was available in cinematography , this was the only other way a film crew could see their work .
The EDL went to the negative cutter who then cut the camera negative accordingly and assembled the finished film .
Later EditDroid experiments borrowed from hard-drive technology of having multiple discs on the same spindle and added numerous playback heads and numerous electronics to the basic jukebox design so that any point on each of the discs would be accessible within seconds .
These discs could contain in each CAV frame video/audio or video/binary data , but not both .
`` Data '' frames would appear blank when played as video .
It was typical for each disc to start with the disc catalog -LRB- a few blank frames -RRB- then the video introduction before the rest of the data .
Because the format -LRB- based on the ADFS hard disc format -RRB- used a starting sector for each file , the data layout effectively skipped over any video frames .
If all 54,000 frames are used for data storage an LV-ROM disc can contain 324 MB of data per side .
The Domesday Project systems also included a genlock , allowing video frames , clips and audio to be mixed with graphics originated from the BBC Master ; this was used to great effect for displaying high resolution photographs and maps , which could then be zoomed into .
The computer was a 286 , the LaserDisc player only capable of reading the analog audio tracks .
The computer controlled the player via a 25-pin serial port at the back of the player and a ribbon cable connected to a proprietary port on the motherboard .
Many of these were sold as surplus by the military during the 1990s , often without the controller software .
American Laser Games and Cinematronics produced elaborate arcade consoles that used the random-access features to create interactive movies such as Dragon 's Lair and Space Ace .
Similarly , the Pioneer Laseractive and Halcyon were introduced as home video game consoles that used LaserDisc media for their software .
The MUSE players were also capable of playing standard NTSC format discs and are superior in performance to non-MUSE players even with these NTSC discs .
The MUSE-capable players had several noteworthy advantages over standard LaserDisc players , including a red laser with a much narrower wavelength than the lasers found in standard players .
In order to view MUSE encoded discs , it was necessary to have a MUSE decoder in addition to a compatible player .
There are televisions with MUSE decoding built-in and set top tuners with decoders that can provide the proper MUSE input .
Players and discs were never officially sold in North America , although several distributors imported MUSE discs along with other import titles .
Several documentaries , including one about Formula One at Japan 's Suzuka Circuit were also released .
With the release of 16:9 televisions in the mid-1990s , Pioneer and Toshiba decided that it was time to take advantage of this aspect ratio .
During the video transfer stage , the movie was stored in an anamorphic `` squeezed '' format .
The widescreen movie image was stretched to fill the entire video frame with less or none of the video resolution wasted to create letterbox bars .
This same procedure was used for anamorphic DVDs , but unlike all DVD players , very few LD players had the ability to unsqueeze the image for 4:3 sets , and very few if any 4:3 sets could be set to play them properly either .
There were no anamorphic LaserDisc titles available in the US except for promotional purposes .
Upon purchase of a Toshiba 16:9 television viewers had the option of selecting a number of Warner Bros. 16:9 films .
The Japanese lineup of titles was different .
RLV discs , like CRVdisc , are also a WORM technology , and function exactly like a CD-R disc .
RLV discs look almost exactly like standard LaserDiscs , and can play in any standard LaserDisc player after they have been recorded .
The purplish color of RLVs is very similar to DVD-R and DVD+R discs .
CD-Vs are not to be confused with Video CDs -LRB- which are all-digital and can only be played on VCD players , DVD players , CD-i players , computers , and later-model LaserDisc players , such as the DVL series from Pioneer that can also play DVDs -RRB- .
CD-Vs can only be played back on LaserDisc players with CD-V capability .
CD-Vs were somewhat popular for a brief time worldwide , but soon faded from view .
In addition , the Pogonophora , Echiura and Sipuncula , previously regarded as separate phyla , are now regarded as sub-groups of polychaetes .
Annelids are considered members of the Lophotrochozoa , a `` super-phylum '' of protostomes that also includes molluscs , brachiopods , flatworms and nemerteans .
The basic annelid form consists of multiple segments .
Each segment has the same sets of organs and , in most polychaetes , has a pair of parapodia that many species use for locomotion .
In addition to improving soil fertility , annelids serve humans as food and as bait .
Scientists observe annelids to monitor the quality of marine and fresh water .
No single feature distinguishes Annelids from other invertebrate phyla , but they have a distinctive combination of features .
Most annelids have closed circulatory systems , where the blood makes its entire circuit via blood vessels .
The first section behind the prostomium , called the peristomium -LRB- Greek περι - meaning `` around '' and στομα meaning `` mouth '' -RRB- , is regarded by some zoologists as not a true segment , but in some polychaetes the peristomium has chetae and appendages like those of other segments .
These are secreted by the one-cell deep epidermis -LRB- outermost skin layer -RRB- .
Some annelids also have oblique internal muscles that connect the underside of the body to each side .
The setae -LRB- `` hairs '' -RRB- of annelids project out from the epidermis to provide traction and other capabilities .
The simplest are unjointed and form paired bundles near the top and bottom of each side of each segment .
When the cheta is complete , the microvilli withdraw into the chetoblast , leaving parallel tunnels that run almost the full length of the cheta .
They are often supported internally by one or more large , thick chetae .
In some very mobile and active polychaetes the brain is enlarged and more complex , with visible hindbrain , midbrain and forebrain sections .
The rest of the central nervous system is generally `` ladder-like '' , consisting of a pair of nerve cords that run through the bottom part of the body and have in each segment paired ganglia linked by a transverse connection .
From each segmental ganglion a branching system of local nerves runs into the body wall and then encircles the body .
However , in most polychaetes the two main nerve cords are fused , and in the tube-dwelling genus Owenia the single nerve chord has no ganglia and is located in the epidermis .
Vertebrates have a different system , in which one neuron controls a group of muscle fibers .
Their large diameter decreases their resistance , which allows them to transmit signals exceptionally fast .
Experiments have shown that cutting the giant axons prevents this escape response but does not affect normal movement .
The compound eyes probably evolved independently of arthropods ' eyes .
Some tube-worms use ocelli widely spread over their bodies to detect the shadows of fish , so that they can quickly withdraw into their tubes .
Some burrowing and tube-dwelling polychaetes have statocysts -LRB- tilt and balance sensors -RRB- that tell them which way is down .
A few polychaete genera have on the undersides of their heads palps that are used both in feeding and as `` feelers '' , and some of these also have antennae that are structurally similar but probably are used mainly as `` feelers '' .
Each septum forms a sandwich with connective tissue in the middle and mesothelium -LRB- membrane that serves as a lining -RRB- from the preceding and following segments on either side .
Each mesentery is similar except that the mesothelium is the lining of each of the pair of coelomata , and the blood vessels and , in polychaetes , the main nerve cords are embedded in it .
The mesothelium may also form radial and circular muscles on the septa , and circular muscles around the blood vessels and gut .
Parts of the mesothelium , especially on the outside of the gut , may also form chloragogen cells that perform similar functions to the livers of vertebrates : producing and storing glycogen and fat ; producing the oxygen-carrier hemoglobin ; breaking down proteins ; and turning nitrogenous waste products into ammonia and urea to be excreted .
In some species coelomocytes may also contain a respiratory pigment -- red hemoglobin in some species , green chlorocruorin in others -LRB- dissolved in the plasma -RRB- -- and provide oxygen transport within their segments .
Networks of capillaries in the body wall and around the gut transfer blood between the main blood vessels and to parts of the segment that need oxygen and nutrients .
Both of the major vessels , especially the upper one , can pump blood by contracting .
In some annelids the forward end of the upper blood vessel is enlarged with muscles to form a heart , while in the forward ends of many earthworms some of the vessels that connect the upper and lower main vessels function as hearts .
They function as the main blood vessels , although they are side-by-side rather than upper and lower .
The anus is on the upper surface of the pygidium .
Feeding structures in the mouth region vary widely , and have little correlation with the animals ' diets .
In these animals the foremost few segments often lack septa so that , when the muscles in these segments contract , the sharp increase in fluid pressure from all these segments everts the pharynx very quickly .
On the other hand , some predatory polychaetes have neither jaws nor eversible pharynges .
Selective deposit feeders generally live in tubes on the sea-floor and use palps to find food particles in the sediment and then wipe them into their mouths .
Non-selective deposit feeders ingest soil or marine sediments via mouths that are generally unspecialized .
Some clitellates have sticky pads in the roofs of their mouths , and some of these can evert the pads to capture prey .
Leeches often have an eversible proboscis , or a muscular pharynx with two or three teeth .
The gut is generally an almost straight tube supported by the mesenteries -LRB- vertical partitions within segments -RRB- , and ends with the anus on the underside of the pygidium .
In annelids the points at which fluid enters the protonephridia or metanephridia are on the forward side of a septum while the second-stage filter and the nephridiopore -LRB- exit opening in the body wall -RRB- are in the following segment .
As a result , the hindmost segment -LRB- before the growth zone and pygidium -RRB- has no structure that extracts its wastes , as there is no following segment to filter and discharge them , while the first segment contains an extraction structure that passes wastes to the second , but does not contain the structures that re-filter and discharge urine .
These species use a variety of methods for sperm transfer ; for example , in some the females collect sperm released into the water , while in others the males have a penis that inject sperm into the female .
There is no guarantee that this is a representative sample of polychaetes ' reproductive patterns , and it simply reflects scientists ' current knowledge .
Some polychaetes breed only once in their lives , while others breed almost continuously or through several breeding seasons .
All have well-developed gonads , and all copulate .
Earthworms store their partners ' sperm in spermathecae -LRB- `` sperm stores '' -RRB- and then the clitellum produces a cocoon that collects ova from the ovaries and then sperm from the spermathecae .
Fertilization and development of earthworm eggs takes place in the cocoon .
In all clitellates the cocoon also either produces yolk when the eggs are fertilized or nutrients while they are developing .
Terrestrial annelids can be invasive in some situations .
Especially of concern is Amynthas agrestis and at least one state -LRB- Wisconsin -RRB- has listed it as a prohibited species .
Earthworms make a significant contribution to soil fertility .
Anglers sometimes find that worms are more effective bait than artificial flies , and worms can be kept for several days in a tin lined with damp moss .
More recently leeches have been used to assist in microsurgery , and their saliva has provided anti-inflammatory compounds and several important anticoagulants , one of which also prevents tumors from spreading .
Since annelids are soft-bodied , their fossils are rare .
Polychaetes ' fossil record consists mainly of the jaws that some species had and the mineralized tubes that some secreted .
Some Ediacaran fossils such as Dickinsonia in some ways resemble polychaetes , but the similarities are too vague for these fossils to be classified with confidence .
However , it lacks some typical annelid features and has features which are not usually found in annelids and some of which are associated with other phyla .
Then Simon Conway Morris and John Peel reported Phragmochaeta from Sirius Passet , about 518 million years old , and concluded that it was the oldest annelid known to date .
There has been vigorous debate about whether the Burgess Shale fossil Wiwaxia was a mollusc or an annelid .
Polychaetes diversified in the early Ordovician , about 488 to 474 million years ago .
It is not until the early Ordovician that the first annelid jaws are found , thus the crown-group can not have appeared before this date and probably appeared somewhat later .
By the end of the Carboniferous , about 299 million years ago , fossils of most of the modern mobile polychaete groups had appeared .
Many fossil tubes look like those made by modern sessile polychaetes , but the first tubes clearly produced by polychaetes date from the Jurassic , less than 199 million years ago .
A trace fossil consisting of a convoluted burrow partly filled with small fecal pellets may be evidence that earthworms were present in the early Triassic period from 251 to 245 million years ago .
This analysis agreed that clitellates , pogonophorans and echiurans were on various branches of the polychaete family tree .
Rouse accepted the analyses based on molecular phylogenetics , and their main conclusions are now the scientific consensus , although the details of the annelid family tree remain uncertain .
It now seems that segmentation can appear and disappear much more easily in the course of evolution than was previously thought .
-LSB- n 2 -RSB-
However , the genes that drive segmentation in arthropods do not appear to do the same in annelids .
Arthropods and annelids both have close relatives that are unsegmented .
It is at least as easy to assume that they evolved segmented bodies independently as it is to assume that the ancestral protostome or bilaterian was segmented and that segmentation disappeared in many descendant phyla .
Bryzoa may be the most basal phylum -LRB- the one that first became distinctive -RRB- within the Lophotrochozoa , and the relationships between the other members are not yet known .
Arthropods are now regarded as members of the Ecdysozoa -LRB- `` animals that molt '' -RRB- , along with some phyla that are unsegmented .
In these phyla the `` fates '' of the embryo 's cells , in other words the roles their descendants will play in the adult animal , are the same and can be predicted from a very early stage .
God has also been conceived as being incorporeal -LRB- immaterial -RRB- , a personal being , the source of all moral obligation , and the `` greatest conceivable existent '' .
Many notable philosophers have developed arguments for and against the existence of God .
There are many names for God , and different names are attached to different cultural ideas about God 's identity and attributes .
In Hinduism , Brahman is often considered a monistic deity .
There is no clear consensus on the nature or even the existence of God .
Divinity was recognized by the historical Buddha , particularly Śakra and Brahma .
However , other sentient beings , including gods , can at best only play a supportive role in one 's personal path to salvation .
Conceptions of God in the latter developments of the Mahayana tradition give a more prominent place to notions of the divine .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The Trinity comprises God the Father , God the Son -LRB- Jesus -RRB- , and God the Holy Spirit .
In Islam , God is beyond all comprehension or equal and does not resemble any of his creations in any way .
Theism holds that God is both transcendent and immanent ; thus , God is simultaneously infinite and in some way present in the affairs of the world .
Not all theists subscribe to all of these propositions , but each usually subscribes to some of them -LRB- see , by way of comparison , family resemblance -RRB- .
Some theists ascribe to God a self-conscious or purposeful limiting of omnipotence , omniscience , or benevolence .
Open Theism , by contrast , asserts that , due to the nature of time , God 's omniscience does not mean the deity can predict the future .
Pandeism and Panendeism , respectively , combine Deism with the Pantheistic or Panentheistic beliefs .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Even non-theist views about gods vary .
In this view , questions of the supernatural , such as those relating to the existence and nature of God , are non-empirical and are the proper domain of theology .
In this view , the perceived lack of any empirical footprint from the magisterium of the supernatural onto natural events makes science the sole player in the natural world .
Following a biological comparative approach , he concludes that it is highly probable that God exists , and , although not visible , it is possible that we know some of his attributes .
Bertrand du Castel and Timothy Jurgensen demonstrate through formalization that Boyer 's explanatory model matches physics ' epistemology in positing not directly observable entities as intermediaries .
Either he can or he ca n't .
If he can , it continues , then there is also something that he can not do , namely lift the stone , and therefore he is not omnipotent .
Either way , then , God is not omnipotent .
Such a God , therefore , does not exist .
The assignment of these attributes often differs according to the conceptions of God in the culture from which they arise .
Thus , in classical western philosophy the gender of this one-and-only deity is most likely to be an analogical statement of how humans and God address , and relate to , each other .
Prayer plays a significant role among many believers .
For example , a hadith states God would replace a sinless people with one who sinned but still asked repentance .
`` To say that God is like a person is to affirm the divine ability and willingness to relate to others .
This does not imply that God is human , or located at a specific point in the universe . ''
Adherents of different religions generally disagree as to how to best worship God and what is God 's plan for mankind , if there is one .
There are different approaches to reconciling the contradictory claims of monotheistic religions .
A pluralist typically believes that his religion is the right one , but does not deny the partial truth of other religions .
A fourth approach is syncretism , mixing different elements from different religions .
An example of syncretism is the New Age movement .
Reconciling some of those attributes generated important philosophical problems and debates .
Some theists agree that none of the arguments for God 's existence are compelling , but argue that faith is not a product of reason , but requires risk .
A recent theory using concepts from physics and neurophysiology proposes that God can be conceptualized within the theory of integrative level .
The word crusade was not used again .
In March 2009 , the Obama administration requested that Pentagon staff members avoid use of the term , instead using `` Overseas Contingency Operation '' .
In February 1998 , Osama bin Laden signed a fatwā , as head of al-Qaeda , declaring war on the West and Israel , later in May of that same year al-Qaeda released a video declaring war on the U.S. and the West .
The strikes failed to kill any leaders of WIFJAJC or the Taliban .
Once the hijackers assumed control of the airliners , they told the passengers that they had the bomb on board and would spare the lives of passengers and crew once their demands were met -- no passenger and crew actually suspected that they would use the airliners as suicide weapons since it had never happened before in history .
The hijackers crashed a third airliner into the Pentagon in Arlington County , Virginia , just outside Washington D.C. .
The fourth plane crashed into a field near Shanksville , Pennsylvania , after some of its passengers and flight crew attempted to retake control of the plane , which the hijackers had redirected toward Washington D.C. , to target the White House , or the U.S. Capitol .
No flights had survivors .
A total of 2,977 victims and the 19 hijackers perished in the attacks .
It authorized the President to use all necessary and appropriate force against those nations , organizations , or persons he determines planned , authorized , committed , or aided the terrorist attacks that occurred on 11 September 2001 , or harbored such organizations or persons , in order to prevent any future acts of international terrorism against the United States by such nations , organizations or persons .
Kabul , the capital city of Afghanistan , fell by mid-November .
The remaining al-Qaeda and Taliban remnants fell back to the rugged mountains of eastern Afghanistan , mainly Tora Bora .
In December , Coalition forces -LRB- the U.S. and its allies -RRB- fought within that region .
Coalition forces responded with a series of military offensives and an increase in the amount of troops in Afghanistan .
Peace talks are also underway between Taliban affiliated fighters and Coalition forces .
The United States and other NATO and non-NATO forces are planning to withdraw ; with the Taliban claiming it has defeated the United States and NATO , and the Obama Administration viewing it as a victory .
In December 2014 , ISAF encasing its colors , and Resolute Support began as the NATO operation in Afghanistan .
Continued United States operations within Afghanistan will continue under the name `` Operation Freedom 's Sentinel '' .
Joint Special Operations Task Force -- Philippines disbanded in June 2014 , ending a 14-year mission .
After JSOTF-P disbanded , as late as November 2014 , American forces continued to operate in the Philippines under the name `` PACOM Augmentation Team '' .
The Malian government had a hard time maintaining full control over their country .
The fledgling government requested support from the international community on combating the Islamic militants .
U.S. forces continued in combat zone deployments through November 1995 and launched Operation Desert Fox against Iraq in 1998 after it failed to meet U.S. demands of `` unconditional cooperation '' in weapons inspections .
However , an insurgency arose against the U.S.-led coalition and the newly developing Iraqi military and post-Saddam government .
The insurgency , which included al-Qaeda affiliated groups , led to far more coalition casualties than the invasion .
Many insurgency leaders are Islamists and claim to be fighting a religious war to reestablish the Islamic Caliphate of centuries past .
Iraq 's former president , Saddam Hussein was captured by U.S. forces in December 2003 .
He was executed in 2006 .
Many analysts -LSB- who ? -RSB-
Obama has authorized the deployment of additional U.S. Forces into Iraq , as well as authorizing direct military operations against ISIL within Syria .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
On 19 September 2001 , Musharraf addressed the people of Pakistan and stated that , while he opposed military tactics against the Taliban , Pakistan risked being endangered by an alliance of India and the U.S. if it did not cooperate .
He said , `` the recent decision to ban extremist groups promoting militancy was taken in the national interest after thorough consultations .
An official ban was imposed on the groups on 12 January .
Zubaydah is said to have been a high-ranking al-Qaeda official with the title of operations chief and in charge of running al-Qaeda training camps .
The United States was criticized by -LSB- according to whom ? -RSB-
An investigation in 2002 unearthed evidence that Al-Qaeda and its affiliates were prospering in Pakistan-administered Kashmir with tacit approval of Pakistan 's National Intelligence agency Inter-Services Intelligence .
U.S. officials believed that Al-Qaeda was helping organize a campaign of terror in Kashmir in order to provoke conflict between India and Pakistan .
Indian sources claimed that In 2006 , Al-Qaeda claimed they had established a wing in Kashmir ; this worried the Indian government .
India also claimed that Al-Qaeda has strong ties with the Kashmir militant groups Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jaish-e-Mohammed in Pakistan .
While on a visit to Pakistan in January 2010 , U.S. Defense secretary Robert Gates stated that Al-Qaeda was seeking to destabilize the region and planning to provoke a nuclear war between India and Pakistan .
Kashmiri was described by Bruce Riedel as a ` prominent ' Al-Qaeda member , while others described him as the head of military operations for Al-Qaeda .
In the following months , NATO took a wide range of measures to respond to the threat of terrorism .
Support for the U.S. cooled when America made clear its determination to invade Iraq in late 2002 .
The monthly supply of cargo containers through Pakistani route to ISAF in Afghanistan is over 4,000 costing around 12 billion in Pakistani Rupees .
Various government bureaucracies that handled security and military functions were reorganized .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Global telecommunication usage , including those with no links to terrorism , is being collected and monitored through the NSA electronic surveillance program .
The Patriot Act is still in effect .
Political interest groups have stated that these laws remove important restrictions on governmental authority , and are a dangerous encroachment on civil liberties , possible unconstitutional violations of the Fourth Amendment .
The party also organises in Northern Ireland , but does not contest elections to the Northern Ireland Assembly .
Some members of the trades union movement became interested in moving into the political field , and after further extensions of the voting franchise in 1867 and 1885 , the Liberal Party endorsed some trade-union sponsored candidates .
In addition , several small socialist groups had formed around this time , with the intention of linking the movement to political policies .
Among these were the Independent Labour Party , the intellectual and largely middle-class Fabian Society , the Marxist Social Democratic Federation and the Scottish Labour Party .
The meeting was attended by a broad spectrum of working-class and left-wing organisations -- trades unions represented about one third of the membership of the TUC delegates .
This created an association called the Labour Representation Committee -LRB- LRC -RRB- , meant to coordinate attempts to support MPs sponsored by trade unions and represent the working-class population .
He had the difficult task of keeping the various strands of opinions in the LRC united .
The October 1900 `` Khaki election '' came too soon for the new party to campaign effectively ; total expenses for the election only came to # 33 .
The apparent acquiescence of the Conservative Government of Arthur Balfour to industrial and business interests -LRB- traditionally the allies of the Liberal Party in opposition to the Conservative 's landed interests -RRB- intensified support for the LRC against a government that appeared to have little concern for the industrial proletariat and its problems .
In their first meeting after the election the group 's Members of Parliament decided to adopt the name `` The Labour Party '' formally -LRB- 15 February 1906 -RRB- .
In the party 's early years the Independent Labour Party -LRB- ILP -RRB- provided much of its activist base as the party did not have individual membership until 1918 but operated as a conglomerate of affiliated bodies .
The Fabian Society provided much of the intellectual stimulus for the party .
The governing Liberals were unwilling to repeal this judicial decision with primary legislation .
The height of Liberal compromise was to introduce a wage for Members of Parliament to remove the need to involve the Trade Unions .
Meanwhile , the Liberal Party declined rapidly , and the party also suffered a catastrophic split which allowed the Labour Party to gain much of the Liberals ' support .
The 1923 general election was fought on the Conservatives ' protectionist proposals but , although they got the most votes and remained the largest party , they lost their majority in parliament , necessitating the formation of a government supporting free trade .
The letter had little impact on the Labour vote -- which held up .
It was the collapse of the Liberal party that led to the Conservative landslide .
The Conservatives were returned to power although Labour increased its vote from 30.7 % to a third of the popular vote , most Conservative gains being at the expense of the Liberals .
However many Labourites for years blamed their defeat on foul play -LRB- the Zinoviev Letter -RRB- , thereby according to A. J. P. Taylor misunderstanding the political forces at work and delaying needed reforms in the party .
As the economic situation worsened MacDonald agreed to form a `` National Government '' with the Conservatives and the Liberals .
The remaining Labour Party MPs -LRB- led again by Arthur Henderson -RRB- and a few Liberals went into opposition .
The nationalist parties , in turn , demanded devolution to their respective constituent countries in return for their supporting the government .
However he decided to extend his wage restraint policy for another year hoping that the economy would be in a better shape for a 1979 election .
By 1982 , the National Executive Committee had concluded that the entryist Militant tendency group were in contravention of the party 's constitution .
The Militant newspaper 's five member editorial board were expelled on 22 February 1983 .
The new leadership progressively dropped unpopular policies .
Tabloid vilification of the so-called loony left continued to taint the parliamentary party by association from the activities of ` extra-parliamentary ' militants in local government .
However , the Labour Party would have had to form a coalition with more than one other smaller party to gain an overall majority ; anything less would result in a minority government .
Finance proved a major problem for the Labour Party during this period ; a `` cash for peerages '' scandal under Blair resulted in the drying up of many major sources of donations .
Declining party membership , partially due to the reduction of activists ' influence upon policy-making under the reforms of Neil Kinnock and Blair , also contributed to financial problems .
They were now firmly re-established as the second political party in Britain as the Alliance had once again failed to make a breakthrough with seats .
The `` yo yo '' in the opinion polls continued into 1992 , though after November 1990 any Labour lead in the polls was rarely sufficient for a majority .
However , the Conservatives themselves had undergone a dramatic change in the change of leader from Thatcher to Major , at least in terms of style if not substance .
Smith 's leadership once again saw the re-emergence of tension between those on the party 's left and those identified as `` modernisers '' , both of whom advocated radical revisions of the party 's stance albeit in different ways .
It was a continuation of the trend that had begun under the leadership of Neil Kinnock .
`` New Labour '' as a name has no official status , but remains in common use to distinguish modernisers from those holding to more traditional positions , normally referred to as `` Old Labour '' .
The UN Secretary-General , among many , considered the war illegal .
Although the party experienced a brief rise in the polls after this , its popularity soon slumped to its lowest level since the days of Michael Foot .
During May 2008 , Labour suffered heavy defeats in the London mayoral election , local elections and the loss in the Crewe and Nantwich by-election , culminating in the party registering its worst ever opinion poll result since records began in 1943 , of 23 % , with many citing Brown 's leadership as a key factor .
Across the Baltic Sea lies Sweden in the west and Finland in the north .
The territory of Estonia consists of a mainland and 2,222 islands and islets in the Baltic Sea , covering 45,339 km2 -LRB- 17,505 sq mi -RRB- of land , and is influenced by a humid continental climate .
During World War II , Estonia was then occupied by the Soviet Union in 1940 , then Nazi Germany a year later and again in 1944 establishing the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic .
In 1988 , during the Singing Revolution , the Estonian SSR issued the Estonian Sovereignty Declaration to defy against the illegal Soviet rule .
Estonia then restored its independence during the 1991 coup by the Soviets on the night of 20 August 1991 .
Estonia is often described as one of the most internet-focused countries in Europe .
Several elderships or villages made up a province .
By the thirteenth century Estonia consisted of the following provinces : Revala , Harjumaa , Saaremaa , Hiiumaa , Läänemaa , Alempois , Sakala , Ugandi , Jogentagana , Soopoolitse , Vaiga , Mõhu , Nurmekund , Järvamaa and Virumaa .
The Oeselians were known in the Old Norse Icelandic Sagas and in Heimskringla as Víkingr frá Esthland -LRB- Estonian Vikings -RRB- .
The city remained occupied for some time , contributing to its decline as a center of commerce in the 13th century and the rise of Uppsala , Visby , Kalmar and Stockholm .
A piratica could carry approximately 30 men and had a high prow shaped like a dragon or a snakehead and a rectangular sail .
Viking-age treasures from Estonia mostly contain silver coins and bars .
Saaremaa has the richest finds of Viking treasures after Gotland in Sweden .
This strongly suggests that Estonia was an important transit country during the Viking era .
/ `` Thor , help ! ''
Estonians still call their capital `` Tallinn '' , which according to legend derives from Taani linna -LRB- meaning Danish town or castle -RRB- .
Even today , Danish influence can be seen in heraldic symbols .
The Danish cross is on the city of Tallinn 's coat of arms , and Estonia 's coat of arms displays three lions similar to those found on the Danish coat of arms .
In 1346 the Duchy of Estonia was sold for 19,000 Köln marks to the Teutonic Order by the King of Denmark .
The unsuccessful rebellion led to a consolidation of power for the Baltic German minority .
For the subsequent centuries they remained the ruling elite in both cities and in the countryside .
The Livonian Confederation ceased to exist during the Livonian War -LRB- 1558 -- 82 -RRB- .
The wars had reduced the Estonian population from about 250 -- 300,000 people before the Livonian War to 120 -- 140,000 in the 1620s .
The Grand Duchy of Moscow and Tsardom of Russia also attempted invasions in 1481 and 1558 , both of which were unsuccessful .
The Reformation greatly changed the Baltic region .
Its ideas came quickly to the Livonian Confederation and by the 1520s were widespread .
During the Livonian War in 1561 , northern Estonia submitted to Swedish control .
In the 1560s two voivodeships of present-day southern Estonia , Dorpat Voivodeship -LRB- Tartu region -RRB- and Parnawa Voivodeship -LRB- Pärnu region -RRB- , became the autonomous Duchy of Livonia within the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth , under joint control of the Polish Crown and the Grand Duchy .
In 1629 , mainland Estonia came entirely under Swedish rule .
Estonia was administratively divided between the provinces of Estonia in the north and Livonia in southern Estonia and northern Latvia .
This division persisted until the early twentieth century .
On 16 June , the Soviet Union invaded Estonia .
The Red Army exited from their military bases in Estonia on 17 June .
The following day , some 90,000 additional troops entered the country .
In the face of overwhelming Soviet force , the Estonian government capitulated on 17 June 1940 to avoid bloodshed .
As the Red Army brought in additional reinforcements supported by six armoured fighting vehicles , the battle lasted several hours until sundown .
Finally the military resistance was ended with negotiations and the Independent Signal Battalion surrendered and was disarmed .
There were two dead Estonian servicemen , Aleksei Männikus and Johannes Mandre , and several wounded on the Estonian side and about ten killed and more wounded on the Soviet side .
Additionally those who had failed to do their `` political duty '' of voting Estonia into the USSR , specifically those who had failed to have their passports stamped for voting , were condemned to death by Soviet tribunals .
The repressions followed with the mass deportations carried out by the Soviets in Estonia on 14 June 1941 .
Many of the country 's political and intellectual leaders were killed or deported to remote areas of the USSR by the Soviet authorities in 1940 -- 1941 .
Repressive actions were also taken against thousands of ordinary people .
Both German troops and Estonian partisans took Narva on 17 August and the Estonian capital Tallinn on 28 August .
After the Soviets were driven out from Estonia , German troops disarmed all the partisan groups .
The Germans and their collaborators also carried out The Holocaust in Estonia in which they established a network of concentration camps and murdered thousands of Estonian Jews and Estonian Gypsies , other Estonians , non-Estonian Jews , and Soviet prisoners of war .
In January 1944 Estonia was again facing the prospect of invasion from the Red Army and the last legitimate prime minister of the Republic of Estonia -LRB- according to the Constitution of the Republic of Estonia -RRB- delivered a radio address asking all able-bodied men born from 1904 through 1923 to report for military service .
The call resulted in around 38,000 new enlistments and several thousand Estonians who had joined the Finnish Army came back to join the newly formed Territorial Defense Force , assigned to defend Estonia against the Soviet advance .
It was hoped -LSB- by whom ? -RSB-
that by engaging in such a war Estonia would be able to attract Western support for Estonian independence .
This conflict continued into the early 1950s .
Material damage caused by the world war and the following Soviet era significantly slowed Estonia 's economic growth , resulting in a wide wealth gap in comparison with neighbouring Finland and Sweden .
Large parts of the country , especially the coastal areas , were closed to all but the Soviet military .
The city had a support base for the Soviet Baltic Fleet 's submarines and several large military bases , including a nuclear submarine training centre complete with a full-scale model of a nuclear submarine with working nuclear reactors .
The Paldiski reactors building passed into Estonian control in 1994 after the last Russian troops left the country .
Immigration was another effect of Soviet occupation .
Hundreds of thousands of migrants were relocated to Estonia from other parts of the Soviet Union to assist industrialisation and militarisation , contributing an increase of about half a million people within 45 years .
Estonia 's return to independence became possible as the Soviet Union faced internal regime challenges , loosening its hold on the outer empire .
In the initial period of 1987 -- 1989 , this was partially for more economic independence , but as the Soviet Union weakened and it became increasingly obvious that nothing short of full independence would do , Estonia began a course towards self-determination .
All three nations had similar experiences of occupation and similar aspirations for regaining independence .
The Estonian Sovereignty Declaration was issued on 16 November 1988 .
On 20 August 1991 , Estonia declared formal independence during the Soviet military coup attempt in Moscow , reconstituting the pre-1940 state .
The Soviet Union recognised the independence of Estonia on 6 September 1991 .
The first country to diplomatically recognise Estonia 's reclaimed independence was Iceland .
The last units of the Russian army left on 31 August 1994 .
This territory , amounting to some 2,300 square kilometres -LRB- 888 sq mi -RRB- , was incorporated into Russia by Stalin at the end of World War II .
For this reason the borders between Estonia and Russia are still not defined .
There is 3,794 kilometres -LRB- 2,357 mi -RRB- of coastline marked by numerous bays , straits , and inlets .
The number of islands and islets is estimated at some 2,355 -LRB- including those in lakes -RRB- .
Two of them are large enough to constitute separate counties : Saaremaa and Hiiumaa .
A small , recent cluster of meteorite craters , the largest of which is called Kaali is found on Saaremaa , Estonia .
The average annual temperature in Estonia is 5.2 °C -LRB- 41.4 °F -RRB- .
The average precipitation in 1961 -- 1990 ranged from 535 to 727 mm -LRB- 21.1 to 28.6 in -RRB- per year .
Governors are appointed by the Government of Estonia for a term of five years .
Several changes were made to the borders of counties after Estonia became independent , most notably the formation of Valga County -LRB- from parts of Võru , Tartu and Viljandi counties -RRB- and Petseri County -LRB- area acquired from Russia with the 1920 Tartu Peace Treaty -RRB- .
The political culture is stable in Estonia , where power is held between two and three parties that have been in politics for a long time .
The current Estonian Prime Minister is Taavi Rõivas , who is the former Minister of Social Affairs and the head of the Estonian Reform Party .
In addition to that , the Riigikogu appoints , on the proposal of the President of Estonia , the Chairman of the National Court , the chairman of the board of the Bank of Estonia , the Auditor General , the Legal Chancellor and the Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Forces .
These are ministers without portfolio -- they do n't have a ministry to control .
The government , headed by the Prime Minister , thus represents the political leadership of the country and makes decisions in the name of the whole executive power .
Estonia has pursued the development of the e-state and e-government .
Voters have a chance to invalidate their electronic vote in traditional elections , if they wish to .
In 2009 in its eighth Worldwide Press Freedom Index , Reporters Without Borders ranked Estonia sixth out of 175 countries .
In the first ever State of World Liberty Index report , Estonia was ranked first out of 159 countries .
The people exercise their supreme power of the state on the elections of the Riigikogu through citizens who have the right to vote .
The official Head of State is the President of Estonia , who gives assent to the laws passed by Riigikogu , also having the right of sending them back and proposing new laws .
Estonia is also a member of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe -LRB- OSCE -RRB- , Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development -LRB- OECD -RRB- , Council of the Baltic Sea States -LRB- CBSS -RRB- and the Nordic Investment Bank -LRB- NIB -RRB- .
As an OSCE participating State , Estonia 's international commitments are subject to monitoring under the mandate of the U.S. Helsinki Commission .
Estonia has also signed the Kyoto Protocol .
Nordic-Baltic Six -LRB- NB-6 -RRB- , comprising Nordic-Baltic countries that are European Union member states , is a framework for meetings on EU related issues .
Annual summits take place , and in addition meetings are organised on all possible levels : speakers , presidiums , commissions , and individual members .
The Nordic Council of Ministers has an office in Tallinn with a subsidiary in Tartu and information points in Narva , Valga and Pärnu .
Joint Nordic-Baltic projects include the education programme Nordplus and mobility programmes for business and industry and for public administration .
Indeed , Estonians consider themselves a Nordic people rather than Balts , based on their historical ties with Sweden , Denmark and particularly Finland .
On the other hand , the Estonian political system , its flat rate of income tax , and its non-welfare-state model distinguish it from the Nordic countries and their Nordic model , and indeed from many other European countries .
The Estonian National Defence Policy aim is to guarantee the preservation of the independence and sovereignty of the state , the integrity of its land , territorial waters , airspace and its constitutional order .
Current strategic goals are to defend the country 's interests , develop the armed forces for interoperability with other NATO and EU member forces , and participation in NATO missions .
Future co-operation will include sharing of national infrastructures for training purposes and specialisation of training areas -LRB- BALTTRAIN -RRB- and collective formation of battalion-sized contingents for use in the NATO rapid-response force .
The proposed aim of the e-military is to secure the vital infrastructure and e-infrastructure of Estonia .
The organisation operates on security issues in local networks .
Because of its rapid growth , Estonia has often been described as a Baltic Tiger beside Lithuania and Latvia .
Beginning 1 January 2011 , Estonia adopted the euro and became the 17th eurozone member state .
Estonia imports petroleum products from western Europe and Russia .
Oil shale energy , telecommunications , textiles , chemical products , banking , services , food and fishing , timber , shipbuilding , electronics , and transportation are key sectors of the economy .
The ice-free port of Muuga , near Tallinn , is a modern facility featuring good transshipment capability , a high-capacity grain elevator , chill/frozen storage , and new oil tanker off-loading capabilities .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The railroad serves as a conduit between the West , Russia , and other points to the East .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The revenue of the budget was decreased for 2008 by EEK 6.1 billion and the expenditure by EEK 3.2 billion .
In the fourth quarter of 2010 , Estonian industrial output increased by 23 % compared to the year before .
The country has been experiencing economic growth ever since .
Estonia 's market reforms put it among the economic leaders in the former COMECON area .
In January 2005 , the personal income tax rate was reduced to 24 % .
Another reduction to 23 % followed in January 2006 .
The income tax rate was decreased to 21 % by January 2008 .
The Government of Estonia finalised the design of Estonian euro coins in late 2004 , and adopted the euro as the country 's currency on 1 January 2011 , later than planned due to continued high inflation .
A Land Value Tax is levied which is used to fund local municipalities .
It is a state level tax , however 100 % of the revenue is used to fund Local Councils .
The rate is set by the Local Council within the limits of 0.1 -- 2.5 % .
It is one of the most important sources of funding for municipalities .
The Land Value Tax is levied on the value of the land only with improvements and buildings not considered .
Very few exemptions are considered on the land value tax and even public institutions are subject to the tax .
The tax has contributed to a high rate -LRB- ~ 90 % -RRB- of owner-occupied residences within Estonia , compared to a rate of 67.4 % in the United States .
With assistance from the European Union , the World Bank and the Nordic Investment Bank , Estonia completed most of its preparations for European Union membership by the end of 2002 and now has one of the strongest economies of the new member states of the European Union .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Estonia joined the OECD in 2010 .
The current government has pursued tight fiscal policies , resulting in balanced budgets and low public debt .
Estonia exports mainly machinery and equipment , wood and paper , textiles , food products , furniture , and metals and chemical products .
At the same time Estonia imports machinery and equipment , chemical products , textiles , food products and transportation equipment .
Majority of the European Union financial aid will be invested into to the following fields : energy economies , entrepreneurship , administrative capability , education , information society , environment protection , regional and local development , research and development activities , healthcare and welfare , transportation and labour market .
This was a result of the migration policies essential to the Soviet Nationalisation Programme aiming to russify Estonia -- administrative and military immigration of non-Estonians from the USSR coupled with the deportation of Estonians to the USSR .
Modern Estonia is a fairly ethnically heterogeneous country , but this heterogeneity is not a feature of much of the country as the non-Estonian population is concentrated in two of Estonia 's counties .
In the counties of Harju -LRB- including the capital city , Tallinn -RRB- and Ida-Viru , however , ethnic Estonians make up 60 % and 20 % of the population , respectively .
The Law on Cultural Autonomy for National Minorities was reinstated in 1993 .
Historically , large parts of Estonia 's northwestern coast and islands have been populated by indigenous ethnically Rannarootslased -LRB- Coastal Swedes -RRB- .
When comparing the result with a survey from 2000 , then Russians ' attitude toward the future is much more positive .
The Eurobarometer Poll 2005 found that only 16 % of Estonians profess a belief in a god , the lowest belief of all countries studied -LRB- EU study -RRB- .
According to the Lutheran World Federation , the historic Lutheran denomination remains a large presence with 180,000 registered members .
The Estonian Apostolic Orthodox Church , under the Greek-Orthodox Ecumenical Patriarchate , claims another 20,000 members .
Thus , the number of adherents of Lutheranism and Orthodoxy , without regard to citizenship or ethnicity , is roughly equal .
Refer to the Table below .
In addition to organising the academic life of the university , universities can create new curricula , establish admission terms and conditions , approve the budget , approve the development plan , elect the rector , and make restricted decisions in matters concerning assets .
Estonia has a moderate number of public and private universities .
Estonian specialists contributed in the development of software engineering standards for ministries of the Soviet Union during the 1980s .
As of 2011 -LSB- update -RSB- , Estonia spends around 2.38 % of its GDP on Research and Development , compared to an EU average of around 2.0 % .
Today , it is one of the largest amateur choral events in the world .
The last festival took place in July 2014 .
In addition , Youth Song Festivals are also held every four or five years , the last of them in 2011 , and the next is scheduled for 2017 .
Lenna Kuurmaa is a very popular singer in Europe -LSB- citation needed -RSB- , with her band Vanilla Ninja .
The Estonian literature refers to literature written in the Estonian language -LRB- ca. 1 million speakers -RRB- .
Originates Livoniae in Chronicle of Henry of Livonia contains Estonian place names , words and fragments of sentences .
In modern times , Jaan Kross and Jaan Kaplinski are Estonia 's best known and most translated writers .
Among the most popular writers of the late 20th and early 21st centuries are Tõnu Õnnepalu and Andrus Kivirähk , who uses elements of Estonian folklore and mythology , deforming them into absurd and grotesque .
The architectural history of Estonia mainly reflects its contemporary development in northern Europe .
Today , it includes many typical international foods .
Today , it is also very popular to grill outside in summer .
After regaining independence in 1991 , Estonia has participated in all Olympics .
Estonia has won most of its medals in athletics , weightlifting , wrestling and cross-country skiing .
Estonia has had very good success at the Olympic games given the country 's small population .
Estonia 's best results were being ranked 13th in the medal table at the 1936 Summer Olympics , and 12th at the 2006 Winter Olympics .
Basketball is also a notable sport in Estonia .
Estonia national team also qualified to EuroBasket 2015 , which will be held in Ukraine .
South Slavic dialects historically formed a continuum .
The breakup of Yugoslavia affected language attitudes , so that social conceptions of the language separated on ethnic and political lines .
Verbs exhibit imperfective or perfective aspect , with a moderately complex tense system .
Officially , the language was called variously Serbo-Croat , Croato-Serbian , Serbian and Croatian , Croatian and Serbian , Serbian or Croatian , Croatian or Serbian .
Croatian linguist Dalibor Brozović advocated the term Serbo-Croatian as late as 1988 , claiming that in an analogy with Indo-European , Serbo-Croatian does not only name the two components of the same language , but simply charts the limits of the region in which it is spoken and includes everything between the limits -LRB- ` Bosnian ' and ` Montenegrin ' -RRB- .
Karadžić standardised the Serbian Cyrillic alphabet , and Gaj and Daničić standardized the Croatian Latin alphabet , on the basis of vernacular speech phonemes and the principle of phonological spelling .
Thus a complex bi-variant language appeared , which the Serbs officially called `` Serbo-Croatian '' or `` Serbian or Croatian '' and the Croats `` Croato-Serbian '' , or `` Croatian or Serbian '' .
Yet , in practice , the variants of the conceived common literary language served as different literary variants , chiefly differing in lexical inventory and stylistic devices .
The common phrase describing this situation was that Serbo-Croatian or `` Croatian or Serbian '' was a single language .
West European scientists judge the Yugoslav language policy as an exemplary one : although three-quarters of the population spoke one language , no single language was official on a federal level .
Official languages were declared only at the level of constituent republics and provinces , and very generously : Vojvodina had five -LRB- among them Slovak and Romanian , spoken by 0.5 per cent of the population -RRB- , and Kosovo four -LRB- Albanian , Turkish , Romany and Serbo-Croatian -RRB- .
Newspapers , radio and television studios used sixteen languages , fourteen were used as languages of tuition in schools , and nine at universities .
Only the Yugoslav Army used Serbo-Croatian as the sole language of command , with all other languages represented in the army 's other activities -- however , this is not different from other armies of multilingual states , or in other specific institutions , such as international air traffic control where English is used worldwide .
All variants of Serbo-Croatian were used in state administration and republican and federal institutions .
Serbo-Croatian was a kind of soft standardisation .
This is a common situation in other pluricentric languages , e.g. the variants of German differ according to their prestige , the variants of Portuguese too .
Moreover , all languages differ in terms of prestige : `` the fact is that languages -LRB- in terms of prestige , learnability etc. -RRB- are not equal , and the law can not make them equal '' .
They also have two numbers : singular and plural .
However , some consider there to be three numbers -LRB- paucal or dual , too -RRB- , since -LRB- still preserved in closely related Slovene -RRB- after two -LRB- dva , dvije/dve -RRB- , three -LRB- tri -RRB- and four -LRB- četiri -RRB- , and all numbers ending in them -LRB- e.g. twenty-two , ninety-three , one hundred four -RRB- the genitive singular is used , and after all other numbers five -LRB- pet -RRB- and up , the genitive plural is used .
These digraphs are represented as '' ļ , ń and ǵ '' respectively in the `` Rječnik hrvatskog ili srpskog jezika '' , published by the former Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts in Zagreb .
The latter digraphs , however , are unused in the literary standard of the language .
These migrations caused the koinéisation of the Shtokavian dialects , that used to form the West Shtokavian -LRB- more closer and transitional towards the neighbouring Chakavian and Kajkavian dialects -RRB- and East Shtokavian -LRB- transitional towards the Torlakian and the whole Bulgaro-Macedonian area -RRB- dialect bundles , and their subsequent spread at the expense of Chakavian and Kajkavian .
This has made possible to include all four varieties into a new grammar book .
The mutual intelligibility between their speakers `` exceeds that between the standard variants of English , French , German , or Spanish '' .
Other linguists have argued that the differences between the variants of Serbo-Croatian are less significant than those between the variants of English , German , , Dutch , and Hindi-Urdu .
In the discussion , she shows that linguistic criteria such as mutual intelligibility , huge overlap in linguistic system , and the same dialectic basis of standard language provide evidence that Croatian , Serbian , Bosnian and Montenegrin are four national variants of the pluricentric Serbo-Croatian language .
Inspired by that discussion , a monograph on language and nationalism has been published .
It should also be noted that , in the pre-national era , Catholic religious orientation did not necessarily equate with Croat ethnic identity in Dalmatia .
Vatroslav Jagić pointed out in 1864 :
The luxurious and ornate representative texts of Serbo-Croatian Church Slavonic belong to the later era , when they coexisted with the Serbo-Croatian vernacular literature .
It also specified that Serbo-Croatian should be the name of the language in official contexts , while in unofficial use the traditional Serbian and Croatian were to be retained .
During the sixties both books were published simultaneously in Ijekavian Latin in Zagreb and Ekavian Cyrillic in Novi Sad .
Yet Croatian linguists claim that it was an act of unitarianism .
The evidence supporting this claim is patchy : Croatian linguist Stjepan Babić complained that the television transmission from Belgrade always used the Latin alphabet -- which was true , but was not proof of unequal rights , but of frequency of use and prestige .
Babić further complained that the Novi Sad Dictionary -LRB- 1967 -RRB- listed side by side words from both the Croatian and Serbian variants wherever they differed , which one can view as proof of careful respect for both variants , and not of unitarism .
Moreover , Croatian linguists criticized those parts of the Dictionary for being unitaristic that were written by Croatian linguists .
And finally , Croatian linguists ignored the fact that the material for the Pravopisni rječnik came from the Croatian Philological Society .
Regardless of these facts , Croatian intellectuals brought the Declaration on the Status and Name of the Croatian Literary Language in 1967 .
On occasion of the publication 's 45th anniversary , the Croatian weekly journal Forum published the Declaration again in 2012 , accompanied by a critical analysis .
Most verbs come in pairs , with the perfective verb being created out of the imperfective by adding a prefix or making a stem change .
Some Štokavian tenses -LRB- namely , aorist and imperfect -RRB- favor a particular aspect -LRB- but they are rarer or absent in Čakavian and Kajkavian -RRB- .
Actually , aspects `` compensate '' for the relative lack of tenses , because aspect of the verb determines whether the act is completed or in progress in the referred time .
The jat-reflex rules are not without exception .
For example , when short jat is preceded by r , in most Ijekavian dialects developed into / re / or , occasionally , / ri / .
On the other hand , the opinion of Jagić from 1864 is argued not to have firm grounds .
This was a common name for all Slavic vernaculars in Dalmatian cities among the Roman inhabitants .
In the meantime , other written monuments are found that mention srpski , lingua serviana -LRB- = Serbian -RRB- , and some that mention Croatian .
Nationalists have conflicting views about the language -LRB- s -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
A large Bosniak minority is present in the southwest region of Sandžak , but the `` official recognition '' of Bosnian language is moot .
Alaska -LRB- i / əˈlæskə / -RRB- is a U.S. state situated in the northwest extremity of the Americas .
The Canadian administrative divisions of British Columbia and Yukon border the state to the east while Russia has a maritime border with the state to the west across the Bering Strait .
To the north are the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas , the southern parts of the Arctic Ocean .
To the south and southwest is the Pacific Ocean .
Military bases and tourism are also a significant part of the economy .
As such , this was where most of the initial non-indigenous settlement occurred in the years following the Alaska Purchase .
The Alaska Marine Highway provides a vital surface transportation link throughout the area , as only three communities -LRB- Haines , Hyder and Skagway -RRB- enjoy direct connections to the contiguous North American road system .
The Northwest Arctic area , anchored by Kotzebue and also containing the Kobuk River valley , is often regarded as being part of this region .
However , the respective Inupiat of the North Slope and of the Northwest Arctic seldom consider themselves to be one people .
The Aleutian Islands chain extends west from the southern tip of the Alaska Peninsula .
Many active volcanoes are found in the Aleutians and in coastal regions .
The chain of volcanoes extends to Mount Spurr , west of Anchorage on the mainland .
It is the world 's largest wildlife refuge , comprising 16 million acres -LRB- 6.5 million hectares -RRB- .
A portion of that acreage is occasionally ceded to organized boroughs , under the statutory provisions pertaining to newly formed boroughs .
Smaller portions are set aside for rural subdivisions and other homesteading-related opportunities .
The University of Alaska , as a land grant university , also owns substantial acreage which it manages independently .
Another 44 million acres -LRB- 18 million hectares -RRB- are owned by 12 regional , and scores of local , Native corporations created under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act -LRB- ANCSA -RRB- of 1971 .
Individual Native allotments can be and are sold on the open market , however .
On an annual basis , Southeast is both the wettest and warmest part of Alaska with milder temperatures in the winter and high precipitation throughout the year .
This is also the only region in Alaska in which the average daytime high temperature is above freezing during the winter months .
It is a subarctic oceanic climate in the southwest and a continental subarctic climate farther north .
The temperature is somewhat moderate considering how far north the area is .
On the other extreme , some locations between Dillingham and Bethel average around 100 in -LRB- 250 cm -RRB- of precipitation .
Numerous indigenous peoples occupied Alaska for thousands of years before the arrival of European peoples to the area .
Linguistic and DNA studies done here have provided evidence for the settlement of North America by way of the Bering land bridge .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The Tlingit people developed a society with a matrilineal kinship system of property inheritance and descent in what is today Southeast Alaska , along with parts of British Columbia and the Yukon .
Western and Southwestern Alaska are home to the Yup ` ik , while their cousins the Alutiiq ~ Sugpiaq lived in what is now Southcentral Alaska .
Some modern researchers associate Kheuveren with Koyuk River .
Construction of the Alaska Governor 's Mansion began that same year .
The Alaska Statehood Committee and Alaska 's Constitutional Convention would soon follow .
Roughly 4 % are Mormon , 0.5 % are Jewish , 1 % are Muslim , 0.5 % are Buddhist , and 0.5 % are Hindu .
The largest religious denominations in Alaska as of 2010 -LSB- update -RSB- were the Catholic Church with 50,866 adherents , non-denominational Evangelical Protestants with 38,070 adherents , The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with 32,170 adherents , and the Southern Baptist Convention with 19,891 adherents .
As a result , an increasing number of Russian Orthodox churches gradually became established within Alaska .
Alaskan Hindus often share venues and celebrations with members of other Asian religious communities , including Sikhs and Jains .
The 2007 gross state product was $ 44.9 billion , 45th in the nation .
According to a 2013 study by Phoenix Marketing International , Alaska had the fifth-largest number of millionaires per capita in the United States , with a ratio of 6.75 percent .
Employment is primarily in government and industries such as natural resource extraction , shipping , and transportation .
There is also a growing service and tourism sector .
Alaska has vast energy resources , although its oil reserves have been largely depleted .
Prudhoe Bay was the largest conventional oil field ever discovered in North America , but was much smaller than Canada 's enormous Athabasca oil sands field , which by 2014 was producing about 1,500,000 barrels per day -LRB- 240,000 m3/d -RRB- of unconventional oil , and had hundreds of years of producible reserves at that rate .
Additionally , substantial coal deposits are found in Alaska 's bituminous , sub-bituminous , and lignite coal basins .
It was later championed by Governor Jay Hammond and Kenai state representative Hugh Malone .
It has served as an attractive political prospect ever since , diverting revenues which would normally be deposited into the general fund .
This has led to frequent calls by Alaskan politicians for the Fund to make investments within Alaska , though such a stance has never gained momentum .
This area was largely set aside and developed under a state program spearheaded by Hammond during his second term as governor .
In rural areas , subsistence hunting and gathering is an essential activity because imported food is prohibitively expensive .
Though most small towns and villages in Alaska lie along the coastline , the cost of importing food to remote villages can be high , because of the terrain and difficult road conditions , which change dramatically , due to varying climate and precipitation changes .
The state 's road system covers a relatively small area of the state , linking the central population centers and the Alaska Highway , the principal route out of the state through Canada .
It links north Pacific shipping through providing critical infrastructure with tracks that run from Seward to Interior Alaska by way of South Central Alaska , passing through Anchorage , Eklutna , Wasilla , Talkeetna , Denali , and Fairbanks , with spurs to Whittier , Palmer and North Pole .
In recent years , the ever-improving paved highway system began to eclipse the railroad 's importance in Alaska 's economy .
It continues to offer one of the last flag stop routes in the country .
A stretch of about 60 miles -LRB- 100 km -RRB- of track along an area north of Talkeetna remains inaccessible by road ; the railroad provides the only transportation to rural homes and cabins in the area .
The ferries transport vehicles as well as passengers .
The system also operates a ferry service from Bellingham , Washington and Prince Rupert , British Columbia in Canada through the Inside Passage to Skagway .
Cities not served by road , sea , or river can be reached only by air , foot , dogsled , or snowmachine , accounting for Alaska 's extremely well developed bush air services -- an Alaskan novelty .
Much of this service can be attributed to the Alaska bypass mail program which subsidizes bulk mail delivery to Alaskan rural communities .
Many communities have small air taxi services .
These operations originated from the demand for customized transport to remote areas .
In modern times -LRB- that is , any time after the mid-late 1920s -RRB- , dog mushing is more of a sport than a true means of transportation .
Mushers from all over the world come to Anchorage each March to compete for cash , prizes , and prestige .
This allows it to have the lowest individual tax burden in the United States .
The Department of Revenue Tax Division reports regularly on the state 's revenue sources .
The Department also issues an annual summary of its operations , including new state laws that directly affect the tax division .
No state has voted for a Democratic presidential candidate fewer times .
Since 1972 , however , Republicans have carried the state by large margins .
McCain 's running mate was Sarah Palin , the state 's governor and the first Alaskan on a major party ticket .
Obama lost Alaska again in 2012 , but he captured 40 % of the state 's vote in that election , making him the first Democrat to do so since 1968 .
The Unorganized Borough has no government of its own , but the U.S. Census Bureau in cooperation with the state divided the Unorganized Borough into 11 census areas solely for the purposes of statistical analysis and presentation .
The tally of cities includes four unified municipalities , essentially the equivalent of a consolidated city -- county .
The table at the bottom of this section lists the 100 largest cities and census-designated places in Alaska , in population order .
The remaining population was scattered throughout Alaska , both within organized boroughs and in the Unorganized Borough , in largely remote areas .
The Alaska State Troopers are Alaska 's statewide police force .
Before the force was officially organized , law enforcement in Alaska was handled by various federal agencies .
In much of the state , the troopers serve as the only police force available .
In 1932 an expedition set out from MGM 's studios in Hollywood to Alaska to film what was then billed as `` The Biggest Picture Ever Made . ''
He used the black swan fallacy to discuss falsification .
If the outcome of an experiment contradicts the theory , one should refrain from ad hoc manoeuvres that evade the contradiction merely by making it less falsifiable .
They understood this as part of their cultural assimilation , not as an expression of devout belief .
Karl 's father Simon Siegmund Carl Popper was a lawyer from Bohemia and a doctor of law at the Vienna University , and mother Jenny Schiff was of Silesian and Hungarian descent .
-LRB- Malachi Hacohen records that Herr Grübl 's first name was Raimund , after which Karl received his middle name .
Popper himself , in his autobiography , erroneously recalls that Herr Grübl 's first name was Carl . -RRB-
Popper inherited both the library and the disposition from him .
He worked in street construction for a short amount of time , but was unable to cope with the heavy labour .
In 1925 , he went to the newly founded Pädagogisches Institut and continued studying philosophy and psychology .
Around that time he started courting Josefine Anna Henninger , who later became his wife .
He married his colleague Josefine Anna Henninger -LRB- 1906 -- 1985 -RRB- in 1930 .
He needed to publish one to get some academic position in a country that was safe for people of Jewish descent .
Here , he criticised psychologism , naturalism , inductionism , and logical positivism , and put forth his theory of potential falsifiability as the criterion demarcating science from non-science .
In 1935 and 1936 , he took unpaid leave to go to the United Kingdom for a study visit .
It was here that he wrote his influential work The Open Society and its Enemies .
Three years later , in 1949 , he was appointed professor of logic and scientific method at the University of London .
Popper was president of the Aristotelian Society from 1958 to 1959 .
He retired from academic life in 1969 , though he remained intellectually active for the rest of his life .
In 1985 , he returned to Austria so that his wife could have her relatives around her during the last months of her life ; she died in November that year .
He had been working continuously on his philosophy until two weeks before , when he suddenly fell terminally ill .
Popper 's estate is managed by his secretary and personal assistant Melitta Mew and her husband Raymond .
The remaining parts of the estate were mostly transferred to The Karl Popper Charitable Trust .
In October 2008 Klagenfurt University acquired the copyrights from the estate .
He was invested with the Insignia of a Companion of Honour in 1982 .
During this time he became familiar with the Marxist view of economics , class-war , and history .
He came to realise that when it came to sacrificing human lives , one was to think and act with extreme prudence .
His most important works in the field of social science -- The Poverty of Historicism -LRB- 1944 -RRB- and The Open Society and Its Enemies -LRB- 1945 -RRB- -- were inspired by his reflection on the events of his time and represented , in a sense , a reaction to the prevalent totalitarian ideologies that then dominated Central European politics .
In contrast , nothing could , even in principle , falsify psychoanalytic theories .
This led Popper to conclude that what were regarded -LSB- by whom ? -RSB-
Psychoanalytical theories were crafted in a way that made them able to refute any criticism and to give an explanation for every possible form of human behaviour .
He considered that if a theory can not , in principle , be falsified by criticism , it is not a scientific theory .
He also held that scientific theory , and human knowledge generally , is irreducibly conjectural or hypothetical , and is generated by the creative imagination to solve problems that have arisen in specific historico-cultural settings .
Logically , no number of positive outcomes at the level of experimental testing can confirm a scientific theory , but a single counterexample is logically decisive : it shows the theory , from which the implication is derived , to be false .
To say that a given statement -LRB- e.g. , the statement of a law of some scientific theory -RRB- -- -LSB- call it `` T '' -RSB- -- is `` falsifiable '' does not mean that `` T '' is false .
Rather , it means that , if `` T '' is false , then -LRB- in principle -RRB- , `` T '' could be shown to be false , by observation or by experiment .
Again , in this context the word `` falsified '' does not refer to something being `` fake '' ; rather , that something can be -LRB- i.e. , is capable of being -RRB- shown to be false by observation or experiment .
Some things simply do not lend themselves to being shown to be false , and therefore , are not falsifiable .
If so , then how is it that the growth of science appears to result in a growth in knowledge ?
In response to a given problem situation -LRB- -RRB- , a number of competing conjectures , or tentative theories -LRB- -RRB- , are systematically subjected to the most rigorous attempts at falsification possible .
Consequently , just as a species ' biological fitness does not ensure continued survival , neither does rigorous testing protect a scientific theory from refutation in the future .
He states that while there is no way to prove that the sun will rise , it is possible to formulate the theory that every day the sun will rise ; if it does not rise on some particular day , the theory will be falsified and will have to be replaced by a different one .
Until that day , there is no need to reject the assumption that the theory is true .
According to this view , rational discussion about metaphysical ideas , about moral values and even about purposes is possible .
Instead , theories should be tested and scrutinised .
He argued that historicism is founded upon mistaken assumptions regarding the nature of scientific law and prediction .
For Popper , metaphysical and historical indeterminism go hand in hand .
As early as 1934 , Popper wrote of the search for truth as `` one of the strongest motives for scientific discovery . ''
Popper writes of learning in 1935 of the consequences of Tarski 's theory , to his intense joy .
The theory met critical objections to truth as correspondence and thereby rehabilitated it .
So , for example , the sentence `` Snow is white '' is true if and only if snow is white .
He identifies Tarski 's formulation of the truth conditions of sentences as the introduction of a `` metalinguistic predicate '' and distinguishes the following cases :
The intuitive idea behind verisimilitude is that the assertions or hypotheses of scientific theories can be objectively measured with respect to the amount of truth and falsity that they imply .
The influence of World Three , in his view , on the individual human mind -LRB- World Two -RRB- is at least as strong as the influence of World One .
In other words , the knowledge held by a given individual mind owes at least as much to the total accumulated wealth of human knowledge , made manifest , as to the world of direct experience .
Many contemporary philosophers , such as Daniel Dennett , have not embraced Popper 's Three World conjecture , due mostly , it seems , to its resemblance to mind-body dualism .
In this context , passages written by Popper are frequently quoted in which he speaks about such issues himself .
He continued :
Popper had his own sophisticated views on evolution that go much beyond what the frequently-quoted passages say .
In effect , Popper agreed with some of the points of both creationists and naturalists , but also disagreed with both views on crucial aspects .
In its most sophisticated form , this is the brain of humans , but controls also exist in much less sophisticated ways for species of lower complexity , such as the amoeba .
This control organ plays a special role in evolution -- it is the `` spearhead of evolution '' .
The goals bring the purpose into the world .
Popper postulates that such purely behavioural changes are less likely to be lethal for the organism compared to drastic changes of the phenotype .
This way it looks as if the phenotype were changing guided by some invisible hand , while it is merely natural selection working in combination with the new behaviour .
For example , according to this hypothesis , the eating habits of the giraffe must have changed before its elongated neck evolved .
... When I look at what I call the gift of life , I feel a gratitude which is in tune with some religious ideas of God .
However , the moment I even speak of it , I am embarrassed that I may do something wrong to God in talking about God . ''
Why then should the Jewish myth be true and the Indian and Egyptian myths not be true ? ''
Each found support and similarities in the other 's work , citing each other often , though not without qualification .
Popper dedicated his Conjectures and Refutations to Hayek .
Thus we can only say that the whole package of relevant theories has been collectively falsified , but can not conclusively say which element of the package must be replaced .
For Popper , theories are accepted or rejected via a sort of selection process .
Thus Newton 's laws , with their wide general application , are to be preferred over the much more specific `` the solar system has seven planets '' .
-LSB- dubious -- discuss -RSB-
The scientific tradition is distinguished from the pre-scientific tradition in having two layers .
The theories are passed on , not as dogmas , but rather with the challenge to discuss them and improve upon them . ''
However , this is a misunderstanding of what Popper 's philosophy of science sets out to do .
The hypothesis can not be falsified by any possible observation , for there will always be a higher temperature than tested at which the metal may in fact melt , yet it seems to be a valid scientific hypothesis .
Hempel came to acknowledge that Logical Positivism 's verificationism was untenable , but argued that falsificationism was equally untenable on logical grounds alone .
The simplest response to this is that , because Popper describes how theories attain , maintain and lose scientific status , individual consequences of currently accepted scientific theories are scientific in the sense of being part of tentative scientific knowledge , and both of Hempel 's examples fall under this category .
For instance , atomic theory implies that all metals melt at some temperature .
According to John N. Gray , Popper held that `` a theory is scientific only in so far as it is falsifiable , and should be given up as soon as it is falsified . ''
Such a theory would be true with higher probability , because it can not be attacked so easily : to falsify the first one , it is sufficient to find that the sun has stopped rising ; to falsify the second one , one additionally needs the assumption that the given day has not yet been reached .
In his early years Popper was impressed by Marxism , whether of Communists or socialists .
Popper began to reject Marxist historicism , which he associated with questionable means , and later socialism , which he associated with placing equality before freedom -LRB- to the possible disadvantage of equality -RRB- .
The courses are normally tuned in a succession of perfect fifths .
It is the soprano member of a family that includes the mandola , octave mandolin , mandocello and mandobass .
The carved-top or arch-top mandolin has a much shallower , arched back , and an arched top -- both carved out of wood .
The flat-backed mandolin uses thin sheets of wood for the body , braced on the inside for strength in a similar manner to a guitar .
Each style of instrument has its own sound quality and is associated with particular forms of music .
Flat-backed instruments are commonly used in Irish , British and Brazilian folk music .
Some modern Brazilian instruments feature an extra fifth course tuned a fifth lower than the standard fourth course .
The modern soundboard is designed to withstand the pressure of metal strings that would break earlier instruments .
There is usually one or more sound holes in the soundboard , either round , oval , or shaped like a calligraphic F -LRB- f-hole -RRB- .
His Hohenstaufen grandson Frederick II , Holy Roman Emperor -LRB- 1194 - 1250 -RRB- continued integrating Muslims into his court , including Moorish musicians .
By the 14th century , lutes had disseminated throughout Italy and , probably because of the cultural influence of the Hohenstaufen kings and emperor , based in Palermo , the lute had also made significant inroads into the German-speaking lands .
Vinaccia .
His son Antonio Vinaccia was active c. 1734 to c. 1796 .
The earliest extant mandolin was built in 1744 by Antonio 's son , Gaetano Vinaccia .
However , professional virtuosity was in decline , and the mandolin music changed as the mandolin became a folk instrument ; `` the large repertoire of notated instrumental music for the mandolino and the mandoline was completely forgotten '' .
Salvador Léonardi mentioned this decline in his 1921 book , Méthode pour Banjoline ou Mandoline-Banjo , saying that the mandolin had been declining in popularity from previous times .
Along with the energy and awareness created by the day 's hit sensation , a wave of Italian mandolinists travelled Europe in the 1880s and 1890s and in the United States by the mid-1880s , playing and teaching their instrument .
Thousands were taking up the instrument as a pastime , and it became an instrument of society , taken up by young men and women .
The second decline was not as complete as the first .
Very old instruments may use wooden tuning pegs , while newer instruments tend to use geared metal tuners .
The bridge is a movable length of hardwood .
A pickguard is glued below the sound hole under the strings .
The strings ran between the tuning pegs and a bridge that was glued to the soundboard , as a guitar 's .
The Lombardic mandolins were tuned g b e ' a ' d '' g '' .
The strings were fastened to the bridge like a guitar 's .
When Adelstein wrote , there were no nylon strings , and the gut and single strings `` do not vibrate so clearly and sweetly as the double steel string of the Neapolitan . ''
He favored the four single strings of the Cremonese instrument , which were tuned the same as the Neapolitan .
Gibson mandolins evolved into two basic styles : the Florentine or F-style , which has a decorative scroll near the neck , two points on the lower body and usually a scroll carved into the headstock ; and the A-style , which is pear shaped , has no points and usually has a simpler headstock .
Much variation exists between makers working from these archetypes , and other variants have become increasingly common .
Original Loar-signed instruments are sought after and extremely valuable .
Mandolins from other countries include The Loar -LRB- China -RRB- , Santa , Rosa -LRB- China -RRB- , Michael Kelly -LRB- Korea -RRB- , Eastman -LRB- China -RRB- , Kentucky -LRB- China -RRB- , Heiden -LRB- Canada -RRB- , Gilchrist -LRB- Australia -RRB- and Morgan Monroe -LRB- China -RRB- .
The international repertoire of music for mandolin is almost unlimited , and musicians use it to play various types of music .
Following its invention and early development in Italy the mandolin spread throughout the European continent .
Following this continental popularity of the mandolin family local traditions appeared outside of Europe in the Americas and in Japan .
More recently , the Baroque and Classical mandolin repertory and styles have benefited from the raised awareness of and interest in Early music , with media attention to classical players such as Israeli Avi Avital , Italian Carlo Aonzo and American Joseph Brent .
Skinner began teaching part-time at age 18 , until the Great Depression forced him to begin teaching full-time and learn a broader range of instruments .
Skinner founded the Sydney Mandolin Orchestra , the oldest surviving mandolin orchestra in Australia .
He has performed and recorded these works with the Sydney Symphony Orchestra and the Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra .
As well , Paul Hooper has had many solo works dedicated to him by Australian composers e.g. , Caroline Szeto , Ian Shanahan , Larry Sitsky and Michael Smetanin .
She is also mandolin teacher and gives lessons in the music academies of Lier , Wijnegem and Brasschaat .
She also gives various concerts each year in different ensembles .
She is in close contact to the Brasschaat mandolin Orchestra .
Her site is www.gevoeligesnaar.be
Prominent mandolin players or composers included Jules Cottin and his sister Madeleine Cottin , Jean Pietrapertosa , and Edgar Bara .
Paris had dozens of `` estudiantina '' mandolin orchestras in the early 1900s .
Mandolin magazines included L'Estudiantina , Le Plectre , École de la mandolie .
Nowadays it is played mainly as a solo instrument in personal and family events on the Ionian islands and Crete .
This tuning corresponds to the way violins are tuned for carnatic classical music .
The f-hole mandolin , however , does come into its own in a traditional session , where its brighter tone cuts through the sonic clutter of a pub .
Others include Giovani Battista Gervasio -LRB- Sonata in D major for Mandolin and Basso Continuo -RRB- , Giuseppe Giuliano -LRB- Sonata in D major for Mandolin and Basso Continuo -RRB- , Emanuele Barbella -LRB- Sonata in D major for Mandolin and Basso Continuo -RRB- , Domenico Scarlatti -LRB- Sonata n. 54 -LRB- K. 89 -RRB- in D minor for Mandolin and Basso Continuo -RRB- , and Addiego Guerra -LRB- Sonata in G major for Mandolin and Basso Continuo -RRB- .
New orchestras were founded and new orchestral compositions composed .
The mandolin virtuoso Fabio Machado is one of Portugal 's most accomplished mandolin players .
The Portuguese influence brought the mandolin to Brazil .
The mandolin has been used extensively in the traditional music of England and Scotland for generations .
The instrument has also found its way into British rock music .
The instrument was also used extensively in the UK folk revival of the 1960s and 1970s with bands such as Fairport Convention and Steeleye Span taking it on as the lead instrument in many of their songs .
It has also been used by other British rock musicians .
Led Zeppelin 's bassist John Paul Jones is an accomplished mandolin player and has recorded numerous songs on mandolin including Going to California and That 's the Way ; the mandolin part on The Battle of Evermore is played by Jimmy Page , who composed the song .
Other Led Zeppelin songs featuring mandolin are Hey Hey What Can I Do , and Black Country Woman .
Pete Townshend of The Who played mandolin on the track Mike Post Theme , along with many other tracks on Endless Wire .
McGuinness Flint , for whom Graham Lyle played the mandolin on their most successful single , When I 'm Dead And Gone , is another example .
Lyle was also briefly a member of Ronnie Lane 's Slim Chance , and played mandolin on their hit How Come .
One of the more prominent early mandolin players in popular music was Robin Williamson in The Incredible String Band .
Ian Anderson of Jethro Tull is a highly accomplished mandolin player -LRB- beautiful track Pussy Willow -RRB- , as is his guitarist Martin Barre .
The popular song Please Please Please Let Me Get What I Want by The Smiths featured a mandolin solo played by Johnny Marr .
More recently , the Glasgow-based band Sons and Daughters featured the mandolin , played by Ailidh Lennon , on tracks such as Fight , Start to End , and Medicine .
British folk-punk icons the Levellers also regularly use the mandolin in their songs .
Current bands are also beginning to use the Mandolin and its unique sound - such as South London 's Indigo Moss who use it throughout their recordings and live gigs .
The mandolin has also featured in the playing of Matthew Bellamy in the rock band Muse .
It also forms the basis of Paul McCartney 's 2007 hit `` Dance Tonight . ''
That was not the first time a Beatle played a mandolin , however ; that distinction goes to George Harrison on Gone Troppo , the title cut from the 1982 album of the same name .
The mandolin is taught in Lanarkshire by the Lanarkshire Guitar and Mandolin Association to over 100 people .
Also more recently hard rock supergroup Them Crooked Vultures have been playing a song based primarily using a mandolin .
This song was left off their debut album , and features former Led Zeppelin bassist John Paul Jones .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Ironically , this ensemble did not play mandolins but rather bandurrias , which are also small , double-strung instruments that resemble the mandolin .
The success of the Figaro Spanish Students spawned other groups who imitated their musical style and costumes .
The imitators ' use of mandolins helped to generate enormous public interest in an instrument previously relatively unknown in the United States .
Partee characterized the early instrument as being larger than the European instruments he was used to , with a `` peculiar shape '' and `` crude construction , '' and said that the quality improved , until American instruments were `` superior '' to imported instruments .
However , alongside the teacher-dealers were serious musicians , working to create a spot for the instrument in classical music , ragtime and jazz .
Like the teacher-dealers , they traveled the U.S. , recording records , giving performances and teaching individuals and mandolin orchestras .
Seth Weeks was an African American who not only taught and performed in the United States , but also in Europe , where he recorded records .
W. Eugene Page toured the country with a group , and was well known for his mandolin and mandola performances .
Other names include Valentine Abt , Samuel Adelstein , William Place , Jr. , and Aubrey Stauffer .
The mandolin orchestras never completely went away , however .
In fact , along with all the other musical forms the mandolin is involved with , the mandolin ensemble -LRB- groups usually arranged like the string section of a modern symphony orchestra , with first mandolins , second mandolins , mandolas , mandocellos , mando-basses , and guitars , and sometimes supplemented by other instruments -RRB- continues to grow in popularity .
He joined the Grand Ole Opry in 1939 and its powerful clear-channel broadcast signal on WSM-AM spread his style throughout the South , directly inspiring many musicians to take up the mandolin .
Monroe famously played Gibson F-5 mandolin , signed and dated July 9 , 1923 , by Lloyd Loar , chief acoustic engineer at Gibson .
The F-5 has since become the most imitated tonally and aesthetically by modern builders .
He emphasized a powerful , syncopated right hand at the expense of left-hand virtuosity .
Highly respected and influential modern bluegrass players include Herschel Sizemore , Doyle Lawson , and the multi-genre Sam Bush , who is equally at home with old-time fiddle tunes , rock , reggae , and jazz .
The late John Duffey of the original Country Gentlemen and later the Seldom Scene did much to popularize the bluegrass mandolin among folk and urban audiences , especially on the east coast and in the Washington , D.C. area .
He initially played an 8-string Gibson but switched after 1952 to a 5-string solidbody electric instrument built by Paul Bigsby .
Modern players David Grisman , Sam Bush , and Mike Marshall , among others , have worked since the early 1970s to demonstrate the mandolin 's versatility for all styles of music .
Most commonly associated with bluegrass , mandolin has been used a lot in country music over the years .
Ian Anderson of Jethro Tull played mandolin on Fat Man , from their second album , Stand Up , and also occasionally on later releases .
John Paul Jones and Jimmy Page both played mandolin on Led Zeppelin songs .
The popular alt rock group Imagine Dragons feature the mandolin on a few of their songs , most prominently being It 's Time .
Dash Crofts of the soft rock duo Seals and Crofts extensively used mandolin in their repertoire during the 1970s .
The song did n't chart in the United States but was popular in much of Europe and the Philippines .
In addition to electric guitar , bass , and drums , the band uses several instruments associated with traditional Celtic music , including mandolin , tin whistle , and Great Highland bagpipes .
The band explains that these instruments accentuate the growling sound they favor .
The single peaked at No. 4 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart -LRB- # 1 on the rock and alternative charts -RRB- , Luther Dickinson of North Mississippi Allstars and The Black Crowes has made frequent use of the mandolin , most notably on the Black Crowes song `` Locust Street . ''
Pop punk band Green Day has used a mandolin in several occasions , especially on their 2000 album , Warning .
Boyd Tinsley , violin player of the Dave Matthews Band has been using an electric mandolin since 2005 .
Frontman Colin Meloy and guitarist Chris Funk of The Decemberists regularly employ the mandolin in the band 's music .
Nancy Wilson , rhythm guitarist of Heart , uses a mandolin in Heart 's song `` Dream of the Archer '' from the album Little Queen , as well as in Heart 's cover of Led Zeppelin 's song `` The Battle of Evermore . ''
It has enjoyed a privileged position as the main melodic instrument in several different regions of the country .
Specifically , the eastern states of Sucre , Nueva Esparta , Anzoategui and Monagas have made the mandolin the main instrument in their versions of Joropo as well as Puntos , Jotas , Polos , Fulias , Merengues and Malagueñas .
In the western city of Maracaibo the Mandolin has been played in Decimas , Danzas and Contradanzas Zulianas ; in the capital , Caracas , the Merengue Rucaneao , Pasodobles and Waltzes have also been played with mandolin for almost a century .
Some players have sought out contemporary composers to solicit new works .
They perform works composed for mandolin family instruments , or re-orchestrations of traditional pieces .
They are the most diverse group of animals on the planet , including more than a million described species and representing more than half of all known living organisms .
The number of extant species is estimated at between six and ten million , and potentially represent over 90 % of the differing animal life forms on Earth .
Insects may be found in nearly all environments , although only a small number of species reside in the oceans , a habitat dominated by another arthropod group , crustaceans .
The higher level relationship of the Hexapoda is unclear .
Insects are the only invertebrates to have evolved flight .
Insects are mostly solitary , but some , such as certain bees , ants and termites , are social and live in large , well-organized colonies .
Some insects , such as earwigs , show maternal care , guarding their eggs and young .
Male moths can sense the pheromones of female moths over great distances .
A few parasitic species are pathogenic .
Many other insects are considered ecologically beneficial as predators and a few provide direct economic benefit .
In some cultures , people eat the larvae or adults of certain insects .
It may have superficially resembled a modern-day silverfish insect .
Thus , the first insects probably appeared earlier , in the Silurian period .
The lack of flying vertebrates could have been another factor .
Many insects make use of these toxins to protect themselves from their predators .
This successful evolutionary pattern has also been used by mimics .
Over time , this has led to complex groups of coevolved species .
Coevolution has led to the development of very specific mutualisms in such systems .
The Thysanura themselves possibly are not monophyletic , with the family Lepidotrichidae being a sister group to the Dicondylia -LRB- Pterygota and the remaining Thysanura -RRB- .
Supraordinal relationships have undergone numerous changes with the advent of methods based on evolutionary history and genetic data .
A recent theory is that the Hexapoda are polyphyletic -LRB- where the last common ancestor was not a member of the group -RRB- , with the entognath classes having separate evolutionary histories from the Insecta .
Many of the traditional appearance-based taxa have been shown to be paraphyletic , so rather than using ranks like subclass , superorder , and infraorder , it has proved better to use monophyletic groupings -LRB- in which the last common ancestor is a member of the group -RRB- .
The following represents the best-supported monophyletic groupings for the Insecta .
It has proved difficult to clarify the relationships between the orders in Polyneoptera because of constant new findings calling for revision of the taxa .
The recent molecular finding that the traditional louse orders Mallophaga and Anoplura are derived from within Psocoptera has led to the new taxon Psocodea .
Phasmatodea and Embiidina have been suggested to form the Eukinolabia .
Mantodea , Blattodea , and Isoptera are thought to form a monophyletic group termed Dictyoptera .
Fleas are now thought to be closely related to boreid mecopterans .
Many questions remain in the basal relationships amongst endopterygote orders , particularly the Hymenoptera .
About 850,000 -- 1,000,000 of all described species are insects .
Of the 24 orders of insects , four dominate in terms of numbers of described species , with at least 3 million species included in Coleoptera , Diptera , Hymenoptera and Lepidoptera .
A recent study estimated the number of beetles at 0.9 -- 2.1 million with a mean of 1.5 million .
The head supports a pair of sensory antennae , a pair of compound eyes , and , if present , one to three simple eyes -LRB- or ocelli -RRB- and three sets of variously modified appendages that form the mouthparts .
The thorax has six segmented legs -- one pair each for the prothorax , mesothorax and the metathorax segments making up the thorax -- and , none , two or four wings .
The abdomen consists of eleven segments , though in a few species of insects , these segments may be fused together or reduced in size .
The abdomen also contains most of the digestive , respiratory , excretory and reproductive internal structures. :22 -- 48 Considerable variation and many adaptations in the body parts of insects occur , especially wings , legs , antenna and mouthparts .
In prognathous insects , the vertex is not found between the compound eyes , but rather , where the ocelli are normally .
This is because the primary axis of the head is rotated 90 ° to become parallel to the primary axis of the body .
In some species , this region is modified and assumes a different name. :13
The middle segment is the mesothorax , with the major features being the second pair of legs and the anterior wings .
The third and most posterior segment , abutting the abdomen , is the metathorax , which features the third pair of legs and the posterior wings .
Each segment is dilineated by an intersegmental suture .
Each segment has four basic regions .
The dorsal surface is called the tergum -LRB- or notum -RRB- to distinguish it from the abdominal terga .
In turn , the notum of the prothorax is called the pronotum , the notum for the mesothorax is called the mesonotum and the notum for the metathorax is called the metanotum .
Continuing with this logic , the mesopleura and metapleura , as well as the mesosternum and metasternum , are used .
Terga are separated from each other and from the adjacent sterna or pleura by membranes .
Variation of this ground plan includes the fusion of terga or terga and sterna to form continuous dorsal or ventral shields or a conical tube .
Some insects bear a sclerite in the pleural area called a laterotergite .
Ventral sclerites are sometimes called laterosternites .
During the embryonic stage of many insects and the postembryonic stage of primitive insects , 11 abdominal segments are present .
In modern insects there is a tendency toward reduction in the number of the abdominal segments , but the primitive number of 11 is maintained during embryogenesis .
Variation in abdominal segment number is considerable .
If the Apterygota are considered to be indicative of the ground plan for pterygotes , confusion reigns : adult Protura have 12 segments , Collembola have 6 .
The orthopteran family Acrididae has 11 segments , and a fossil specimen of Zoraptera has a 10-segmented abdomen .
The tough and flexible endocuticle is built from numerous layers of fibrous chitin and proteins , criss-crossing each other in a sandwich pattern , while the exocuticle is rigid and hardened. :22 -- 24 The exocuticle is greatly reduced in many soft-bodied insects -LRB- e.g. , caterpillars -RRB- , especially during their larval stages .
Unlike insects , though , most aquatic crustaceans are biomineralized with calcium carbonate extracted from the water .
Many species of insects have reduced numbers of ganglia due to fusion or reduction .
Some cockroaches have just six ganglia in the abdomen , whereas the wasp Vespa crabro has only two in the thorax and three in the abdomen .
Some insects , like the house fly Musca domestica , have all the body ganglia fused into a single large thoracic ganglion .
Although nociception has been demonstrated in insects , there is no consensus that insects feel pain consciously
By moving its mouthparts -LRB- element 32 in numbered diagram -RRB- the insect can mix its food with saliva .
The mixture of saliva and food then travels through the salivary tubes into the mouth , where it begins to break down .
Some insects , like flies , have extra-oral digestion .
Insects using extra-oral digestion expel digestive enzymes onto their food to break it down .
It can be divided into the foregut , midgut and hindgut .
In some insects , the role of the microvilli and where they are located may vary .
For example , specialized microvilli producing digestive enzymes may more likely be near the end of the midgut , and absorption near the origin or beginning of the midgut. :32
The uric acid is formed using hemolymph waste products diffused from the Malpighian tubules -LRB- element 20 -RRB- .
It is then emptied directly into the alimentary canal , at the junction between the midgut and hindgut .
The number of Malpighian tubules possessed by a given insect varies between species , ranging from only two tubules in some insects to over 100 tubules in others. :71 -- 72 , 78 -- 80
The number of eggs that the insect is able to make vary by the number of ovarioles with the rate that eggs can be develop being also influenced by ovariole design .
Female insects are able make eggs , receive and store sperm , manipulate sperm from different males , and lay eggs .
Accessory glands or glandular parts of the oviducts produce a variety of substances for sperm maintenance , transport and fertilization , as well as for protection of eggs .
They can produce glue and protective substances for coating eggs or tough coverings for a batch of eggs called oothecae .
Spermathecae are tubes or sacs in which sperm can be stored between the time of mating and the time an egg is fertilized. :880
A portion of the vas deferens is often enlarged to form the seminal vesicle , which stores the sperm before they are discharged into the female .
The seminal vesicles have glandular linings that secrete nutrients for nourishment and maintenance of the sperm .
The ejaculatory duct is derived from an invagination of the epidermal cells during development and , as a result , has a cuticular lining .
The terminal portion of the ejaculatory duct may be sclerotized to form the intromittent organ , the aedeagus .
The remainder of the male reproductive system is derived from embryonic mesoderm , except for the germ cells , or spermatogonia , which descend from the primordial pole cells very early during embryogenesis. :885
The insect circulatory system has no veins or arteries , and instead consists of little more than a single , perforated dorsal tube which pulses peristaltically .
Toward the thorax , the dorsal tube -LRB- element 14 -RRB- divides into chambers and acts like the insect 's heart .
The opposite end of the dorsal tube is like the aorta of the insect circulating the hemolymph , arthropods ' fluid analog of blood , inside the body cavity. :61 -- 65 Air is taken in through openings on the sides of the abdomen called spiracles .
Some species of insect that are submerged also have adaptations to aid in respiration .
As larvae , many insects have gills that can extract oxygen dissolved in water , while others need to rise to the water surface to replenish air supplies which may be held or trapped in special structures .
In contrast to eggs of other arthropods , most insect eggs are drought resistant .
This is because inside the chorion two additional membranes develop from embryonic tissue , the amnion and the serosa .
This serosa secretes a cuticle rich in chitin that protects the embryo against desiccation .
In Schizophora however the serosa does not develop , but these flies lay their eggs in damp places , such as rotting matter .
Some species of insects , like the cockroach Blaptica dubia , as well as juvenile aphids and tsetse flies , are ovoviviparous .
The eggs of ovoviviparous animals develop entirely inside the female , and then hatch immediately upon being laid .
Some insects may retain phenotypes that are normally only seen in juveniles ; this is called paedomorphosis .
In peramorphosis , an opposite sort of phenomenon , insects take on previously unseen traits after they have matured into adults .
Many insects display sexual dimorphism , in which males and females have notably different appearances , such as the moth Orgyia recens as an exemplar of sexual dimorphism in insects .
Other insects produced by parthenogenesis are bees , wasps and ants , in which they spawn males .
However , overall , most individuals are female , which are produced by fertilization .
The males are haploid and the females are diploid .
More rarely , some insects display hermaphroditism , in which a given individual has both male and female reproductive organs .
The molting process begins as the insect 's epidermis secretes a new epicuticle inside the old one .
After this new epicuticle is secreted , the epidermis releases a mixture of enzymes that digests the endocuticle and thus detaches the old cuticle .
When this stage is complete , the insect makes its body swell by taking in a large quantity of water or air , which makes the old cuticle split along predefined weaknesses where the old exocuticle was thinnest. :142
In these species , an egg hatches to produce a larva , which is generally worm-like in form .
This worm-like form can be one of several varieties : eruciform -LRB- caterpillar-like -RRB- , scarabaeiform -LRB- grub-like -RRB- , campodeiform -LRB- elongated , flattened and active -RRB- , elateriform -LRB- wireworm-like -RRB- or vermiform -LRB- maggot-like -RRB- .
The larva grows and eventually becomes a pupa , a stage marked by reduced movement and often sealed within a cocoon .
There are three types of pupae : obtect , exarate or coarctate .
Obtect pupae are compact , with the legs and other appendages enclosed .
Exarate pupae have their legs and other appendages free and extended .
Coarctate pupae develop inside the larval skin. :151 Insects undergo considerable change in form during the pupal stage , and emerge as adults .
Some insects have evolved this system to hypermetamorphosis .
These wagging movements can signal the arrival of new material into the nest and aggression between workers can be used to stimulate others to increase foraging expeditions .
There is a pronounced tendency for there to be a trade-off between visual acuity and chemical or tactile acuity , such that most insects with well-developed eyes have reduced or simple antennae , and vice versa .
There are a variety of different mechanisms by which insects perceive sound , while the patterns are not universal , insects can generally hear sound if they can produce it .
Different insect species can have varying hearing , though most insects can hear only a narrow range of frequencies related to the frequency of the sounds they can produce .
Mosquitoes have been found to hear up to 2 kHz. , and some grasshoppers can hear up to 50 kHz .
Certain predatory and parasitic insects can detect the characteristic sounds made by their prey or hosts , respectively .
For instance , some nocturnal moths can perceive the ultrasonic emissions of bats , which helps them avoid predation. :87 -- 94 Insects that feed on blood have special sensory structures that can detect infrared emissions , and use them to home in on their hosts .
Some species of wasp always provide five , others twelve , and others as high as twenty-four caterpillars per cell .
The number of caterpillars is different among species , but always the same for each sex of larva .
The most familiar group are the fireflies , beetles of the family Lampyridae .
Some species are able to control this light generation to produce flashes .
The function varies with some species using them to attract mates , while others use them to lure prey .
Cave dwelling larvae of Arachnocampa -LRB- Mycetophilidae , Fungus gnats -RRB- glow to lure small flying insects into sticky strands of silk .
The colors of emitted light vary from dull blue -LRB- Orfelia fultoni , Mycetophilidae -RRB- to the familiar greens and the rare reds -LRB- Phrixothrix tiemanni , Phengodidae -RRB- .
The eyes may include simple eyes or ocelli as well as compound eyes of varying sizes .
Color vision has been demonstrated in many species and phylogenetic analysis suggests that UV-green-blue trichromacy existed from at least the Devonian period between 416 and 359 million years ago .
In grasshoppers and crickets , this is achieved by stridulation .
Cicadas make the loudest sounds among the insects by producing and amplifying sounds with special modifications to their body and musculature .
The African cicada Brevisana brevis has been measured at 106.7 decibels at a distance of 50 cm -LRB- 20 in -RRB- .
Some insects , such as the Helicoverpa zeamoths , hawk moths and Hedylid butterflies , can hear ultrasound and take evasive action when they sense that they have been detected by bats .
The ultrasonic clicks were subsequently found to be produced mostly by unpalatable moths to warn bats , just as warning colorations are used against predators that hunt by sight .
Some otherwise palatable moths have evolved to mimic these calls .
More recently , the claim that some moths can jam bat sonar has been revisited .
Ultrasonic recording and high-speed infrared videography of bat-moth interactions suggest the palatable tiger moth really does defend against attacking big brown bats using ultrasonic clicks that jam bat sonar .
Most sound-making insects also have tympanal organs that can perceive airborne sounds .
Most insects are also able to sense vibrations transmitted through surfaces .
The Madagascar hissing cockroach has the ability to press air through its spiracles to make a hissing noise as a sign of aggression ; the Death 's - head Hawkmoth makes a squeaking noise by forcing air out of their pharynx when agitated , which may also reduce aggressive worker honey bee behavior when the two are in close proximity .
One example is the butterfly Phengaris arion which uses chemical signals as a form of mimicry to aid in predation .
Pheromones , a type of semiochemical , are used for attracting mates of the opposite sex , for aggregating conspecific individuals of both sexes , for deterring other individuals from approaching , to mark a trail , and to trigger aggression in nearby individuals .
Allomonea benefit their producer by the effect they have upon the receiver .
Kairomones benefit their receiver instead of their producer .
While some chemicals are targeted at individuals of the same species , others are used for communication across species .
The use of scents is especially well known to have developed in social insects. :96 -- 105
It is sometimes argued that the various species of honey bee are the only invertebrates -LRB- and indeed one of the few non-human groups -RRB- to have evolved a system of abstract symbolic communication where a behavior is used to represent and convey specific information about something in the environment .
Bombus terrestris , for example , exhibit a faster learning curve for visiting unfamiliar , yet rewarding flowers , when they can see a conspecific foraging on the same species .
A few insects seasonally migrate large distances between different geographic regions -LRB- e.g. , the overwintering areas of the Monarch butterfly -RRB- .
:14
A small number exhibit some form of parental care , where they will at least guard their eggs , and sometimes continue guarding their offspring until adulthood , and possibly even feeding them .
Another simple form of parental care is to construct a nest -LRB- a burrow or an actual construction , either of which may be simple or complex -RRB- , store provisions in it , and lay an egg upon those provisions .
This sort of care is typical for most species of bees and various types of wasps .
These theories include suggestions that wings originated from modified gills , spiracular flaps or as from an appendage of the epicoxa .
In the Carboniferous age , some of the Meganeura dragonflies had as much as a 50 cm -LRB- 20 in -RRB- wide wingspan .
The appearance of gigantic insects has been found to be consistent with high atmospheric oxygen .
The respiratory system of insects constrains their size , however the high oxygen in the atmosphere allowed larger sizes .
The largest flying insects today are much smaller and include several moth species such as the Atlas moth and the White Witch -LRB- Thysania agrippina -RRB- .
The legs are used in alternate triangles touching the ground .
For the first step , the middle right leg and the front and rear left legs are in contact with the ground and move the insect forward , while the front and rear right leg and the middle left leg are lifted and moved forward to a new position .
When they touch the ground to form a new stable triangle the other legs can be lifted and brought forward in turn and so on .
The purest form of the tripedal gait is seen in insects moving at high speeds .
For example , when moving slowly , turning , or avoiding obstacles , four or more feet may be touching the ground .
Cockroaches are among the fastest insect runners and , at full speed , adopt a bipedal run to reach a high velocity in proportion to their body size .
As cockroaches move very quickly , they need to be video recorded at several hundred frames per second to reveal their gait .
A few species of ocean-skaters in the genus Halobates even live on the surface of open oceans , a habitat that has few insect species .
Many of these species have adaptations to help in under-water locomotion .
Some species like the water striders are capable of walking on the surface of water .
These insects , and others , are responsible for much of the process by which topsoil is created. :3 , 218 -- 228
Many of those that live in sandy environments blend in with the coloration of the substrate .
Most phasmids are known for effectively replicating the forms of sticks and leaves , and the bodies of some species -LRB- such as O. macklotti and Palophus centaurus -RRB- are covered in mossy or lichenous outgrowths that supplement their disguise .
Some species have the ability to change color as their surroundings shift -LRB- B. scabrinota , T. californica -RRB- .
In a further behavioral adaptation to supplement crypsis , a number of species have been noted to perform a rocking motion where the body is swayed from side to side that is thought to reflect the movement of leaves or twigs swaying in the breeze .
Another method by which stick insects avoid predation and resemble twigs is by feigning death -LRB- catalepsy -RRB- , where the insect enters a motionless state that can be maintained for a long period .
The nocturnal feeding habits of adults also aids Phasmatodea in remaining concealed from predators .
Genetic polymorphism and natural selection give rise to otherwise edible species -LRB- the mimic -RRB- gaining a survival advantage by resembling inedible species -LRB- the model -RRB- .
Such a mimicry complex is referred to as Batesian and is most commonly known by the mimicry by the limenitidine Viceroy butterfly of the inedible danaine Monarch .
Later research has discovered that the Viceroy is , in fact more toxic than the Monarch and this resemblance should be considered as a case of Müllerian mimicry .
In Müllerian mimicry , inedible species , usually within a taxonomic order , find it advantageous to resemble each other so as to reduce the sampling rate by predators who need to learn about the insects ' inedibility .
Predators that eat poisonous butterflies and moths may become sick and vomit violently , learning not to eat those types of species ; this is actually the basis of Müllerian mimicry .
A predator who has previously eaten a poisonous lepidopteran may avoid other species with similar markings in the future , thus saving many other species as well .
These arose through complex plant-animal adaptations .
Pollinators find flowers through bright colorations , including ultraviolet , and attractant pheromones .
The study of pollination by insects is known as anthecology .
Many entomologists are involved in various forms of pest control , as in research for companies to produce insecticides , but increasingly rely on methods of biological pest control , or biocontrol .
Biocontrol uses one organism to reduce the population density of another organism -- the pest -- and is considered a key element of integrated pest management .
Pollination is a mutualistic relationship between plants and insects .
This greatly increases plants ' ability to cross-pollinate , which maintains and possibly even improves their evolutionary fitness .
This ultimately affects humans since ensuring healthy crops is critical to agriculture .
As well as pollination ants help with seed distribution of plants .
This helps to spread the plants which increases plant diversity .
This leads to an overall better environment .
Insects also produce useful substances such as honey , wax , lacquer and silk .
Honey bees have been cultured by humans for thousands of years for honey , although contracting for crop pollination is becoming more significant for beekeepers .
The silkworm has greatly affected human history , as silk-driven trade established relationships between China and the rest of the world .
Ants also help control animal populations by consuming small vertebrates .
Without predators to keep them in check , insects can undergo almost unstoppable population explosions. :328 -- 348:400
The genome of D. melanogaster was sequenced in 2000 , reflecting the organism 's important role in biological research .
Since it is impossible to entirely eliminate pest insects from the human food chain , insects are inadvertently present in many foods , especially grains .
Food safety laws in many countries do not prohibit insect parts in food , but rather limit their quantity .
According to cultural materialist anthropologist Marvin Harris , the eating of insects is taboo in cultures that have other protein sources such as fish or livestock .
In Mesopotamian literature , the epic poem of Gilgamesh has allusions to Odonata which signify the impossibility of immortality .
These features are the distinguishing features of how the concept of race is used today .
Drawing on Classical sources and upon their own internal interactions -- for example , the hostility between the English and Irish powerfully influenced early European thinking about the differences between people -- Europeans began to sort themselves and others into groups based on physical appearance , and to attribute to individuals belonging to these groups behaviors and capacities which were claimed to be deeply ingrained .
A set of folk beliefs took hold that linked inherited physical differences between groups to inherited intellectual , behavioral , and moral qualities .
Similar ideas can be found in other cultures , for example in China , where a concept often translated as `` race '' was associated with supposed common descent from the Yellow Emperor , and used to stress the unity of ethnic groups in China .
The 1735 classification of Carl Linnaeus , inventor of zoological taxonomy , divided the human race Homo sapiens into continental varieties of europaeus , asiaticus , americanus , and afer , each associated with a different humour : sanguine , melancholic , choleric , and phlegmatic , respectively .
He saw Africans as inferior to Whites especially in regards to their intellect , and imbued with unnatural sexual appetites , but described Native Americans as equals to whites .
In the US , Samuel George Morton , Josiah Nott and Louis Agassiz promoted this theory in the mid-nineteenth century .
In order to do this , a working definition of population must be found .
Examples of such definitions are :
Every creature produced by sexual reproduction has two immediate lineages , one maternal and one paternal .
Some researchers have tried to clarify the idea of race by equating it to the biological idea of the clade .
These single-locus sources of DNA do not recombine and are inherited from a single parent .
Individuals from the various continental groups tend to be more similar to one another than to people from other continents , and tracing either mitochondrial DNA or non-recombinant Y-chromosome DNA explains how people in one place may be largely derived from people in some remote location .
They claim that `` the molecular and biochemical proponents of this model explicitly use racial categories in their initial grouping of samples '' .
They suggest that the authors of these studies find support for racial distinctions only because they began by assuming the validity of race .
The former refers to any distinction in gene frequencies between populations ; the latter is `` a matter of judgment . ''
In short , Livingstone and Dobzhansky agree that there are genetic differences among human beings ; they also agree that the use of the race concept to classify people , and how the race concept is used , is a matter of social convention .
Or as Ossorio & Duster -LRB- 2005 -RRB- put it :
However , we see that the global geographic distributions of these putatively selected alleles are largely determined simply by their frequencies in Yoruba , French and Han -LRB- Figure 3 -RRB- .
It is an arbitrary matter which , and how many , gene loci we choose to consider as a significant ` constellation ' '' .
Moreover , the anthropologist Stephen Molnar has suggested that the discordance of clines inevitably results in a multiplication of races that renders the concept itself useless .
This statistic is often used in taxonomy to compare differences between any two given populations by measuring the genetic differences among and between populations for individual genes , or for many genes simultaneously .
This translates to an estimated 85 % of the variation measured in the overall human population is found within individuals of the same population , and about 15 % of the variation occurs between populations .
These estimates imply that any two individuals from different populations are almost as likely to be more similar to each other than either is to a member of their own group .
They claim that this does not correctly reflect human population history , because it treats all human groups as independent .
A more realistic portrayal of the way human groups are related is to understand that some human groups are parental to other groups and that these groups represent paraphyletic groups to their descent groups .
This view produces a version of human population movements that do not result in all human populations being independent ; but rather , produces a series of dilutions of diversity the further from Africa any population lives , each founding event representing a genetic subset of its parental population .
Long and Kittles argued that this still produces a global human population that is genetically homogeneous compared to other mammalian populations .
Geographically based human studies since have shown that such genetic clusters can be derived from analyzing of a large number of loci which can assort individuals sampled into groups analogous to traditional continental racial groups .
However , Risch denied such limitations render the analysis useless : `` Perhaps just using someone 's actual birth year is not a very good way of measuring age .
Does that mean we should throw it out ?
One such study looked at a large multiethnic population in the United States , and `` detected only modest genetic differentiation between different current geographic locales within each race/ethnicity group .
Thus , ancient geographic ancestry , which is highly correlated with self-identified race/ethnicity -- as opposed to current residence -- is the major determinant of genetic structure in the U.S. population . ''
-LRB- Tang et al. -LRB- 2005 -RRB- -RRB-
to be `` never '' .
This assumed three population groups separated by large geographic ranges -LRB- European , African and East Asian -RRB- .
Witherspoon , et al. concluded that , `` The fact that , given enough genetic data , individuals can be correctly assigned to their populations of origin is compatible with the observation that most human genetic variation is found within populations , not between them .
Anthropologists such as C. Loring Brace , the philosophers Jonathan Kaplan and Rasmus Winther , and the geneticist Joseph Graves , -LSB- page needed -RSB- have argued that while there it is certainly possible to find biological and genetic variation that corresponds roughly to the groupings normally defined as `` continental races '' , this is true for almost all geographically distinct populations .
Weiss and Fullerton have noted that if one sampled only Icelanders , Mayans and Maoris , three distinct clusters would form and all other populations could be described as being clinally composed of admixtures of Maori , Icelandic and Mayan genetic materials .
Kaplan and Winther therefore argue that , seen in this way , both Lewontin and Edwards are right in their arguments .
Moreover , the genomic data underdetermines whether one wishes to see subdivisions -LRB- i.e. , splitters -RRB- or a continuum -LRB- i.e. , lumpers -RRB- .
Each is also associated with opposing ontological consequences vis-a-vis the metaphysics of race .
It 's not a scientific one .
There are no bright lines -LRB- that would stand out -RRB- , if we could compare all the sequenced genomes of everyone on the planet . ''
We actually had a higher discordance rate between self-reported sex and markers on the X chromosome !
And there is sexism . ''
These socioeconomic factors are also significant to the limits of racial lines , because a minority of pardos , or brown people , are likely to start declaring themselves white or black if socially upward , and being seen as relatively `` whiter '' as their perceived social status increases -LRB- much as in other regions of Latin America -RRB- .
Thus , the historical construction of race in Brazilian society dealt primarily with gradations between persons of majoritarily European ancestry and little minority groups with otherwise lower quantity therefrom in recent times .
In the diverse geographic context of Europe , ethnicity and ethnic origin are arguably more resonant and are less encumbered by the ideological baggage associated with `` race '' .
France has developed an approach to dealing with ethnic problems that stands in contrast to that of many advanced , industrialized countries .
This means that it targets virtually no policies directly at racial or ethnic groups .
Instead , it uses geographic or class criteria to address issues of social inequalities .
It has , however , developed an extensive anti-racist policy repertoire since the early 1970s .
Until recently , French policies focused primarily on issues of hate speech -- going much further than their American counterparts -- and relatively less on issues of discrimination in jobs , housing , and in provision of goods and services .
To be White one had to have perceived `` pure '' White ancestry .
The one-drop rule or hypodescent rule refers to the convention of defining a person as racially black if he or she has any known African ancestry .
This rule meant that those that were mixed race but with some discernible African ancestry were defined as black .
The types of practices that take place under this new color-blind racism is subtle , institutionalized , and supposedly not racial .
He also states that many biological anthropologists see races as real yet `` not one introductory textbook of physical anthropology even presents that perspective as a possibility .
-LRB- Lieberman et al. 1992 , pp. 316 -- 17 -RRB-
In general , the material on race has moved from surface traits to genetics and evolutionary history .
There is an active debate among biomedical researchers about the meaning and importance of race in their research .
Officers are instructed to `` record the response that has been given '' even if the person gives an answer which may be incorrect ; their own perception of the person 's ethnic background is recorded separately .
There is active debate regarding the cause of a marked correlation between the recorded crimes , punishments meted out , and the country 's populations .
Mass incarceration is also , `` the larger web of laws , rules , policies , and customs that control those labeled criminals both in and out of prison . ''
He concluded :
This has resulted in a majority of people who identify as African American having some European ancestors .
Paris is also known for its fashion , particularly the twice-yearly Paris Fashion Week , and for its haute cuisine , and three-star restaurants .
Most of France 's major universities and grandes écoles are located in Paris , as are France 's major newspapers , including Le Monde , Le Figaro , and Libération .
Paris hosts the annual French Open Grand Slam tennis tournament on the red clay of Roland Garros .
Under the rule of the Capetian kings , Paris gradually became the largest and most prosperous city in France .
By the end of the 12th century , Paris had become the political , economic , religious , and cultural capital of France .
A century later , during the French Wars of Religion , Paris was a stronghold of the Catholic League .
The last of these wars , the eighth one , ended in 1594 , after Henri IV had converted to Catholicism and was finally able to enter Paris as he supposedly declared Paris vaut bien une messe -LRB- `` Paris is well worth a Mass '' -RRB- .
The Comédie-Française , the Academy of Painting , and the French Academy of Sciences were founded and made their headquarters in the city .
The property of the aristocracy and the church was nationalised , and the city 's churches were closed , sold or demolished .
The city was also bombed by Zeppelins and shelled by German long-range guns .
General Charles de Gaulle led a huge and emotional crowd down the Champs Élysées towards Notre Dame de Paris , and made a rousing speech from the Hôtel de Ville .
In the early 21st century , the population of Paris began to increase slowly again , as more young people moved into the city .
On the morning of 18 November three suspected terrorists , including alleged planner of the attacks Abdelhamid Abaaoud , were killed in a shootout with police in the Paris suburb of Saint-Denis .
President Hollande declared France to be in a three-month state of emergency .
The river 's mouth on the English Channel -LRB- La Manche -RRB- is about 233 mi -LRB- 375 km -RRB- downstream of the city , established around 7600 BC .
The city is spread widely on both banks of the river .
Overall , the city is relatively flat , and the lowest point is 35 m -LRB- 115 ft -RRB- above sea level .
Montmartre gained its name from the martyrdom of Saint Denis , first bishop of Paris , atop the Mons Martyrum , `` Martyr 's mound '' , in 250 .
From the 1860 area of 78 km2 -LRB- 30 sq mi -RRB- , the city limits were expanded marginally to 86.9 km2 -LRB- 33.6 sq mi -RRB- in the 1920s .
Each year , however , there are a few days where the temperature rises above 32 °C -LRB- 90 °F -RRB- .
Some years have even witnessed long periods of harsh summer weather , such as the heat wave of 2003 when temperatures exceeded 30 °C -LRB- 86 °F -RRB- for weeks , surged up to 40 °C -LRB- 104 °F -RRB- on some days and seldom cooled down at night .
Spring and autumn have , on average , mild days and fresh nights but are changing and unstable .
Surprisingly warm or cool weather occurs frequently in both seasons .
Snow falls every year , but rarely stays on the ground .
Each arrondissement has a number of members depending upon its population , from 10 members for each of the least-populated arrondissements -LRB- 1st through 9th -RRB- to 36 members for the most populated -LRB- the 15th -RRB- .
The elected council members select the mayor .
Sometimes the candidate who receives the most votes city-wide is not selected if the other candidate has won the support of the majority of council members .
The current council is divided between a coalition of the left of 91 members , including the socialists , communists , greens , and extreme left ; and 71 members for the centre right , plus a few members from smaller parties .
It is an administrative structure for cooperation between the City of Paris and its nearest suburbs .
By 2020 its basic competencies will include urban planning , housing , and protection of the environment .
It is composed of 209 members representing the different communes within the region .
It supervises the units of the National Police who patrol the city and the three neighbouring departments .
It is also responsible for providing emergency services , including the Paris Fire Brigade .
In addition to traditional police duties , the local police monitors the number of discount sales held by large stores -LRB- no more than two a year are allowed -RRB- and verify that , during summer holidays , at least one bakery is open in every neighbourhood .
Vans of CRS agents are frequently seen in the centre of the city when there are demonstrations and public events .
Most French rulers since the Middle Ages made a point of leaving their mark on a city that , contrary to many other of the world 's capitals , has never been destroyed by catastrophe or war .
In modernising its infrastructure through the centuries , Paris has preserved even its earliest history in its street map .
Paris also owes its style to its aligned street-fronts , distinctive cream-grey `` Paris stone '' building ornamentation , aligned top-floor balconies , and tree-lined boulevards .
The high residential population of its city centre makes it much different from most other western global cities .
Paris ' urbanism laws have been under strict control since the early 17th century , particularly where street-front alignment , building height and building distribution is concerned .
They were scheduled for completion in 2019 or 2020 , but as of January 2015 construction had not yet begun , and there were questions in the press about the future of the project .
Parisian examples of European architecture date back more than a millennium ; including the Romanesque church of the Abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés -LRB- 1014-1163 -RRB- ; the early Gothic Architecture of the Basilica of Saint-Denis -LRB- 1144 -RRB- , the Notre Dame Cathedral -LRB- 1163-1345 -RRB- , the Flamboyant Gothic of Saint Chapelle -LRB- 1239-1248 -RRB- , the Baroque churches of Saint-Paul-Saint-Louis -LRB- 1627-1641 -RRB- and Les Invalides -LRB- 1670-1708 -RRB- .
Forty-one percent were women , and 29 percent were accompanied by children .
Fifty-six percent of the homeless were born outside France , the largest number coming from Africa and Eastern Europe .
Many other suburban residential districts -LRB- grands ensembles -RRB- were built between the 1960s and 1970s to provide a low-cost solution for a rapidly expanding population : these districts were socially mixed at first , but few residents actually owned their homes -LRB- the growing economy made these accessible to the middle classes only from the 1970s -RRB- .
Their poor construction quality and their haphazard insertion into existing urban growth contributed to their desertion by those able to move elsewhere and their repopulation by those with more limited possibilities .
To the north of the city they are grouped mainly in the Seine-Saint-Denis department , and to a lesser extreme to the east in the Val-d'Oise department .
Eurostat , the statistical agency of the EU , places Paris -LRB- 6.5 million people -RRB- second behind London -LRB- 8 million -RRB- and ahead of Berlin -LRB- 3.5 million -RRB- , based on the 2012 populations of what Eurostat calls `` urban audit core cities '' .
It is slightly smaller than the Paris Region .
The Paris Metropolitan Area is the second most populous in the European Union after London with a population of 12,341,418 at the Jan. 2012 census .
The principal reasons were a significant decline in household size , and a dramatic migration of residents to the suburbs between 1962 and 1975 .
Factors in the migration included de-industrialisation , high rent , the gentrification of many inner quarters , the transformation of living space into offices , and greater affluence among working families .
The remaining group , people born in foreign countries with no French citizenship at birth , are those defined as immigrants under French law .
Note that the immigrants from the Americas and the South Pacific in Paris are vastly outnumbered by migrants from French overseas regions and territories located in these regions of the world .
The largest of these , in terms of number of employees , is known in French as the QCA , or quartier central des affaires ; it is in the western part of the City of Paris , in the 2nd , 8th , 9th , 16th and 18th arrondissements .
In 2010 it was the workplace of 500,000 salaried employees , about thirty percent of the salaried employees in Paris and ten percent of those in the Île-de-France .
The largest sectors of activity in the central business district were finance and insurance -LRB- 16 percent of employees in the district -RRB- and business services -LRB- 15 percent -RRB- .
The district also includes a large concentration of department stores , shopping areas , hotels and restaurants , as well a government offices and ministries .
Another district , including Boulogne-Billancourt , Issy-les-Moulineaux and the southern part of the 15th arrondissement , is a center of activity for the media and information technology .
In 2011 , its GDP ranked second among the regions of Europe and its per-capita GDP was the 4th highest in Europe .
While the Paris economy is dominated by services , and employment in manufacturing sector has declined sharply , the region remains an important manufacturing centre , particularly for aeronautics , automobiles , and `` eco '' industries .
Nineteen percent of Paris employees work for the State in either in administration or education .
The majority of Paris ' healthcare and social workers work at the hospitals and social housing concentrated in the peripheral 13th , 14th , 18th , 19th and 20th arrondissements .
Most of this is due to companies relocating outside the Paris region .
The Paris region 's manufacturing decline is quickly being replaced by eco-industries : these employ about 100,000 workers .
The median taxable income for 2011 was around $ 25,000 in Paris and $ 22,200 for Île-de-France .
Generally speaking , incomes are higher in the Western part of the city and in the western suburbs than in the northern and eastern parts of the urban area .
While Paris has some of the richest neighbourhoods in France , it also has some of the poorest , mostly on the eastern side of the city .
The other top cultural attractions in Paris in 2013 were the Basilique du Sacré-Cœur -LRB- 10.5 million visitors -RRB- ; the Eiffel Tower -LRB- 6,740,000 visitors -RRB- ; the Centre Pompidou -LRB- 3,745,000 visitors -RRB- and Musée d'Orsay -LRB- 3,467,000 visitors -RRB- .
Other landmarks are laid out east to west along the historic axis of Paris , which runs from the Louvre through the Tuileries Garden , the Luxor Column in the Place de la Concorde , the Arc de Triomphe , to the Grande Arche of La Défense .
Paris has long been famous for its grand hotels .
The Hôtel Ritz on Place Vendôme opened in 1898 , followed by the Hôtel Crillon in an 18th-century building on the Place de la Concorde in 1909 ; the Hotel Bristol on rue de Fabourg Saint-Honoré in 1925 ; and the Hotel George V in 1928 .
For centuries , Paris has attracted artists from around the world , who arrive in the city to educate themselves and to seek inspiration from its vast pool of artistic resources and galleries .
As a result , Paris has acquired a reputation as the `` City of Art '' .
Painting and sculpture became the pride of the French monarchy and the French royals commissioned many Parisian artists to adorn their palaces during the French Baroque and Classicism era .
Sculptors such as Girardon , Coysevox and Coustou acquired reputations as the finest artists in the royal court in 17th-century France .
Paris was in its artistic prime in the 19th century and early 20th century , when it had a colony of artists established in the city and in art schools associated with some of the finest painters of the times : Manet , Monet , Berthe Morisot , Gauguin , Renoir and others .
The French Revolution and political and social change in France had a profound influence on art in the capital .
Impressionism , Art Nouveau , Symbolism , Fauvism Cubism and Art Deco movements all evolved in Paris .
In the late 19th century , many artists in the French provinces and worldwide flocked to Paris to exhibit their works in the numerous salons and expositions and make a name for themselves .
Artists such as Pablo Picasso , Henri Matisse , Vincent van Gogh , Paul Cézanne , Jean Metzinger , Albert Gleizes , Henri Rousseau , Marc Chagall , Amedeo Modigliani and many others became associated with Paris .
The work of Étienne-Jules Marey in the 1880s contributed considerably to the development of modern photography .
Photography came to occupy a central role in Parisian Surrealist activity , in the works of Man Ray and Maurice Tabard .
Its treasures include the Mona Lisa -LRB- La Joconde -RRB- and the Venus de Milo statue .
The Musée d'Orsay , in the former Orsay railway station , was the third-most visited museum in the city in 2014 ; it displays French art of the 19th century , including major collections of the Impressionists and Post-Impressionists .
The original building - a railway station - was constructed for the Universal Exhibition of 1900 .
The Musée national du Moyen Âge , or Cluny Museum , presents Medieval art , including the famous tapestry cycle of The Lady and the Unicorn .
There are also notable museums devoted to individual artists , including the Picasso Museum the Rodin Museum , and the Musée national Eugène Delacroix .
Paris hosts one of the largest science museums in Europe , the Cité des Sciences et de l'Industrie at La Villette .
In middle of the 19th century , there were three other active and competing opera houses : the Opéra-Comique -LRB- which still exists -RRB- , Théâtre-Italien , and Théâtre Lyrique -LRB- which in modern times changed its profile and name to Théâtre de la Ville -RRB- .
Theatre traditionally has occupied a large place in Parisian culture , and many of its most popular actors today are also stars of French television .
of Other famous theaters include the Odéon-Théâtre de l'Europe , next to the Luxembourg Gardens , also a state institution and theatrical landmark ; the Théâtre Mogador , and the Théâtre de la Gaîté-Montparnasse .
The music hall and cabaret are famous Paris institutions .
It helped make famous the singers Mistinguett and Édith Piaf and the painter Toulouse-Lautrec , who made posters for the venue .
In 1911 , the dance hall Olympia Paris invented the grand staircase as a settling for its shows , competing with its great rival , the Folies Bergère , Its stars in the 1920s included the American singer and dancer Josephine Baker .
The Casino de Paris presented many famous French singers , including Mistinguett , Maurice Chevalier , and Tino Rossi .
A half dozen music halls exist today in Paris , attended mostly visitors to the city .
Since then , Paris has been the centre of the French publishing industry , the home of some of the world 's best-known writers and poets , and the setting for many classic works of French literature .
Paris did not become the acknowledged capital of French literature until the 17th century , with authors such as Boileau , Corneille , La Fontaine , Molière , Racine , several coming from the provinces , and the foundation of the Académie française .
In the 18th century , the literary life of Paris revolved around the cafés and salons , and was dominated by Voltaire , Jean-Jacques Rousseau , Pierre de Marivaux , and Beaumarchais .
During the 19th century , Paris was the home and subject for some of France 's greatest writers , including Charles Baudelaire , Stéphane Mallarmé , Mérimée , Alfred de Musset , Marcel Proust , Émile Zola , Alexandre Dumas , Gustave Flaubert , Guy de Maupassant and Honoré de Balzac .
Paris is a city of books and bookstores .
Since that time , because of high prices , some publishers have moved out to the less expensive areas .
A group of Parisian aristocrats , known as Trouvères , became known for their poetry and songs .
Troubadors were also popular .
During the Renaissance era , the French Boleroroyals `` disported themselves in masques , ballets , allegorical dances , recitals , and opera and comedy '' .
Baroque-era composers include Jean-Baptiste Lully , Jean-Philippe Rameau , and François Couperin and were popular .
By 1870 , Paris had become an important centre for symphony , ballet and operatic music .
Romantic-era composers -LRB- in Paris -RRB- include Hector Berlioz -LRB- La Symphonie fantastique -RRB- , Charles Gounod -LRB- Faust -RRB- , Camille Saint-Saëns -LRB- Samson et Delilah -RRB- , Léo Delibes -LRB- Lakmé -RRB- and Jules Massenet -LRB- Thaïs -RRB- , among others .
Carmen has since become one of the most popular and frequently-performed operas in the classical canon ; Impressionist composers Claude Debussy -LRB- -LRB- La Mer -RRB- and Maurice Ravel -LRB- Boléro -RRB- also made significant contributions to piano -LRB- Clair de lune , Miroirs -RRB- , orchestra , opera -LRB- Palléas et Mélisande -RRB- , and other musical forms .
Foreign-born composers have made their homes in Paris and have made significant contributions both with their works and their influence .
Paris became a major centre for jazz and still attracts jazz musicians from all around the world to its clubs and cafés .
They introduced Parisians to the music of Claude Luter , Boris Vian , Sydney Bechet Mezz Mezzrow , and Henri Salvador .
Later , most of the largest cinemas were divided into multiple , smaller rooms .
Big multiplex movie theaters have been built since the 1990s .
UGC Ciné Cité Les Halles with 27 screens , MK2 Bibliothèque with 20 screens and UGC Ciné Cité Bercy with 18 screens are among the largest .
French cinema comes a close second , with major directors -LRB- réalisateurs -RRB- such as Claude Lelouch , Jean-Luc Godard , and Luc Besson , and the more slapstick/popular genre with director Claude Zidi as an example .
European and Asian films are also widely shown and appreciated .
Since the late 18th century , Paris has been famous for its restaurants and haute cuisine , food meticulously prepared and artfully presented .
The restaurant Le Grand Véfour in the Palais-Royal dates from the same period .
Several of the best-known restaurants in Paris today appeared during the Belle Epoque , including Maxim 's on Rue Royale , Ledoyen in the gardens of the Champs-Élysées , and the Tour d'Argent on the Quai de la Tournelle .
These include both restaurants which serve classical French cuisine , such as L'Ambroisie in the Place des Vosges , and those which serve non-traditional menus , such as L'Astrance , which combines French and Asian cuisines .
Several of France 's most famous chefs , including Pierre Gagnaire , Alain Ducasse , Yannick Alléno and Alain Passard , have three-star restaurants in Paris .
In addition to the classical restaurants , Paris has several other kinds of traditional eating places .
In the 20th century , the cafés of the Left Bank , especially Café de la Rotonde and Le Dôme Café in Montparnasse and Café de Flore and Les Deux Magots on Boulevard Saint Germain , all still in business , were important meeting places for painters , writers and philosophers .
Its name is said to have come in 1814 from the Russian soldiers who occupied the city ; `` bistro '' means `` quickly '' in Russian , and they wanted their meals served rapidly so they could get back their encampment .
Real bistros are increasingly rare in Paris , due to rising costs , competition from cheaper ethnic restaurants , and different eating habits of Parisian diners .
A brasserie originally was a tavern located next to a brewery , which served beer and food at any hour .
Now brasseries , like cafés , serve food and drinks throughout the day .
It is home of some of the largest fashion houses in the world , including Dior and Chanel , and of many well-known fashion designers , including Karl Lagerfeld , Jean-Paul Gaultier , Christophe Josse and Christian Lacroix .
Paris Fashion Week , held in January and July in the Carrousel du Louvre and other city locations , is among the top four events of the international fashion calendar , along with the fashion weeks in Milan , London and New York .
The prestigious public universities are usually considered grands établissements .
There are a high number of engineering schools , led by the Paris Institute of Technology which comprises several colleges such as École Polytechnique , École des Mines , AgroParisTech , Télécom Paris , Arts et Métiers , and École des Ponts et Chaussées .
There are also many business schools , including HEC , INSEAD , ESSEC , and ESCP Europe .
Paris is also home to several of France 's most famous high-schools such as Lycée Louis-le-Grand , Lycée Henri-IV , Lycée Janson de Sailly and Lycée Condorcet .
The National Institute of Sport and Physical Education , located in the 12th arrondissement , is both a physical education institute and high-level training centre for elite athletes .
There are three public libraries in the 4th arrondissement .
The Médiathèque Musicale Mahler in the 8th arrondissement opened in 1986 and contains collections related to music .
There are several academic libraries and archives in Paris .
Other academic libraries include Interuniversity Pharmaceutical Library , Leonardo da Vinci University Library , Paris School of Mines Library , and the René Descartes University Library .
A majority of Parisians are still nominally Roman Catholic .
There are an additional 10 Eastern Orthodox parishes , and bishops for the Armenian and Ukrainian Orthodox Churches .
During the Middle Ages , Paris was a center of Jewish learning with famous Talmudic scholars , such as Yechiel of Paris who took part in the Disputation of Paris between Christian and Jewish intellectuals .
The Parisian Jewish community was victim of persecution , alternating expulsions and returns , until France became the first country in Europe to emancipate its Jewish population during the French Revolution .
It hosts several different schools of Buddhism , and does not have a single leader .
There are two other small temples located in the Asian community in the 13th arrondissement .
It is used for football , rugby union and track and field athletics .
It hosts the French national football team for friendlies and major tournaments qualifiers , annually hosts the French national rugby team 's home matches of the Six Nations Championship , and hosts several important matches of the Stade Français rugby team .
In addition to Paris Saint-Germain FC , the city has a number of other amateur football clubs : Paris FC , Red Star , RCF Paris and Stade Français Paris .
Paris is a major rail , highway , and air transport hub .
Five new light rail lines are currently in various stages of development .
The city is served by three commercial international airports : Paris-Charles de Gaulle , Paris-Orly and Beauvais-Tillé .
Today it is the 4th busiest airport in the world by international traffic , and is the hub for the nation 's flag carrier Air France .
Paris in its early history had only the Seine and Bièvre rivers for water .
From then on , the new reservoir system became Paris ' principal source of drinking water , and the remains of the old system , pumped into lower levels of the same reservoirs , were from then on used for the cleaning of Paris ' streets .
This system is still a major part of Paris ' modern water-supply network .
In Paris ' Roman era , its main cemetery was located to the outskirts of the Left Bank settlement , but this changed with the rise of Catholicism , where most every inner-city church had adjoining burial grounds for use by their parishes .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Some of the most famous people in the world are buried in Parisian cemeteries .
It is the largest hospital system in Europe .
It provides health care , teaching , research , prevention , education and emergency medical service in 52 branches of medicine .
Paris and its close suburbs is home to numerous newspapers , magazines and publications including Le Monde , Le Figaro , Libération , Le Nouvel Observateur , Le Canard enchaîné , La Croix , Pariscope , Le Parisien -LRB- in Saint-Ouen -RRB- , Les Échos , Paris Match -LRB- Neuilly-sur-Seine -RRB- , Réseaux & Télécoms , Reuters France , and L'Officiel des Spectacles .
Another news agency is France Diplomatie , owned and operated by the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs , and pertains solely to diplomatic news and occurrences .
Radio France Internationale , another public broadcaster is also based in the city .
Amongst the god 's custodial charges , Apollo became associated with dominion over colonists , and as the patron defender of herds and flocks .
As the leader of the Muses -LRB- Apollon Musegetes -RRB- and director of their choir , Apollo functioned as the patron god of music and poetry .
In Latin texts , on the other hand , Joseph Fontenrose declared himself unable to find any conflation of Apollo with Sol among the Augustan poets of the 1st century , not even in the conjurations of Aeneas and Latinus in Aeneid XII -LRB- 161 -- 215 -RRB- .
Apollo and Helios/Sol remained separate beings in literary and mythological texts until the 3rd century CE .
The etymology of the name is uncertain .
The spelling Ἀπόλλων -LRB- pronounced -LSB- a.pól.lɔːn -RSB- in Classical Attic -RRB- had almost superseded all other forms by the beginning of the common era , but the Doric form Apellon -LRB- Ἀπέλλων -RRB- , is more archaic , derived from an earlier * Ἀπέλjων .
R. S. P. Beekes rejected the connection of the theonym with the noun apellai and suggested a Pre-Greek proto-form * Apalyun .
Several instances of popular etymology are attested from ancient authors .
Plato in Cratylus connects the name with ἀπόλυσις -LRB- apolysis -RRB- , `` redemption '' , with ἀπόλουσις -LRB- apolousis -RRB- , `` purification '' , and with ἁπλοῦν -LRB- -LSB- h -RSB- aploun -RRB- , `` simple '' , in particular in reference to the Thessalian form of the name , Ἄπλουν , and finally with Ἀειβάλλων -LRB- aeiballon -RRB- , `` ever-shooting '' .
Apollo was worshipped as Actiacus -LRB- / ækˈtaɪ.əkəs / ak-TY-ə-kəs ; Ἄκτιακός , Aktiakos , literally `` Actian '' -RRB- , Delphinius -LRB- / dɛlˈfɪniəs / del-FIN-ee-əs ; Δελφίνιος , Delphinios , literally `` Delphic '' -RRB- , and Pythius -LRB- / ˈpɪθiəs / PITH-ee-əs ; Πύθιος , Puthios , from Πυθώ , Pythō , the area around Delphi -RRB- , after Actium -LRB- Ἄκτιον -RRB- and Delphi -LRB- Δελφοί -RRB- respectively , two of his principal places of worship .
For this he was also known as Parnopius -LRB- / pɑːrˈnoʊpiəs / par-NOH-pee-əs ; Παρνόπιος , Parnopios , from πάρνοψ , `` locust '' -RRB- and to the Romans as Culicarius -LRB- / ˌkjuːlᵻˈkæriəs / KEW-li-KARR-ee-əs ; from Latin culicārius , `` of midges '' -RRB- .
The Romans referred to Apollo as Medicus -LRB- / ˈmɛdᵻkəs / MED-i-kəs ; literally `` physician '' in Latin -RRB- in this respect .
To the Romans , he was known in this capacity as Averruncus -LRB- / ˌævəˈrʌŋkəs / AV-ər-RUNG-kəs ; from Latin āverruncare , `` to avert '' -RRB- .
In this respect , the Romans called him Coelispex -LRB- / ˈsɛlᵻspɛks / SEL-i-speks ; from Latin coelum , `` sky '' , and specere , `` to look at '' -RRB- .
The Romans referred to Apollo as Articenens -LRB- / ɑːrˈtɪsᵻnənz / ar-TISS-i-nənz ; `` bow-carrying '' -RRB- .
The cult centers of Apollo in Greece , Delphi and Delos , date from the 8th century BCE .
At Delphi , Apollo was venerated as the slayer of Pytho .
For the Greeks , Apollo was all the Gods in one and through the centuries he acquired different functions which could originate from different gods .
In archaic Greece he was the prophet , the oracular god who in older times was connected with `` healing '' .
In classical Greece he was the god of light and of music , but in popular religion he had a strong function to keep away evil .
The ritualism belonged to Apollo from the beginning .
Apollo became the god of shining youth , the protector of music , spiritual-life , moderation and perceptible order .
The improvement of the old Anatolian god , and his elevation to an intellectual sphere , may be considered an achievement of the Greek people .
Paeοn is probably connected with the Mycenean pa-ja-wo-ne -LRB- Linear B : -RRB- , but this is not certain .
He did not have a separate cult , but he was the personification of the holy magic-song sung by the magicians that was supposed to cure disease .
Later the Greeks knew the original meaning of the relevant song `` paean '' -LRB- παιάν -RRB- .
In later writers , the word , usually spelled `` Paean '' , becomes a mere epithet of Apollo in his capacity as a god of healing .
Homer illustrated Paeon the god , and the song both of apotropaic thanksgiving or triumph .
It was in this way that Apollo had become recognised as the god of music .
Apollo 's role as the slayer of the Python led to his association with battle and victory ; hence it became the Roman custom for a paean to be sung by an army on the march and before entering into battle , when a fleet left the harbour , and also after a victory had been won .
His arrival must have occurred during the `` Dark Ages '' that followed the destruction of the Mycenaean civilization , and his conflict with Gaia -LRB- Mother Earth -RRB- was represented by the legend of his slaying her daughter the serpent Python .
The earth deity had power over the ghostly world , and it is believed that she was the deity behind the oracle .
The older tales mentioned two dragons who were perhaps intentionally conflated .
The conception that diseases and death come from invisible shots sent by supernatural beings , or magicians is common in Germanic and Norse mythology .
The `` elf-shot '' originally indicated disease or death attributed to the elves , but it was later attested denoting stone arrow-heads which were used by witches to harm people , and also for healing rituals .
It seems an oracular cult existed in Delphi from the Mycenaean ages .
The Homeric hymn adds that Apollo appeared as a dolphin and carried Cretan priests to Delphi , where they evidently transferred their religious practices .
Apollo Delphinios was a sea-god especially worshiped in Crete and in the islands , and his name indicates his connection with Delphi and the holy serpent Delphyne -LRB- `` womb '' -RRB- .
In her earliest depictions she is accompanied by the `` Mister of the animals '' , a male god of hunting who had the bow as his attribute .
His original name is unknown , but it seems that he was absorbed by the more popular Apollo , who stood by the virgin `` Mistress of the Animals '' , becoming her brother .
The old oracles in Delphi seem to be connected with a local tradition of the priesthood , and there is not clear evidence that a kind of inspiration-prophecy existed in the temple .
Frenzied women like Sibyls from whose lips the god speaks are recorded in the Near East as Mari in the second millennium BC .
Although Crete had contacts with Mari from 2000 BC , there is no evidence that the ecstatic prophetic art existed during the Minoan and Mycenean ages .
It is more probable that this art was introduced later from Anatolia and regenerated an existing oracular cult that was local to Delphi and dormant in several areas of Greece .
A non-Greek origin of Apollo has long been assumed in scholarship .
Omens , symbols , purifications , and exorcisms appear in old Assyro-Babylonian texts , and these rituals were spread into the empire of the Hittites .
In a Hittite text is mentioned that the king invited a Babylonian priestess for a certain `` purification '' .
It seems that these rituals were dormant in Greece , and they were reinforced when the Greeks migrated to Anatolia .
Homer pictures Apollo on the side of the Trojans , fighting against the Achaeans , during the Trojan War .
He is pictured as a terrible god , less trusted by the Greeks than other gods .
The stones found in front of the gates of Homeric Troy were the symbols of Apollo .
The Greeks gave to him the name ἀγυιεύς agyieus as the protector god of public places and houses who wards off evil , and his symbol was a tapered stone or column .
Here we have an apotropaic situation , where a god originally bringing the plague was invoked to end it .
Homer interprets Apollo as a terrible god -LRB- δεινὸς θεός -RRB- who brings death and disease with his arrows , but who can also heal , possessing a magic art that separates him from the other Greek gods .
All these functions , including the function of the healer-god Paean , who seems to have Mycenean origin , are fused in the cult of Apollo .
In cult practice , Delian Apollo and Pythian Apollo -LRB- the Apollo of Delphi -RRB- were so distinct that they might both have shrines in the same locality .
Apollo 's cult was already fully established when written sources commenced , about 650 BCE .
Apollo became extremely important to the Greek world as an oracular deity in the archaic period , and the frequency of theophoric names such as Apollodorus or Apollonios and cities named Apollonia testify to his popularity .
Oracular sanctuaries to Apollo were established in other sites .
`` In the 3rd century , Apollo fell silent .
A lot of temples dedicated to Apollo were built in Greece and in the Greek colonies , and they show the spread of the cult of Apollo , and the evolution of the Greek architecture , which was mostly based on the rightness of form , and on mathematical relations .
Some of the earliest temples , especially in Crete , do n't belong to any Greek order .
The different wooden elements were considered divine , and their forms were preserved in the marble or stone elements of the temples of Doric order .
The Greeks used standard types , because they believed that the world of objects was a series of typical forms which could be represented in several instances .
The temples should be canonic , and the architects were trying to achieve the esthetic perfection .
From the earliest times there were certain rules strictly observed in rectangular peripteral and prostyle buildings .
Mythographers agree that Artemis was born first and then assisted with the birth of Apollo , or that Artemis was born one day before Apollo , on the island of Ortygia and that she helped Leto cross the sea to Delos the next day to give birth to Apollo .
Apollo was born on the seventh day -LRB- ἑβδομαγενής , hebdomagenes -RRB- of the month Thargelion -- according to Delian tradition -- or of the month Bysios -- according to Delphian tradition .
This was the spring which emitted vapors that caused the oracle at Delphi to give her prophecies .
To protect his mother , Apollo begged Hephaestus for a bow and arrows .
After receiving them , Apollo cornered Python in the sacred cave at Delphi .
During this time he served as shepherd for King Admetus of Pherae in Thessaly .
Admetus treated Apollo well , and , in return , the god conferred great benefits on Admetus .
The myth explains the connection of Apollo with δάφνη -LRB- daphnē -RRB- , the laurel whose leaves his priestess employed at Delphi .
She fell in love with Apollo who disguised himself as Leucothea 's mother to gain entrance to her chambers .
Clytia , jealous of her sister because she wanted Apollo for herself , told Orchamus the truth , betraying her sister 's trust and confidence in her .
Apollo refused to forgive Clytia for betraying his beloved , and a grieving Clytia wilted and slowly died .
Apollo changed her into an incense plant , either heliotrope or sunflower , which follows the sun every day .
When first informed he disbelieved the crow and turned all crows black -LRB- where they were previously white -RRB- as a punishment for spreading untruths .
When he found out the truth he sent his sister , Artemis , to kill Coronis -LRB- in other stories , Apollo himself had killed Coronis -RRB- .
As a result , he also made the crow sacred and gave them the task of announcing important deaths .
Apollo rescued the baby and gave it to the centaur Chiron to raise .
Phlegyas was irate after the death of his daughter and burned the Temple of Apollo at Delphi .
Apollo then killed him for what he did .
He was a Spartan prince , beautiful and athletic .
The Festival of Hyacinthus was a celebration of Sparta .
They invade his temple , and he says that the matter should be brought before Athena .
Apollo promises to protect Orestes , as Orestes has become Apollo 's supplicant .
Apollo advocates Orestes at the trial , and ultimately Athena rules in favor of Apollo .
Then Apollo struck the strings of his lyre .
Tmolus at once awarded the victory to Apollo , and all but Midas agreed with the judgment .
He dissented and questioned the justice of the award .
Apollo would not suffer such a depraved pair of ears any longer , and caused them to become the ears of a donkey .
After they each performed , both were deemed equal until Apollo decreed they play and sing at the same time .
Apollo was declared the winner because of this .
Apollo flayed Marsyas alive in a cave near Celaenae in Phrygia for his hubris to challenge a god .
He then nailed Marsyas ' shaggy skin to a nearby pine-tree .
In the time of Augustus , who considered himself under the special protection of Apollo and was even said to be his son , his worship developed and he became one of the chief gods of Rome .
According to Greek tradition , he helped Cretan or Arcadian colonists found the city of Troy .
However , this story may reflect a cultural influence which had the reverse direction : Hittite cuneiform texts mention a Minor Asian god called Appaliunas or Apalunas in connection with the city of Wilusa attested in Hittite inscriptions , which is now generally regarded as being identical with the Greek Ilion by most scholars .
The contrast between the roles of these gods is reflected in the adjectives Apollonian and Dionysian .
This contrast appears to be shown on the two sides of the Borghese Vase .
The evolution of the Greek sculpture can be observed in his depictions from the almost static formal Kouros type in early archaic period , to the representation of motion in a relative harmonious whole in late archaic period .
In classical Greece the emphasis is not given to the illusive imaginative reality represented by the ideal forms , but to the analogies and the interaction of the members in the whole , a method created by Polykleitos .
The forms on earth are imperfect duplicates of the intellectual celestial ideas .
The artists in Plato 's time moved away from his theories and art tends to be a mixture of naturalism with stylization .
The Greek sculptors considered the senses more important , and the proportions were used to unite the sensible with the intellectual .
This type served certain religious needs and was first proposed for what was previously thought to be depictions of Apollo .
The first statues are certainly still and formal .
The formality of their stance seems to be related with the Egyptian precedent , but it was accepted for a good reason .
The sculptors had a clear idea of what a young man is , and embodied the archaic smile of good manners , the firm and springy step , the balance of the body , dignity , and youthful happiness .
When they tried to depict the most abiding qualities of men , it was because men had common roots with the unchanging gods .
The adoption of a standard recognizable type for a long time , is probably because nature gives preference in survival of a type which has long be adopted by the climatic conditions , and also due to the general Greek belief that nature expresses itself in ideal forms that can be imagined and represented .
These forms expressed immortality .
His shrine in Delphi , that he shared in winter with Dionysius had the inscriptions : γνῶθι σεαυτόν -LRB- gnōthi seautón = `` know thyself '' -RRB- and μηδὲν ἄγαν -LRB- mēdén ágan , `` nothing in excess '' -RRB- , and ἐγγύα πάρα δ ' ἄτη -LRB- eggýa pára d'atē , `` make a pledge and mischief is nigh '' -RRB- .
The Greeks maintained , until late in their civilization , an almost animistic idea that the statues are in some sense alive .
This embodies the belief that the image was somehow the god or man himself .
A fine example is the statue of the Sacred gate Kouros which was found at the cemetery of Dipylon in Athens -LRB- Dipylon Kouros -RRB- .
The statue is the `` thing in itself '' , and his slender face with the deep eyes express an intellectual eternity .
It is considered that he created also the New York kouros , which is the oldest fully preserved statue of Kouros type , and seems to be the incarnation of the god himself .
The earliest examples of life-sized statues of Apollo , may be two figures from the Ionic sanctuary on the island of Delos .
Such statues were found across the Greek speaking world , the preponderance of these were found at the sanctuaries of Apollo with more than one hundred from the sanctuary of Apollo Ptoios , Boeotia alone .
Ranking from the very few bronzes survived to us is the masterpiece bronze Piraeus Apollo .
It probably comes from north-eastern Peloponnesus .
The emphasis is given in anatomy , and it is one of the first attempts to represent a kind of motion , and beauty relative to proportions , which appear mostly in post-Archaic art .
The statue throws some light on an artistic centre which , with an independently developed harder , simpler , and heavier style , restricts Ionian influence in Athens .
Finally , this is the germ from which the art of Polykleitos was to grow two or three generations later .
In the next century which is the beginning of the Classical period , it was considered that beauty in visible things as in everything else , consisted of symmetry and proportions .
The artists tried also to represent motion in a specific moment -LRB- Myron -RRB- , which may be considered as the reappearance of the dormant Minoan element .
Anatomy and geometry are fused in one , and each does something to the other .
The Greek sculptors tried to clarify it by looking for mathematical proportions , just as they sought some reality behind appearances .
It seems that he was influenced by the theories of Pythagoras .
The Apollo held the cythara against his extended left arm , of which in the Louvre example , a fragment of one twisting scrolling horn upright remains against his biceps .
Though the proportions were always important in Greek art , the appeal of the Greek sculptures eludes any explanation by proportion alone .
Spiritual life is incorporated in matter , when it is given artistic form .
Just as in the arts the Greeks sought some reality behind appearances , so in mathematics they sought permanent principles which could be applied wherever the conditions were the same .
Artists and sculptors tried to find this ideal order in relation with mathematics , but they believed that this ideal order revealed itself not so much to the dispassionate intellect , as to the whole sentient self .
Things as we see them , and as they really are , are one , that each stresses the nature of the other in a single unity .
They care for the schematic arrangements of bodies in space , but only as parts in a larger whole .
In these archaic pediments the sculptors use empty intervals , to suggest a passage to and fro a busy battlefield .
Among the stated reasons were that Saddam 's regime had tried to acquire nuclear material and had not properly accounted for biological and chemical material it was known to have previously possessed , and believed to still maintain .
The assertion about WMD was hotly advanced by the Bush administration from the beginning , but other major powers including China , France , Germany , and Russia remained unconvinced that Iraq was a threat and refused to allow passage of a UN Security Council resolution to authorize the use of force .
The United States invaded Iraq on March 20 , 2003 , along with a `` coalition of the willing '' that consisted of additional troops from the United Kingdom , and to a lesser extent , from Australia and Poland .
Within about three weeks , the invasion caused the collapse of both the Iraqi government and its armed forces , however , the U.S. and allied forces failed to find any weapon of mass destruction in Iraq .
Traces of former materials and weapons labs were reported to have been located , but no `` smoking guns '' .
Nevertheless , on May 1 , George W. Bush landed on the aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln , in a Lockheed S-3 Viking , where he gave a speech announcing the end of `` major combat operations '' in the Iraq War .
Bush 's approval rating in May was at 66 % , according to a CNN -- USA Today -- Gallup poll .
However , Bush 's high approval ratings did not last .
First , while the war itself was popular in the U.S. , the reconstruction and attempted `` democratization '' of Iraq lost some support as months passed and casualty figures increased , with no decrease in violence nor progress toward stability or reconstruction .
The ownership society included allowing people to invest some of their Social Security in the stock market , increasing home and stock ownership , and encouraging more people to buy their own health insurance .
Senator Lieberman , a liberal on domestic issues but a hawk on the War on Terror , failed to gain traction with liberal Democratic primary voters .
This weakness was apparent in his first few debates , although he soon presented a range of position papers , including a major tax-relief plan .
Most other states did not have updated polling numbers to give an accurate placing for the Kerry campaign before Iowa .
He also brought on the `` magical '' Michael Whouley who would be credited with helping bring home the Iowa victory the same as he did in New Hampshire for Al Gore in 2000 against Bill Bradley .
Howard Dean was a strong front-runner .
Besides the impact of coming in third , Dean was further hurt by a speech he gave at a post-caucus rally .
Dean was shouting over the cheers of his enthusiastic audience , but the crowd noise was being filtered out by his unidirectional microphone , leaving only his full-throated exhortations audible to the television viewers .
To those at home , he seemed to raise his voice out of sheer emotion .
The scream scene was shown approximately 633 times by cable and broadcast news networks in just four days following the incident , a number that does not include talk shows and local news broadcasts .
Kucinich and Sharpton continued to run despite poor results at the polls .
Kuninch did not leave the race officially until July .
Kerry made his Vietnam War experience the prominent theme of the convention .
This strategy was designed to convey to American voters the idea that Bush could be trusted to be tough on terrorism while Kerry would be `` uncertain in the face of danger . ''
Serious doubts about the documents ' authenticity quickly emerged , leading CBS to appoint a review panel that eventually resulted in the firing of the news producer and other significant staffing changes .
Bush replied to this by saying , `` Well , actually , he forgot Poland . ''
In the days after , coverage focused on Bush 's apparent annoyance with Kerry and numerous scowls and negative facial expressions .
51 million viewers watched the debate which was moderated by Bob Schieffer of CBS News .
One elector in Minnesota cast a ballot for president with the name of `` John Ewards '' -LSB- sic -RSB- written on it .
The remaining nine electors cast ballots for John Kerry .
The morning after the election , the major candidates were neck and neck .
Bush had preliminary leads of less than 5 % of the vote in only four states , but if Iowa , Nevada and New Mexico had all eventually gone to Kerry , a win for Bush in Ohio would have created a 269 -- 269 tie in the Electoral College .
Such a scenario would almost certainly have resulted in a victory for Bush , as Republicans controlled more House delegations .
In the afternoon Ohio 's Secretary of State , Ken Blackwell , announced that it was statistically impossible for the Democrats to make up enough valid votes in the provisional ballots to win .
At the time provisional ballots were reported as numbering 140,000 -LRB- and later estimated to be only 135,000 -RRB- .
Faced with this announcement , John Kerry conceded defeat .
Because the motion was supported by at least one member of both the House of Representatives and the Senate , election law mandated that each house retire to debate and vote on the motion .
In the House of Representatives , the motion was supported by 31 Democrats .
It was opposed by 178 Republicans , 88 Democrats and one independent .
Four people elected to the House had not yet taken office , and one seat was vacant .
That 's what we suspect has happened . ''
In September 2004 the OSCE issued a report on U.S. electoral processes and the election final report .
There was exceptional public interest in the two leading presidential candidates and the issues raised by their respective campaigns , as well as in the election process itself . ''
Because of the Act 's restrictions on candidates ' and parties ' fundraising , a large number of so-called 527 groups emerged .
Many such groups were active throughout the campaign season .
-LRB- There was some similar activity , although on a much lesser scale , during the 2000 campaign . -RRB-
The initialism IBM followed .
IBM has constantly evolved since its inception .
This transition had progressed as of early 2015 -LSB- update -RSB- .
They manufactured machinery for sale and lease , ranging from commercial scales and industrial time recorders , meat and cheese slicers , to tabulators and punched cards .
Watson joined CTR as General Manager then , 11 months later , was made President when court cases relating to his time at NCR were resolved .
Having learned Patterson 's pioneering business practices , Watson proceeded to put the stamp of NCR onto CTR 's companies .
He implemented sales conventions , `` generous sales incentives , a focus on customer service , an insistence on well-groomed , dark-suited salesmen and had an evangelical fervor for instilling company pride and loyalty in every worker '' .
`` Watson had never liked the clumsy hyphenated title of the CTR '' and chose to replace it with the more expansive title `` International Business Machines '' .
For example , the McClures magazine , v53 , May 1921 , has a full page ad with , at the bottom :
During the Second World War the company produced small arms for the American war effort -LRB- M1 Carbine , and Browning Automatic Rifle -RRB- .
The same year IBM developed the SABRE -LRB- Semi-Automatic Business-Related Environment -RRB- reservation system for American Airlines and introduced the highly successful Selectric typewriter .
In 2003 it initiated a project to redefine company values .
Three emerged , expressed as : `` Dedication to every client 's success '' , `` Innovation that matters -- for our company and for the world '' , and `` Trust and personal responsibility in all relationships '' .
In 2011 , IBM gained worldwide attention for its artificial intelligence program Watson , which was exhibited on Jeopardy! where it won against game-show champions Ken Jennings and Brad Rutter .
As of 2012 -LSB- update -RSB- , IBM had been the top annual recipient of U.S. patents for 20 consecutive years .
Said Rometty , `` We 've got to reinvent ourselves like we 've done in prior generations . ''
The company also operates the IBM Scientific Center , Hursley House , the Canada Head Office Building , IBM Rochester , and the Somers Office Complex .
IBM 's employee management practices can be traced back to its roots .
IBM sports teams still continue in the present day ; the IBM Big Blue continue to exist as semi-professional company rugby and American football teams .
Also that year , IBM held its first training class for female systems service professionals .
The next year classes began in New York City , and soon the company was asked to join the President 's Committee for Employment of the Handicapped .
In 1947 , IBM announced a Total and Permanent Disability Income Plan for employees .
A vested rights pension was added to the IBM retirement plan .
During IBM 's management transformation in the 1990s revisions were made to these pension plans to reduce IBM 's pension liabilities .
The company stated that this would give IBM a competitive advantage because IBM would then be able to hire talented people its competitors would turn down .
It contains how-to articles and tutorials , as well as software downloads and code samples , discussion forums , podcasts , blogs , wikis , and other resources for developers and technical professionals .
Virtually all console gaming systems of the previous generation used microprocessors developed by IBM .
The new Power Architecture-based microprocessor includes IBM 's latest technology in an energy-saving silicon package .
Nintendo 's seventh-generation console , Wii , features an IBM chip codenamed Broadway .
The older Nintendo GameCube utilizes the Gekko processor , also designed by IBM .
The company states that its new product allows businesses to offer employees a choice of using the same software on Windows and its alternatives .
This means that `` Open Client Offering '' is to cut costs of managing whether to use Linux or Apple relative to Windows .
There will be no necessity for companies to pay Microsoft for its licenses for operating systems since the operating systems will no longer rely on software which is Windows-based .
On Aug 18 , 2011 , as part of its effort in cognitive computing , IBM has produced chips that imitate neurons and synapses .
These microprocessors do not use von Neumann architecture , and they consume less memory and power .
The program searches for fresh start-up companies that IBM can partner with to solve world problems .
These left behind volatile organic compounds in the town 's soil and aquifer .
Traces of volatile organic compounds have been identified in Endicott 's drinking water , but the levels are within regulatory limits .
Remediation and testing are ongoing , however according to city officials , tests show that the water is safe to drink .
Historically , the party has supported a higher degree of economic protectionism and interventionism than it has in recent decades .
Strong opposition to socialism and communism in Australia and abroad was one of its founding principles .
In the 1970s a left-wing middle class emerged that no longer voted Liberal .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- On the other hand , the Liberals have done increasingly well in recent years among socially conservative working-class voters .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- However the Liberal Party 's key support base remains the upper-middle classes ; 16 of the 20 richest federal electorates are held by the Liberals , most of which are safe seats .
In country areas they either compete with or have a truce with the Nationals , depending on various factors .
The Commonwealth Liberal Party was a fusion of the Free Trade Party and the Protectionist Party in 1909 by the second prime minister , Alfred Deakin , in response to Labor 's growing electoral prominence .
That party , in turn , merged with Labor dissidents to form the UAP in 1931 .
The UAP had been formed as a new conservative alliance in 1931 , with Labor defector Joseph Lyons as its leader .
The stance of Lyons and other Labor rebels against the more radical proposals of the Labor movement to deal the Great Depression had attracted the support of prominent Australian conservatives .
It largely avoided Keynesian pump-priming and pursued a more conservative fiscal policy of debt reduction and balanced budgets as a means of stewarding Australia out of the Depression .
The UAP , led by Billy Hughes , disintegrated after suffering a heavy defeat in the 1943 election .
The new party was dominated by the remains of the old UAP ; with few exceptions , the UAP party room became the Liberal party room .
The Australian Women 's National League , a powerful conservative women 's organisation , also merged with the new party .
A conservative youth group Menzies had set up , the Young Nationalists , was also merged into the new party .
While himself an unashamed anglophile , Menzies ' government concluded a number of major defence and trade treaties that set Australia on its post-war trajectory out of Britain 's orbit ; opened Australia to multi-ethnic immigration ; and instigated important legal reforms regarding Aboriginal Australians .
Menzies came to power the year the Communist Party of Australia had led a coal strike to improve pit miners ' working conditions .
That same year Joseph Stalin 's Soviet Union exploded its first atomic bomb , and Mao Zedong led the Communist Party of China to power in China ; a year later came the invasion of South Korea by Communist North Korea .
In 1951 , during the early stages of the Cold War , Menzies spoke of the possibility of a looming third world war .
External Affairs Minister Percy Spender had put forward the proposal to work along similar lines to the NATO Alliance .
The Treaty declared that any attack on one of the three parties in the Pacific area would be viewed as a threat to each , and that the common danger would be met in accordance with each nation 's constitutional processes .
That same year , Soviet diplomat Vladimir Petrov and his wife defected from the Soviet embassy in Canberra , revealing evidence of Russian spying activities ; Menzies called a Royal Commission to investigate .
Menzies continued the expanded immigration program established under Chifley , and took important steps towards dismantling the White Australia Policy .
In the early 1950s , external affairs minister Percy Spender helped to establish the Colombo Plan for providing economic aid to underdeveloped nations in Australia 's region .
Under that scheme many future Asian leaders studied in Australia .
Menzies remained a staunch supporter of links to the monarchy and British Commonwealth but formalised an alliance with the United States and concluded the Agreement on Commerce between Australia and Japan which was signed in July 1957 and launched post-war trade with Japan , beginning a growth of Australian exports of coal , iron ore and mineral resources that would steadily climb until Japan became Australia 's largest trading partner .
His government oversaw conversion to decimal currency .
Holt faced Britain 's withdrawal from Asia by visiting and hosting many Asian leaders and by expanding ties to the United States , hosting the first visit to Australia by an American president , his friend Lyndon B. Johnson .
Holt 's government introduced the Migration Act 1966 , which effectively dismantled the White Australia Policy and increased access to non-European migrants , including refugees fleeing the Vietnam War .
By the end of 1967 , the Liberals ' initially popular support for the war in Vietnam was causing increasing public protest .
The Gorton government experienced a decline in voter support at the 1969 election .
State Liberal leaders saw his policies as too Centralist , while other Liberals did n't like his personal behaviour .
He worked on Indigenous and social welfare issues and proved an independent minded Senator , often crossing the floor on Parliamentary votes .
Following the 1974 -- 75 Loans Affair , the Malcolm Fraser led Liberal-Country Party Coalition argued that the Whitlam Government was incompetent and delayed passage of the Government 's money bills in the Senate , until the government would promise a new election .
Whitlam refused , Fraser insisted leading to the divisive 1975 Australian constitutional crisis .
Fraser won in a landslide at the resulting 1975 election .
Fraser maintained some of the social reforms of the Whitlam era , while seeking increased fiscal restraint .
Fraser established the multicultural broadcaster SBS , accepted Vietnamese refugees , opposed minority white rule in Apartheid South Africa and Rhodesia and opposed Soviet expansionism .
A significant program of economic reform however was not pursued .
Fraser had promoted `` states ' rights '' and his government refused to use Commonwealth powers to stop the construction of the Franklin Dam in Tasmania in 1982 .
Howard 's premiership coincided with Al Qaeda 's 11 September attacks on the United States .
Through 2010 , the party improved its vote in the Tasmanian and South Australian state elections and achieved state government in Victoria .
In March 2011 , the New South Wales Liberal-National Coalition led by Barry O'Farrell won government with the largest election victory in post-war Australian history at the State Election .
Abbott led the party to the 2010 federal election , which saw an increase in the Liberal Party vote and resulted in the first hung parliament since the 1940 election .
At state and territory level , the Liberal Party is in office in three states : Colin Barnett has been Premier of Western Australia since 2008 , Will Hodgman Premier of Tasmania since 2014 and Mike Baird Premier of New South Wales since 2014 .
Adam Giles is also the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory , having led a Country Liberal minority government since 2015 .
The party is in opposition in Victoria , Queensland , South Australia and the Australian Capital Territory .
Socially , while liberty and freedom of enterprise form the basis of its beliefs , elements of the party have wavered between what is termed `` small-l liberalism '' and social conservatism .
The Liberal-Country Coalition was returned with control of the Senate .
John McEwen replaced Arthur Fadden as leader of the Country Party in March 1958 and the Menzies-McEwen Coalition was returned again at elections in November 1958 -- their third victory against Labor 's H. V. Evatt .
The Coalition was narrowly returned against Labor 's Arthur Calwell in the December 1961 election , in the midst of a credit squeeze .
Menzies stood for office for the last time in the November 1963 election , again defeating Calwell , with the Coalition winning back its losses in the House of Representatives .
The Australian economy was facing the early 1990s recession .
Under Dr John Hewson , in November 1991 , the opposition launched the 650-page Fightback !
policy document − a radical collection of `` dry '' , economic liberal measures including the introduction of a Goods and Services Tax -LRB- GST -RRB- , various changes to Medicare including the abolition of bulk billing for non-concession holders , the introduction of a nine-month limit on unemployment benefits , various changes to industrial relations including the abolition of awards , a $ 13 billion personal income tax cut directed at middle and upper income earners , $ 10 billion in government spending cuts , the abolition of state payroll taxes and the privatisation of a large number of government owned enterprises − representing the start of a very different future direction to the keynesian economic conservatism practiced by previous Liberal/National Coalition governments .
The 15 percent GST was the centerpiece of the policy document .
Through 1992 , Labor Prime Minister Paul Keating mounted a campaign against the Fightback package , and particularly against the GST , which he described as an attack on the working class in that it shifted the tax burden from direct taxation of the wealthy to indirect taxation as a broad-based consumption tax .
Pressure group activity and public opinion was relentless , which led Hewson to exempt food from the proposed GST − leading to questions surrounding the complexity of what food was and was n't to be exempt from the GST .
Keating won a record fifth consecutive Labor term at the 1993 election .
A number of the proposals were later adopted in to law in some form , to a small extent during the Keating Labor government , and to a larger extent during the Howard Liberal government -LRB- most famously the GST -RRB- , while unemployment benefits and bulk billing were re-targeted for a time by the Abbott Liberal government .
David Tonkin , as leader of the South Australian Division of the Liberal Party of Australia , became Premier at the 1979 election for one term , losing office at the 1982 election .
The Liberals returned to power at the 1993 election , led by Premiers Dean Brown , John Olsen and Rob Kerin through two terms , until their defeat at the 2002 election .
In Japanese , they are usually referred to as bushi -LRB- 武士 ?
, -LSB- bu.ɕi -RSB- -RRB- or buke -LRB- 武家 ? -RRB-
.
In both countries the terms were nominalized to mean `` those who serve in close attendance to the nobility '' , the pronunciation in Japanese changing to saburai .
This edict allowed the Japanese aristocracy to adopt the Tang dynasty political structure , bureaucracy , culture , religion , and philosophy .
As part of the Taihō Code , of 702 AD , and the later Yōrō Code , the population was required to report regularly for census , a precursor for national conscription .
With an understanding of how the population was distributed , Emperor Mommu introduced a law whereby 1 in 3 -- 4 adult males was drafted into the national military .
These soldiers were required to supply their own weapons , and in return were exempted from duties and taxes .
This was one of the first attempts by the Imperial government to form an organized army modeled after the Chinese system .
It was called `` Gundan-Sei '' -LRB- 軍団制 -RRB- by later historians and is believed to have been short-lived .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Skilled in mounted combat and archery -LRB- kyūdō -RRB- , these clan warriors became the Emperor 's preferred tool for putting down rebellions .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Though this is the first known use of the `` Shogun '' title , it was a temporary title , and was not imbued with political power until the 13th century .
At this time -LRB- the 7th to 9th century -RRB- the Imperial Court officials considered them merely a military section under the control of the Imperial Court .
Initially , their responsibility was restricted to arresting rebels and collecting needed army provisions , and they were forbidden from interfering with Kokushi Governors , but their responsibility gradually expanded and thus the samurai-class appeared as the political ruling power in Japan .
Originally the Emperor and non-warrior nobility employed these warrior nobles .
In time , they amassed enough manpower , resources and political backing in the form of alliances with one another , to establish the first samurai-dominated government .
Because of their rising military and economic power , the warriors ultimately became a new force in the politics of the court .
The victorious Minamoto no Yoritomo established the superiority of the samurai over the aristocracy .
Instead of ruling from Kyoto , he set up the Shogunate in Kamakura , near his base of power .
`` Bakufu '' means `` tent government '' , taken from the encampments the soldiers would live in , in accordance with the Bakufu 's status as a military government .
The invading army was harassed by major thunderstorms throughout the invasion , which aided the defenders by inflicting heavy casualties .
The Yuan army was eventually recalled and the invasion was called off .
The Mongol invaders used small bombs , which was likely the first appearance of bombs and gunpowder in Japan .
This would later serve as a strong defensive point against the Mongols .
This set the stage for one of the most famous engagements in Japanese history .
-LRB- See Hideyoshi 's invasions of Korea , Chōsen-seibatsu -LRB- 朝鮮征伐 ? -RRB-
.
Taking advantage of arquebus mastery and extensive wartime experience from the Sengoku period , Japanese samurai armies made major gains in most of Korea .
Kato Kiyomasa advanced to Orangkai territory -LRB- present-day Manchuria -RRB- bordering Korea to the northeast and crossed the border into Manchuria , but withdrew after retaliatory attacks from the Jurchens there , as it was clear he had outpaced the rest of the Japanese invasion force .
A few of the more famous samurai generals of this war were Katō Kiyomasa , Konishi Yukinaga , and Shimazu Yoshihiro .
Yoshihiro was feared as Oni-Shimazu -LRB- `` Shimazu ogre '' -RRB- and his nickname spread across not only Korea but to Ming Dynasty China .
In spite of the superiority of Japanese land forces , ultimately the two expeditions failed -LRB- though they did devastate the Korean landmass -RRB- from factors such as Korean naval superiority -LRB- which , led by Admiral Yi Sun-shin , harassed Japanese supply lines continuously throughout the wars , resulting in supply shortages on land -RRB- , the commitment of sizeable Ming forces to Korea , Korean guerrilla actions , the underestimation of resistance by Japanese commanders -LRB- in the first campaign of 1592 , Korean defenses on land were caught unprepared , under-trained , and under-armed ; they were rapidly overrun , with only a limited number of successfully resistant engagements against the more-experienced and battle-hardened Japanese forces - in the second campaign of 1597 , Korean and Ming forces proved to be a far more difficult challenge and , with the support of continued Korean naval superiority , limited Japanese gains to parts southeastern Korea -RRB- , and wavering Japanese commitment to the campaigns as the wars dragged on .
Consecutive victories enabled him to realize the termination of the Ashikaga Bakufu and the disarmament of the military powers of the Buddhist monks , which had inflamed futile struggles among the populace for centuries .
Attacking from the `` sanctuary '' of Buddhist temples , they were constant headaches to any warlord and even the Emperor who tried to control their actions .
They still had the legal right to cut down any commoner who did not show proper respect kiri-sute gomen -LRB- 斬り捨て御免 ? -RRB-
, but to what extent this right was used is unknown .
When the central government forced daimyos to cut the size of their armies , unemployed rōnin became a social problem .
French naval engineers were hired to build naval arsenals , such as Yokosuka and Nagasaki .
A French Military Mission to Japan -LRB- 1867 -RRB- was established to help modernize the armies of the Bakufu .
The samurai finally came to an end after hundreds of years of enjoyment of their status , their powers , and their ability to shape the government of Japan .
However , the rule of the state by the military class was not yet over .
In defining how a modern Japan should be , members of the Meiji government decided to follow the footsteps of the United Kingdom and Germany , basing the country on the concept of noblesse oblige .
Samurai were not a political force under the new order .
The Imperial Japanese Armies were conscripted , but many samurai volunteered as soldiers , and many advanced to be trained as officers .
Much of the Imperial Army officer class was of samurai origin , and were highly motivated , disciplined , and exceptionally trained .
Some samurai became businessmen .
Some were killed as they came to terms with these realizations in the battlefield .
He should not scandalize his name forever by holding his one and only life too dear ... One 's main purpose in throwing away his life is to do so either for the sake of the Emperor or in some great undertaking of a military general .
It is that exactly that will be the great fame of one 's descendants . ''
He also ordered his followers to put forth great effort in studying the military classics , especially those related to loyalty and filial piety .
Thus it is essential to engrave this business of the warrior into one 's mind well . ''
On the eve of the battle of Sekigahara , he volunteered to remain behind in the doomed Fushimi Castle while his lord advanced to the east .
Torii and Tokugawa both agreed that the castle was indefensible .
In an act of loyalty to his lord , Torii chose to remain behind , pledging that he and his men would fight to the finish .
As was custom , Torii vowed that he would not be taken alive .
In a moving last statement to his son Tadamasa , he wrote :
Go to the battlefield firmly confident of victory , and you will come home with no wounds whatever .
Engage in combat fully determined to die and you will be alive ; wish to survive in the battle and you will surely meet death .
When you leave the house determined not to see it again you will come home safely ; when you have any thought of returning you will not return .
You may not be in the wrong to think that the world is always subject to change , but the warrior must not entertain this way of thinking , for his fate is always determined . ''
Xavier further describes the honour and manners of the people : `` I fancy that there are no people in the world more punctilious about their honour than the Japanese , for they will not put up with a single insult or even a word spoken in anger . ''
They were hard workers and respectful of authority .
Rather , these ideals were vigorously pursued in the upper echelons of warrior society and recommended as the proper form of the Japanese man of arms .
Wilson then translates the writings of several warriors who mention the Heike Monogatari as an example for their men to follow .
As aristocrats for centuries , samurai developed their own cultures that influenced Japanese culture as a whole .
Musō , as well as other monks , acted as political and cultural diplomat between Japan and China .
Musō was particularly well known for his garden design .
Another Ashikaga patron of the arts was Yoshimasa .
His cultural advisor , the Zen monk Zeami , introduced tea ceremony to him .
Previously , tea had been used primarily for Buddhist monks to stay awake during meditation .
A man was addressed by his family name and his title , or by his yobina if he did not have a title .
However , the nanori was a private name that could be used by only a very few , including the Emperor .
A samurai could take concubines but their backgrounds were checked by higher-ranked samurai .
If the concubine was a commoner , a messenger was sent with betrothal money or a note for exemption of tax to ask for her parents ' acceptance .
A woman could also arrange a divorce , although it would generally take the form of the samurai divorcing her .
This was especially crucial during early feudal Japan , when warrior husbands were often traveling abroad or engaged in clan battles .
Too much love and affection was also said to indulge and spoil the youngsters .
Thus , a woman was also to exercise discipline .
This does not mean that samurai women were always powerless .
Powerful women both wisely and unwisely wielded power at various occasions .
Tachibana Ginchiyo was chosen to lead the Tachibana clan after her father 's death .
Chiyo , wife of Yamauchi Kazutoyo , has long been considered the ideal samurai wife .
According to legend , she made her kimono out of a quilted patchwork of bits of old cloth and saved pennies to buy her husband a magnificent horse , on which he rode to many victories .
The fact that Chiyo -LRB- though she is better known as `` Wife of Yamauchi Kazutoyo '' -RRB- is held in such high esteem for her economic sense is illuminating in the light of the fact that she never produced an heir and the Yamauchi clan was succeeded by Kazutoyo 's younger brother .
The source of power for women may have been that samurai left their finances to their wives .
He was provided with generous revenues : `` For the services that I have done and do daily , being employed in the Emperor 's service , the Emperor has given me a living '' -LRB- Letters -RRB- .
His estate was valued at 250 koku .
He finally wrote `` God hath provided for me after my great misery '' , -LRB- Letters -RRB- by which he meant the disaster-ridden voyage that initially brought him to Japan .
-- 1623 ? -RRB-
It appears Joosten became a samurai -LSB- citation needed -RSB- and was given a residence within Ieyasu 's castle at Edo .
Today , this area at the east exit of Tokyo Station is known as Yaesu -LRB- 八重洲 -RRB- .
In many contemporary references , he is portrayed wearing a Japanese kimono , overcoat , and swords , with Western riding trousers and boots .
Various other components of armor protected the samurai 's body .
The helmet kabuto was an important part of the samurai 's armor .
Samurai armor changed and developed as the methods of samurai warfare changed over the centuries .
As the last samurai rebellion was crushed , Japan modernized its defenses and turned to a national conscription army that used uniforms .
In Japanese literature , there is an early reference to samurai in the Kokinshū -LRB- 古今集 , early 10th century -RRB- :
Samurai was a word used by the Kuge aristocratic class with warriors themselves preferring the word bushi .
Most samurai were bound by a code of honor and were expected to set an example for those below them .
A notable part of their code is seppuku -LRB- 切腹 , seppuku ? -RRB-
Samurai were usually loyal to their immediate superiors , who in turn allied themselves with higher lords .
The programs typically feature a samurai .
Samurai films and westerns share a number of similarities and the two have influenced each other over the years .
One example is that in the Japanese film , seven samurai warriors are hired by local farmers to protect their land from being overrun by bandits ; In George Lucas ' Star Wars : A New Hope , a similar situation arises .
There is also a 26 episode anime adaptation -LRB- Samurai 7 -RRB- of The Seven Samurai .
Along with film , literature containing samurai influences are seen as well .
Most common are historical works where the protagonist is either a samurai or former samurai -LRB- or another rank or position -RRB- who possesses considerable martial skill .
Samurai-like characters are not just restricted to historical settings and a number of works set in the modern age , and even the future , include characters who live , train and fight like samurai .
Examples are Samurai Champloo , Requiem from the Darkness , Muramasa : The Demon Blade , and Afro Samurai .
Some of these works have made their way to the west , where it has been increasing in popularity with America .
Just in the last two decades , -LSB- when ? -RSB-
samurai have become more popular in America .
Through various medium , producers and writers have been capitalizing on the notion that Americans admire the samurai lifestyle .
The series was produced for American viewers which `` embodies the trend ... comparing hip-hop artists to samurai warriors , an image some rappers claim for themselves -LRB- Solomon , 2009 -RRB- .
The storyline keeps in tone with the perception of a samurais finding vengeance against someone who has wronged him .
Due to its popularity , Afro Samurai was adopted into a full feature animated film and also became titles on gaming consoles such as the PlayStation 3 and Xbox .
Not only has the samurai culture been adopted into animation and video games , it can also be seen in comic books .
In 2013 , the samurai villain was depicted in James Mangold 's film The Wolverine .
In the film , Cruise 's character finds himself deeply immersed in samurai culture .
The character in the film , `` Nathan Algren , is a fictional contrivance to make nineteenth-century Japanese history less foreign to American viewers '' .
-LRB- Ravina , 2010 -RRB- After being captured by a group of samurai rebels , he becomes empathetic towards the cause they fight for .
Becoming a product of his environment , Algren joins the samurai clan in an attempt to rescue a captured samurai leader .
`` By the end of the film , he has clearly taken on many of the samurai traits , such as zen-like mastery of the sword , and a budding understanding of spirituality '' .
-LRB- Manion , 2006 -RRB-
There are various roles for testing team members .
Information derived from software testing may be used to correct the process by which software is developed .
Software faults occur through the following processes .
If this defect is executed , in certain situations the system will produce wrong results , causing a failure .
Not all defects will necessarily result in failures .
For example , defects in dead code will never result in failures .
A defect can turn into a failure when the environment is changed .
A single defect may result in a wide range of failure symptoms .
Note that `` coverage '' , as used here , is referring to combinatorial coverage , not requirements coverage .
The following table shows the cost of fixing the defect depending on the stage it was found .
There are many approaches available in software testing .
Static testing is often implicit , as proofreading , plus when programming tools/text editors check source code structure or compilers -LRB- pre-compilers -RRB- check syntax and data flow as static program analysis .
Dynamic testing takes place when the program itself is run .
The tester chooses inputs to exercise paths through the code and determine the appropriate outputs .
This is analogous to testing nodes in a circuit , e.g. in-circuit testing -LRB- ICT -RRB- .
This level of testing usually requires thorough test cases to be provided to the tester , who then can simply verify that for a given input , the output value -LRB- or behavior -RRB- , either `` is '' or `` is not '' the same as the expected value specified in the test case .
It uses external descriptions of the software , including specifications , requirements , and designs to derive test cases .
Because they do not examine the source code , there are situations when a tester writes many test cases to check something that could have been tested by only one test case , or leaves some parts of the program untested .
This distinction is particularly important when conducting integration testing between two modules of code written by two different developers , where only the interfaces are exposed for test .
By knowing the underlying concepts of how the software works , the tester makes better-informed testing choices while testing the software from outside .
This will particularly apply to data type handling , exception handling , and so on .
Rather than replace traditional QA focuses , it augments it .
Tests can include checking the handling of some extreme data values while other interface variables are passed as normal values .
Unusual data values in an interface can help explain unexpected performance in the next unit .
OAT is a common type of non-functional software testing , used mainly in software development and software maintenance projects .
Hence , it is also known as operational readiness testing -LRB- ORT -RRB- or Operations readiness and assurance -LRB- OR&A -RRB- testing .
This results in the unintended consequence that the latest work may not function on earlier versions of the target environment , or on older hardware that earlier versions of the target environment was capable of using .
Sometimes such issues can be fixed by proactively abstracting operating system functionality into a separate program module or library .
Specifically , it seeks to uncover software regressions , as degraded or lost features , including old bugs that have come back .
Typically , regressions occur as an unintended consequence of program changes , when the newly developed part of the software collides with the previously existing code .
They can either be complete , for changes added late in the release or deemed to be risky , or be very shallow , consisting of positive tests on each feature , if the changes are early in the release or deemed to be of low risk .
The software is released to groups of people so that further testing can ensure the product has few faults or bugs .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Various commercial non-functional testing tools are linked from the software fault injection page ; there are also numerous open-source and free software tools available that perform destructive testing .
This is generally referred to as software scalability .
The related load testing activity of when performed as a non-functional activity is often referred to as endurance testing .
Rather than replace traditional QA focuses , it augments it .
Of course these tests fail initially ; as they are expected to .
Then as code is written it passes incrementally larger portions of the test suites .
The test suites are continuously updated as new failure conditions and corner cases are discovered , and they are integrated with any regression tests that are developed .
Unit tests are maintained along with the rest of the software source code and generally integrated into the build process -LRB- with inherently interactive tests being relegated to a partially manual build acceptance process -RRB- .
After the integration testing of lower level integrated modules , the next level of modules will be formed and can be used for integration testing .
The process is repeated until the components at the top of the hierarchy are tested .
This approach is helpful only when all or most of the modules of the same development level are ready .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
For instance , testing when we assume that the behavior of the implementation under test can be denoted by a deterministic finite-state machine for some known finite sets of inputs and outputs and with some known number of states belongs to Class I -LRB- and all subsequent classes -RRB- .
Testing temporal machines where transitions are triggered if inputs are produced within some real-bounded interval only belongs to classes from Class IV on , whereas testing many non-deterministic systems only belongs to Class V -LRB- but not all , and some even belong to Class I -RRB- .
The inclusion into Class I does not require the simplicity of the assumed computation model , as some testing cases involving implementations written in any programming language , and testing implementations defined as machines depending on continuous magnitudes , have been proved to be in Class I .
Other elaborated cases , such as the testing framework by Matthew Hennessy under must semantics , and temporal machines with rational timeouts , belong to Class II .
Several certification programs exist to support the professional aspirations of software testers and quality assurance specialists .
No certification is based on a widely accepted body of knowledge .
They examine and change the software engineering process itself to reduce the number of faults that end up in the delivered software : the so-called `` defect rate '' .
Although there are close links with SQA , testing departments often exist independently , and there may be no SQA function in some companies .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
These qualities have led to the extensive use of glass in the manufacture of art objects and in particular , stained glass windows .
Although brittle , silicate glass is extremely durable , and many examples of glass fragments exist from early glass-making cultures .
Because glass can be formed or molded into any shape , and also because it is a sterile product , it has been traditionally used for vessels : bowls , vases , bottles , jars and drinking glasses .
In its most solid forms it has also been used for paperweights , marbles , and beads .
Some objects historically were so commonly made of silicate glass that they are simply called by the name of the material , such as drinking glasses and reading glasses .
Most common glass contains other ingredients to change its properties .
Fused quartz is a glass made from chemically-pure SiO2 -LRB- silica -RRB- .
Normally , other substances are added to simplify processing .
One is sodium carbonate -LRB- Na2CO3 , `` soda '' -RRB- , which lowers the glass transition temperature .
Soda-lime glasses account for about 90 % of manufactured glass .
Following the glass batch preparation and mixing , the raw materials are transported to the furnace .
Soda-lime glass for mass production is melted in gas fired units .
Smaller scale furnaces for specialty glasses include electric melters , pot furnaces , and day tanks .
Container glass for common bottles and jars is formed by blowing and pressing methods .
Further glass forming techniques are summarized in the table Glass forming techniques .
Glass has the ability to refract , reflect , and transmit light following geometrical optics , without scattering it .
It is used in the manufacture of lenses and windows .
The term glass , in popular usage , is often used to refer only to this type of material , which is familiar from use as window glass and in glass bottles .
In glasses like soda lime , the compounds added to quartz are used to lower the melting temperature and improve workability , at a cost in the toughness , thermal stability , and optical transmittance .
Glass is in widespread use largely due to the production of glass compositions that are transparent to visible light .
The individual crystallites may be transparent , but their facets -LRB- grain boundaries -RRB- reflect or scatter light resulting in diffuse reflection .
But in general , archaeological evidence suggests that the first true glass was made in coastal north Syria , Mesopotamia or ancient Egypt .
Further FeO and Cr2O3 additions may be used for the production of green bottles .
When used in art glass or studio glass is colored using closely guarded recipes that involve specific combinations of metal oxides , melting temperatures and ` cook ' times .
Most colored glass used in the art market is manufactured in volume by vendors who serve this market although there are some glassmakers with the ability to make their own color from raw materials .
Glass remained a luxury material , and the disasters that overtook Late Bronze Age civilizations seem to have brought glass-making to a halt .
The term glass developed in the late Roman Empire .
Glass objects have been recovered across the Roman empire in domestic , industrial and funerary contexts .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Glass was used extensively during the Middle Ages .
Anglo-Saxon glass has been found across England during archaeological excavations of both settlement and cemetery sites .
Glass in the Anglo-Saxon period was used in the manufacture of a range of objects including vessels , beads , windows and was also used in jewelry .
The use of domestic stained glass increased until most substantial houses had glass windows .
These were initially small panes leaded together , but with the changes in technology , glass could be manufactured relatively cheaply in increasingly larger sheets .
Multi-storey buildings are frequently constructed with curtain walls made almost entirely of glass .
While glass containers have always been used for storage and are valued for their hygienic properties , glass has been utilized increasingly in industry .
For more details , see lead glass .
There are three classes of components for oxide glasses : network formers , intermediates , and modifiers .
Some elements can play multiple roles ; e.g. lead can act both as a network former -LRB- Pb4 + replacing Si4 + -RRB- , or as a modifier .
Their mobility decreases the chemical resistance of the glass , allowing leaching by water and facilitating corrosion .
Alkaline earth ions , with their two positive charges and requirement for two non-bridging oxygen ions to compensate for their charge , are much less mobile themselves and also hinder diffusion of other ions , especially the alkalis .
New chemical glass compositions or new treatment techniques can be initially investigated in small-scale laboratory experiments .
In the laboratory mostly pure chemicals are used .
Care must be taken that the raw materials have not reacted with moisture or other chemicals in the environment -LRB- such as alkali or alkaline earth metal oxides and hydroxides , or boron oxide -RRB- , or that the impurities are quantified -LRB- loss on ignition -RRB- .
Also , more readily reacting raw materials may be preferred over relatively inert ones , such as Al -LRB- OH -RRB- 3 over Al2O3 .
In the past , small batches of amorphous metals with high surface area configurations -LRB- ribbons , wires , films , etc. -RRB- have been produced through the implementation of extremely rapid rates of cooling .
Amorphous metal wires have been produced by sputtering molten metal onto a spinning metal disk .
More recently a number of alloys have been produced in layers with thickness exceeding 1 millimeter .
This phase is the first phase , or `` primary phase , '' to form in the Al-Fe-Si system during rapid cooling .
Interestingly , experimental evidence indicates that this phase forms by a first-order transition .
The diffraction pattern shows it to be an isotropic glassy phase .
For example , the microstructure of whiteware ceramics frequently contains both amorphous and crystalline phases .
Crystalline grains are often embedded within a non-crystalline intergranular phase of grain boundaries .
The negative thermal expansion coefficient -LRB- CTE -RRB- of the crystalline ceramic phase can be balanced with the positive CTE of the glassy phase .
Mass production of glass window panes in the early twentieth century caused a similar effect .
In glass factories , molten glass was poured onto a large cooling table and allowed to spread .
This plate was then cut to fit a window .
The pieces were not absolutely flat ; the edges of the disk became a different thickness as the glass spun .
Occasionally such glass has been found installed with the thicker side at the top , left or right .
The term glass is often used to describe any amorphous solid that exhibits a glass transition temperature Tg .
Generally , the structure of a glass exists in a metastable state with respect to its crystalline form , although in certain circumstances , for example in atactic polymers , there is no crystalline analogue of the amorphous phase .
The change in heat capacity at a glass transition and a melting transition of comparable materials are typically of the same order of magnitude , indicating that the change in active degrees of freedom is comparable as well .
This helps to explain why both crystalline and non-crystalline solids exhibit rigidity on most experimental time scales .
Countries such as Germany , Denmark , and Spain have led the way in implementing innovative policies which has driven most of the growth over the past decade .
As a share of total investment in power plants , wind and solar PV grew from 14 % in 2000 to over 60 % in 2012 .
Renewable energy companies include BrightSource Energy , First Solar , Gamesa , GE Energy , Goldwind , Sinovel , Trina Solar , Vestas and Yingli .
Most people in all twenty-seven countries either approved of the target or called for it to go further .
Across the EU , 57 percent thought the proposed goal was `` about right '' and 16 percent thought it was `` too modest . ''
In comparison , 19 percent said it was `` too ambitious '' .
Renewables producing electricity accounted for almost half of the 208 GW of capacity added globally during 2011 .
Wind and solar photovoltaics -LRB- PV -RRB- accounted for almost 40 % and 30 % .
This energy consumption is divided as 9 % coming from traditional biomass , 4.2 % as heat energy -LRB- non-biomass -RRB- , 3.8 % hydro electricity and 2 % electricity from wind , solar , geothermal , and biomass .
The combination of government target-setting , policy support and stimulus funds is underpinning the renewable industry 's rise and bringing the much needed transformation of our global energy system within reach . ''
He added : `` Renewable energies are expanding both in terms of investment , projects and geographical spread .
In doing so , they are making an increasing contribution to combating climate change , countering energy poverty and energy insecurity '' .
`` Photovoltaic and concentrated solar power together can become the major source of electricity '' .
As of 2014 , China leads the world in the production and use of wind power , solar photovoltaic power and smart grid technologies , generating almost as much water , wind and solar energy as all of France and Germany 's power plants combined .
China 's renewable energy sector is growing faster than its fossil fuels and nuclear power capacity .
As Chinese renewable manufacturing has grown , the costs of renewable energy technologies have dropped .
Where `` oil-fired generation is the predominant power generation source -LRB- e.g. on islands , off-grid and in some countries -RRB- a lower-cost renewable solution almost always exists today '' .
As of 2012 , renewable power generation technologies accounted for around half of all new power generation capacity additions globally .
In 2011 , additions included 41 gigawatt -LRB- GW -RRB- of new wind power capacity , 30 GW of PV , 25 GW of hydro-electricity , 6 GW of biomass , 0.5 GW of CSP , and 0.1 GW of geothermal power .
However , the industry has remained relatively stagnant over the decade to 2007 , even though demand for biomass -LRB- mostly wood -RRB- continues to grow in many developing countries .
Hydroelectric plants have the advantage of being long-lived and many existing plants have operated for more than 100 years .
The cost of hydroelectricity is low , making it a competitive source of renewable electricity .
The United States is the world leader in terms of installed capacity , representing 3.1 GW .
Other countries with significant installed capacity include the Philippines -LRB- 1.9 GW -RRB- , Indonesia -LRB- 1.2 GW -RRB- , Mexico -LRB- 1.0 GW -RRB- , Italy -LRB- 0.8 GW -RRB- , Iceland -LRB- 0.6 GW -RRB- , Japan -LRB- 0.5 GW -RRB- , and New Zealand -LRB- 0.5 GW -RRB- .
There are also many large plants under construction .
The Blythe Solar Power Project is a 500 MW photovoltaic station under construction in Riverside County , California .
The 230 MW Antelope Valley Solar Ranch is a First Solar photovoltaic project which is under construction in the Antelope Valley area of the Western Mojave Desert , and due to be completed in 2013 .
The Mesquite Solar project is a photovoltaic solar power plant being built in Arlington , Maricopa County , Arizona , owned by Sempra Generation .
Phase 1 will have a nameplate capacity of 150 megawatts .
Some of the second-generation renewables , such as wind power , have high potential and have already realised relatively low production costs .
The increase for 2010 represents investments totalling $ 47.3 billion -LRB- US$ 65 billion -RRB- and for the first time more than half of all new wind power was added outside of the traditional markets of Europe and North America , mainly driven , by the continuing boom in China which accounted for nearly half of all of the installations at 16,500 MW .
In Australian state of South Australia wind power , championed by Premier Mike Rann -LRB- 2002 -- 2011 -RRB- , now comprises 26 % of the state 's electricity generation , edging out coal fired power .
At the end of 2011 South Australia , with 7.2 % of Australia 's population , had 54 % of the nation 's installed wind power capacity .
Wind power 's share of worldwide electricity usage at the end of 2014 was 3.1 % .
These are some of the largest wind farms in the world :
Many other plants are under construction or planned , mainly in Spain and the USA .
In developing countries , three World Bank projects for integrated solar thermal/combined-cycle gas-turbine power plants in Egypt , Mexico , and Morocco have been approved .
The challenge is to expand the market for biofuels beyond the farm states where they have been most popular to date .
According to the International Energy Agency , cellulosic ethanol biorefineries could allow biofuels to play a much bigger role in the future than organizations such as the IEA previously thought .
The development of binary cycle power plants and improvements in drilling and extraction technology may enable enhanced geothermal systems over a much greater geographical range than `` traditional '' Geothermal systems .
In late 2011 , factory-gate prices for crystalline-silicon photovoltaic modules dropped below the $ 1.00 / W mark .
These reductions have taken many stakeholders , including industry analysts , by surprise , and perceptions of current solar power economics often lags behind reality .
Some stakeholders still have the perspective that solar PV remains too costly on an unsubsidized basis to compete with conventional generation options .
Many energy markets , institutions , and policies have been developed to support the production and use of fossil fuels .
Intentional market distortions -LRB- such as subsidies -RRB- , and unintentional market distortions -LRB- such as split incentives -RRB- may work against renewables .
It also favors the near term over the long term , thereby showing limited concern for future generations .
For example , a tax on coal that included the increased health care costs associated with breathing polluted air , the costs of acid rain damage , and the costs of climate disruption would encourage investment in renewable technologies .
Subsidies are not an inherently bad thing as many technologies and industries emerged through government subsidy schemes .
The Stern Review explains that of 20 key innovations from the past 30 years , only one of the 14 was funded entirely by the private sector and nine were totally publicly funded .
First-generation technologies , which are already mature and economically competitive , include biomass , hydroelectricity , geothermal power and heat .
Third-generation technologies require continued R&D efforts in order to make large contributions on a global scale and include advanced biomass gasification , hot-dry-rock geothermal power , and ocean energy .
Lester Brown has argued that `` a world facing the prospect of economically disruptive climate change can no longer justify subsidies to expand the burning of coal and oil .
The subsidy dropped from $ 5.4 billion in 1989 to $ 2.8 billion in 2002 , and in the process Germany lowered its coal use by 46 percent .
China cut its coal subsidy from $ 750 million in 1993 to $ 240 million in 1995 and more recently has imposed a high-sulfur coal tax .
National targets for individual EU Member States have also been set to meet the overall target .
Energy sector regulators implement that policy -- thus affecting the pace and pattern of RE investments and connections to the grid .
Such functions include issuing licenses , setting performance standards , monitoring the performance of regulated firms , determining the price level and structure of tariffs , establishing uniform systems of accounts , arbitrating stakeholder disputes -LRB- like interconnection cost allocations -RRB- , performing management audits , developing agency human resources -LRB- expertise -RRB- , reporting sector and commission activities to government authorities , and coordinating decisions with other government agencies .
Thus , regulators make a wide range of decisions that affect the financial outcomes associated with RE investments .
In addition , the sector regulator is in a position to give advice to the government regarding the full implications of focusing on climate change or energy security .
The energy sector regulator is the natural advocate for efficiency and cost-containment throughout the process of designing and implementing RE policies .
According to the directive the EU Member States must ensure that the origin of electricity produced from renewables can be guaranteed and therefore a `` guarantee of origin '' must be issued -LRB- article 15 -RRB- .
Environmental organisations are using the voluntary market to create new renewables and improving sustainability of the existing power production .
In Europe the main voluntary tool used by the NGOs to promote sustainable electricity production is EKOenergy label .
Most notably , U.S. President Barack Obama 's American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 included more than $ 70 billion in direct spending and tax credits for clean energy and associated transportation programs .
This policy-stimulus combination represents the largest federal commitment in U.S. history for renewables , advanced transportation , and energy conservation initiatives .
Based on these new rules , many more utilities strengthened their clean-energy programs .
The company ceased all business activity , filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy , and laid-off nearly all of its employees in early September 2011 .
Without a level playing field , however , high market penetration of renewables is still dependent on a robust promotional policies .
Fossil fuel subsidies , which are far higher than those for renewable energy , remain in place and quickly need to be phased out .
In October 2011 , he `` announced the creation of a high-level group to drum up support for energy access , energy efficiency and greater use of renewable energy .
Worldwide use of solar power and wind power continued to grow significantly in 2012 .
Global solar and wind energy installed capacities continued to expand even though new investments in these technologies declined during 2012 .
But due to lower production costs for both technologies , total installed capacities grew sharply .
This investment decline , but growth in installed capacity , may again occur in 2013 .
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has said that there are few fundamental technological limits to integrating a portfolio of renewable energy technologies to meet most of total global energy demand .
In reviewing 164 recent scenarios of future renewable energy growth , the report noted that the majority expected renewable sources to supply more than 17 % of total energy by 2030 , and 27 % by 2050 ; the highest forecast projected 43 % supplied by renewables by 2030 and 77 % by 2050 .
Renewable energy use has grown much faster than even advocates anticipated .
Jacobson says that energy costs with a wind , solar , water system should be similar to today 's energy costs .
.
Palermo -LRB- Italian : -LSB- paˈlɛrmo -RSB- -LRB- listen -RRB- , Sicilian : Palermu , Latin : Panormus , from Greek : Πάνορμος , Panormos , Arabic : بَلَرْم , Balarm ; Phoenician : זִיז , Ziz -RRB- is a city in Insular Italy , the capital of both the autonomous region of Sicily and the Province of Palermo .
Palermo then became a possession of Carthage , before becoming part of the Roman Republic , the Roman Empire and eventually part of the Byzantine Empire , for over a thousand years .
The Arabs shifted the Greek name into Balarm , the root for Palermo 's present-day name .
Following the Norman reconquest , Palermo became the capital of a new kingdom -LRB- from 1130 to 1816 -RRB- , the Kingdom of Sicily and the capital of the Holy Roman Empire under Frederick II Holy Roman Emperor and Conrad IV of Germany , King of the Romans .
Eventually Sicily would be united with the Kingdom of Naples to form the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies until the Italian unification of 1860 .
Palermo is Sicily 's cultural , economic and touristic capital .
It is a city rich in history , culture , art , music and food .
Palermo currently has an international airport , and a significant underground economy .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- In fact , for cultural , artistic and economic reasons , Palermo was one of the largest cities in the Mediterranean and is now among the top tourist destinations in both Italy and Europe .
The city is also going through careful redevelopment , preparing to become one of the major cities of the Euro-Mediterranean area .
Some districts of the city are divided by the mountains themselves .
Historically , it was relatively difficult to reach the inner part of Sicily from the city because of the mounts .
The mount lies right in front of the Tyrrhenian Sea .
In the basins there were , though , many seasonal torrents that helped formed swampy plains , reclaimed during history ; a good example of which can be found in the borough of Mondello .
During 734 BC the Phoenicians , a sea trading people from the north of ancient Canaan , built a small settlement on the natural harbor of Palermo .
This road helped the Phoenicians in trading with the populations that lived beyond the mountains that surround the gulf .
This district was named after the walls themselves ; the word Cassaro deriving from the Arab al-qsr -LRB- castle , stronghold -RRB- .
Along the walls there were few doors to access and exit the city , suggesting that trade even toward the inner part of the island occurred frequently .
Moreover , according to some studies , it may be possible that there were some walls that divided the old city from the new one too .
The colony developed around a central street -LRB- decumanus -RRB- , cut perpendicularly by minor streets .
This street today has become the Corso Vittorio Emanuele .
Carthage was Palermo 's major trading partner under the Phoenicians and the city enjoyed a prolonged peace during this period .
It was from Palermo that Hamilcar I 's fleet -LRB- which was defeated at the Battle of Himera -RRB- was launched .
In 409 B.C. the city was looted by Hermocrates of Syracuse .
In 254 BC Panormos was besieged and conquered by the Romans in the first battle of Panormus -LRB- the name Latin name -RRB- .
Carthage attempted to reconquer Panormus in 251 BC but failed .
As the Roman Empire was falling apart , Palermo fell under the control of several Germanic tribes .
The first were the Vandals in 440 AD under the rule of their king Geiseric .
They acquired Corsica , Sardinia and Sicily shortly afterwards .
Sicily was the first part of Italy to be taken under control of General Belisarius who was commissioned by Eastern Emperor .
Justinian I solidified his rule in the following years .
The Muslims took control of the Island in 904 , after decades of fierce fighting , and the Emirate of Sicily was established .
-LSB- page needed -RSB- Palermo -LRB- Balarm during Arab rule -RRB- displaced Syracuse as the capital city of Sicily .
It was said to have then begun to compete with Córdoba and Cairo in terms of importance and splendor .
For more than one hundred years Palermo was the capital of a flourishing emirate .
After dynastic quarrels however , there was a Christian reconquest in 1072 .
It was under Roger II of Sicily that Norman holdings in Sicily and the southern part of the Italian Peninsula were promoted from the County of Sicily into the Kingdom of Sicily .
Much construction was undertaken during this period , such as the building of Palermo Cathedral .
Palermo was the preferred city of the Emperor Frederick II .
After an interval of Angevin rule -LRB- 1266 -- 1282 -RRB- , Sicily came under control of the Aragon and Barcelona dynasties .
From 1479 until 1713 Palermo was ruled by the Kingdom of Spain , and again between 1717 and 1718 .
Palermo was also under Savoy control between 1713 and 1717 and 1718 -- 1720 as a result of the Treaty of Utrecht .
Charles had new houses built for the growing population , while trade and industry grew as well .
However , by now Palermo was now just another provincial city as the Royal Court resided in Naples .
Charles ' son Ferdinand , though disliked by the population , took refuge in Palermo after the French Revolution in 1798 .
His son Alberto died on the way to Palermo and is buried in the city .
A parliament and constitution were proclaimed .
The famous general entered Palermo with his troops -LRB- the `` Thousands '' -RRB- on 27 May 1860 .
The majority of Sicilians preferred independence to the Savoia kingdom ; in 1866 , Palermo became the seat of a week-long popular rebellion , which was finally crushed after Martial law was declared .
In the early twentieth century Palermo expanded outside the old city walls , mostly to the north along the new boulevards Via Roma , Via Dante , Via Notarbartolo , and Viale della Libertà .
Many of these were designed by the famous architect Ernesto Basile .
The Grand Hotel Villa Igiea , designed by Ernesto Basile for the Florio family , is a good example of Palermitan Art Nouveau .
The so-called `` Sack of Palermo '' is one of the major visible faces of the problem .
The regulatory plans for expansion was largely ignored in the boom .
Winters are cool and wet , while summers are hot and dry .
Temperatures in autumn and spring are usually mild .
Snow is usually a rare occurrence , but it does occur occasionally if there is a cold front , as the Apennines are too distant to protect the island from cold winds blowing from the Balkans , and the mountains surrounding the city facilite the formation of snow accumulation in Palermo , especially at night .
Snow also occurred in 1999 , 2009 and 2015 .
The average annual temperature of the sea is above 19 °C -LRB- 66 °F -RRB- ; from 14 °C -LRB- 57 °F -RRB- in February to 26 °C -LRB- 79 °F -RRB- in August .
In the period from May to November , the average sea temperature exceeds 18 °C -LRB- 64 °F -RRB- and in the period from June to October , the average sea temperature exceeds 21 °C -LRB- 70 °F -RRB- .
Palermo has at least 2 circuits of City Walls - many pieces of which still survive .
The wall circuit was approximately Porto Nuovo , Corso Alberti , Piazza Peranni , Via Isodoro , Via Candela , Via Venezia , Via Roma , Piazza Paninni , Via Biscottari , Via Del Bastione , Palazzo dei Normanni and back to Porto Nuovo .
Via Vittorio Emanuele continued to be the main road east-west through the walled city .
West gate was still Porta Nuova , the circuit continued to Corso Alberti , to Piazza Vittorio Emanuele Orlando where it turned east along Via Volturno to Piazza Verdi and along the line of Via Cavour .
The sea-side wall was along the western side of Foro Italico Umberto .
The wall turns west along the northern side of Via Abramo Lincoln , continues along Corso Tukory .
The wall turns north approximately on Via Benedetto , to Palazzo dei Normanni and back to Porta Nuova .
Source : Palermo - City Guide by Adriana Chirco , 1998 , Dario Flaccovio Editore .
The ends of the line mark the positions as at the summer and winter solstices ; signs of the zodiac show the various other dates throughout the year .
People under age 15 totalled 15.6 % compared to pensioners who composed 17.2 % of the population .
This compares with the Italian average of 14.1 % people under 15 years and 20.2 % pensioners .
In the ten years between 2001 and 2010 , the population of Palermo declined by 4.5 % , while the population of Italy , as a whole , grew by 6.0 % .
The current birth rate of Palermo is 10.2 births per 1,000 inhabitants compared to the Italian average of 9.3 births .
Being Sicily 's administrative capital , Palermo is a centre for much of the region 's finance , tourism and commerce .
The city currently hosts an international airport , and Palermo 's economic growth over the years has brought the opening of many new businesses .
It is also an important port for cruise ships .
Traffic includes also almost 5 million tonnes of cargo and 80.000 TEU yearly .
The port also has links to minor sicilian islands such as Ustica and the Aeolian Islands -LRB- via Cefalù in summer -RRB- .
Her remains were discovered in a cave on Monte Pellegrino , and her remains were carried around the city three times , banishing the plague .
There is a sanctuary marking the spot where her remains were found which can be reached via a scenic bus ride from the city .
It is the first element of group 12 of the periodic table .
The largest mineable amounts are found in Australia , Asia , and the United States .
Other applications are in batteries , small non-structural castings , and alloys , such as brass .
Zinc is a fair conductor of electricity .
Its melting point is the lowest of all the transition metals aside from mercury and cadmium .
69mZn has the longest half-life , 13.76 h .
The isotopes 65Zn , 71Zn , 77Zn and 78Zn each have only one excited state .
When compounds in this oxidation state are formed the outer shell s electrons are lost , which yields a bare zinc ion with the electronic configuration -LSB- Ar -RSB- 3d10 .
In aqueous solution an octahedral complex , -LSB- Zn -LRB- H 2O -RRB- 6 -RSB- 2 + is the predominant species .
Calculations indicate that a zinc compound with the oxidation state of +4 is unlikely to exist .
Otherwise there is little similarity .
Complexes of zinc are mostly 4 - or 6 - coordinate although 5-coordinate complexes are known .
The first zinc -LRB- I -RRB- compound containing the Zn -- Zn bond , -LRB- η5-C5Me5 -RRB- 2Zn2 , is also the first dimetallocene .
Pnictogenides -LRB- Zn 3N 2 , Zn 3P 2 , Zn 3As 2 and Zn 3Sb 2 -RRB- , the peroxide -LRB- ZnO 2 -RRB- , the hydride -LRB- ZnH 2 -RRB- , and the carbide -LRB- ZnC 2 -RRB- are also known .
Of the four halides , ZnF 2 has the most ionic character , whereas the others -LRB- ZnCl 2 , ZnBr 2 , and ZnI 2 -RRB- have relatively low melting points and are considered to have more covalent character .
In weak basic solutions containing Zn2 + ions , the hydroxide Zn -LRB- OH -RRB- 2 forms as a white precipitate .
The nitrate Zn -LRB- NO3 -RRB- 2 , chlorate Zn -LRB- ClO3 -RRB- 2 , sulfate ZnSO 4 , phosphate Zn 3 -LRB- PO4 -RRB- 2 , molybdate ZnMoO 4 , cyanide Zn -LRB- CN -RRB- 2 , arsenite Zn -LRB- AsO2 -RRB- 2 , arsenate Zn -LRB- AsO4 -RRB- 2 · 8H 2O and the chromate ZnCrO 4 -LRB- one of the few colored zinc compounds -RRB- are a few examples of other common inorganic compounds of zinc .
One of the simplest examples of an organic compound of zinc is the acetate -LRB- Zn -LRB- O 2CCH3 -RRB- 2 -RRB- .
One estimate is that this location produced an estimated million tonnes of metallic zinc and zinc oxide from the 12th to 16th centuries .
Another estimate gives a total production of 60,000 tonnes of metallic zinc over this period .
Yet another possibility is that the word is derived from the Persian word سنگ seng meaning stone .
Jean-Jacques Daniel Dony built a different kind of horizontal zinc smelter in Belgium , which processed even more zinc .
Italian doctor Luigi Galvani discovered in 1780 that connecting the spinal cord of a freshly dissected frog to an iron rail attached by a brass hook caused the frog 's leg to twitch .
The composition of this is normally zinc sulfide -LRB- 80 % to 85 % -RRB- , iron sulfide -LRB- 7.0 % to 12 % -RRB- , lead sulfide -LRB- 3.0 % to 5.0 % -RRB- silica -LRB- 2.5 % to 3.5 % -RRB- , and cadmium sulfide -LRB- 0.35 % to 0.41 % -RRB- .
About 1.1 million tonnes of metallic zinc and 130 thousand tonnes of lead were mined and smelted in the Belgian towns of La Calamine and Plombières between 1806 and 1882 .
About two thousand years ago emissions of zinc from mining and smelting totaled 10 thousand tonnes a year .
After increasing 10-fold from 1850 , zinc emissions peaked at 3.4 million tonnes per year in the 1980s and declined to 2.7 million tonnes in the 1990s , although a 2005 study of the Arctic troposphere found that the concentrations there did not reflect the decline .
This protection lasts even after the zinc layer is scratched but degrades through time as the zinc corrodes away .
Zinc acts as the anode -LRB- negative terminus -RRB- by slowly corroding away as it passes electric current to the steel pipeline .
Other similar uses include a plug of zinc attached to a propeller or the metal protective guard for the keel of the ship .
Other widely used alloys that contain zinc include nickel silver , typewriter metal , soft and aluminium solder , and commercial bronze .
In 1994 , 33,200 tonnes -LRB- 36,600 short tons -RRB- of zinc were used to produce 13.6 billion pennies in the United States .
An example of this is zinc aluminium .
The low working temperature leads to rapid cooling of the cast products and therefore fast assembly is possible .
In building facades , roofs or other applications in which zinc is used as sheet metal and for methods such as deep drawing , roll forming or bending , zinc alloys with titanium and copper are used .
It is also used as a heat disperser for the rubber and acts to protect its polymers from ultraviolet radiation -LRB- the same UV protection is conferred to plastics containing zinc oxide -RRB- .
It is also used to make other chemicals .
Zinc methyl -LRB- Zn -LRB- CH3 -RRB- 2 -RRB- is used in a number of organic syntheses .
Zinc sulfate is a chemical in dyes and pigments .
For the same reason , zinc has been proposed as a salting material for nuclear weapons -LRB- cobalt is another , better-known salting material -RRB- .
A jacket of isotopically enriched 64Zn would be irradiated by the intense high-energy neutron flux from an exploding thermonuclear weapon , forming a large amount of 65Zn significantly increasing the radioactivity of the weapon 's fallout .
Such a weapon is not known to have ever been built , tested , or used .
Preparations include zinc oxide , zinc acetate , and zinc gluconate .
It is also suspected of being beneficial to the body 's immune system .
Indeed , zinc deficiency may have effects on virtually all parts of the human immune system .
There are many important organozinc compounds .
Among important applications is the Frankland-Duppa Reaction in which an oxalate ester -LRB- ROCOCOOR -RRB- reacts with an alkyl halide R ` X , zinc and hydrochloric acid to the α-hydroxycarboxylic esters RR ` COHCOOR , the Reformatskii reaction which converts α-halo-esters and aldehydes to β-hydroxy-esters , the Simmons -- Smith reaction in which the carbenoid -LRB- iodomethyl -RRB- zinc iodide reacts with alkene -LRB- or alkyne -RRB- and converts them to cyclopropane , the Addition reaction of organozinc compounds to carbonyl compounds .
On the downside organozincs are much less nucleophilic than Grignards , are expensive and difficult to handle .
In one study the active organozinc compound is obtained from much cheaper organobromine precursors :
Other sources include fortified food and dietary supplements , which come in various forms .
This review cited studies which found low plasma zinc concentrations after zinc oxide and zinc carbonate were consumed compared with those seen after consumption of zinc acetate and sulfate salts .
Clinical outcomes include depressed growth , diarrhea , impotence and delayed sexual maturation , alopecia , eye and skin lesions , impaired appetite , altered cognition , impaired host defense properties , defects in carbohydrate utilization , and reproductive teratogenesis .
Despite some concerns , western vegetarians and vegans have not been found to suffer from overt zinc deficiencies any more than meat-eaters .
These considerations must be balanced against the fact that there is a paucity of adequate zinc biomarkers , and the most widely used indicator , plasma zinc , has poor sensitivity and specificity .
Diagnosing zinc deficiency is a persistent challenge .
In children it causes an increase in infection and diarrhea , contributing to the death of about 800,000 children worldwide per year .
Zinc supplements help prevent disease and reduce mortality , especially among children with low birth weight or stunted growth .
Zinc-deficient soil is cultivated in the cropland of about half of Turkey and India , a third of China , and most of Western Australia , and substantial responses to zinc fertilization have been reported in these areas .
The USDA RDA is 11 and 8 mg Zn/day for men and women , respectively .
Levels of 100 -- 300 mg may interfere with the utilization of copper and iron or adversely affect cholesterol .
There have been claims of disability , and even death , due to excessive use of these products .
The FDA said the loss of smell can be life-threatening because people with impaired smell can not detect leaking gas or smoke and can not tell if food has spoiled before they eat it .
The baroque style had never truly been to the English taste .
The book contained architectural prints of famous British buildings that had been inspired by the great architects from Vitruvius to Palladio .
At first the book mainly featured the work of Inigo Jones , but the later tomes contained drawings and plans by Campbell and other 18th-century architects .
This severe lack of ornamentation was to be a feature of the Palladianism .
The main block of this house followed Palladio 's dictates quite closely , but Palladio 's low , often detached , wings of farm buildings were elevated in significance .
The shift to neoclassical architecture is conventionally dated to the 1750s .
-LSB- according to whom ? -RSB-
This book of engraved designs made the Adam repertory available throughout Europe .
The Works in Architecture illustrated the main buildings the Adam brothers had worked on and crucially documented the interiors , furniture and fittings , designed by the Adams .
A number of British architects in the second half of the century took up the expressive challenge of the Doric from their aristocratic patrons , including Joseph Bonomi and John Soane , but it was to remain the private enthusiasm of connoisseurs up to the first decade of the 19th century .
Seen in its wider social context , Greek Revival architecture sounded a new note of sobriety and restraint in public buildings in Britain around 1800 as an assertion of nationalism attendant on the Act of Union , the Napoleonic Wars , and the clamour for political reform .
According to the art historian Hugh Honour `` so far from being , as is sometimes supposed , the culmination of the Neo-classical movement , the Empire marks its rapid decline and transformation back once more into a mere antique revival , drained of all the high-minded ideas and force of conviction that had inspired its masterpieces '' .
Projections and recessions and their effects of light and shade were more flat ; sculptural bas-reliefs were flatter and tended to be enframed in friezes , tablets or panels .
Ancient façades and building layouts were oriented to these city design patterns and they tended to work in proportion with the importance of public buildings .
A combination of simple forms and high levels of enrichment was adopted by the majority of contemporary British architects and designers .
The works of Cuthbert Brodrick and Alexander Thomson show that by the end of the 19th century the results could be powerful and eccentric .
The interior style in France was initially a Parisian style , the `` Goût grec '' -LRB- `` Greek style '' -RRB- not a court style .
Pollack 's major work is the Hungarian National Museum -LRB- 1837 -- 1844 -RRB- .
Hild is famous for his designs for the Cathedral of Eger and Esztergom .
Early examples include the Bibliotheca -LRB- 1786 -RRB- , the De Rohan Arch -LRB- 1798 -RRB- and the Hompesch Gate -LRB- 1801 -RRB- .
However , neoclassical architecture only became popular in Malta following the establishment of British rule in the early 19th century .
In 1814 , a neoclassical portico decorated with the British coat of arms was added to the Main Guard building so as to serve as a symbol of British Malta .
While some schools had interest in classical architecture , such as the University of Virginia , no school was purely dedicated to classical architecture .
In the early 1990s a program in classical architecture was started by Smith and Duncan Stroik at the University of Notre Dame that continues successfully .
Programs at the University of Miami , Andrews University , Judson University and The Prince 's Foundation for Building Community have trained a number of new classical architects since this resurgence .
Today one can find numerous buildings embracing neoclassical style , since a generation of architects trained in this discipline shapes urban planning .
His appeal was met with success and the plans were withdrawn .
A new design by architecture house Dixon Jones is currently being drafted .
Since this change , the CBC has sometimes struggled to maintain ratings comparable to those it achieved before 1995 , although it has seen somewhat of a ratings resurgence in recent years .
This was required by the CRTC as Rogers exercises editorial control and sells all advertising time during the HNIC broadcasts , even though the CBC bug and promos for other CBC Television programs appear throughout HNIC .
This second airing was later replaced with other programming , and as of the 2012-13 television season , was replaced on CBC 's major market stations by a half-hour late newscast .
There is also a short news update , at most , on late Saturday evenings .
Weekly newsmagazine the fifth estate is also a CBC mainstay , as are documentary series such as Doc Zone .
Many cultural groups criticized this and suggested the CBC air games from minor hockey leagues ; the CBC responded that most such broadcast rights were already held by other groups , but it did base each Movie Night broadcast from a different Canadian hockey venue .
Other than hockey , CBC Sports properties include Toronto Raptors basketball , Toronto FC Soccer , and various other amateur and professional events .
Since that time , the network has also launched HD simulcasts in Vancouver -LRB- CBUT-DT -RRB- , Ottawa -LRB- CBOT-DT -RRB- , Edmonton -LRB- CBXT-DT -RRB- , Calgary -LRB- CBRT-DT -RRB- , Halifax -LRB- CBHT-DT -RRB- , Windsor , -LRB- CBET-DT -RRB- , Winnipeg -LRB- CBWT-DT -RRB- and St. John 's -LRB- CBNT-DT -RRB- .
CBC O&O stations operate as a mostly seamless national service with few deviations from the main network schedule , although there are some regional differences from time to time .
Only the third letter varies from market to market ; however , that letter is typically the same as the third letter of the CBC Radio One and CBC Radio 2 stations in the same market .
However , they may opt out of some CBC programming in order to air locally produced programs , syndicated series or programs purchased from other broadcasters , such as CTV Two , which do not have a broadcast outlet in the same market .
In these cases , the CBC programming being displaced may be broadcast at a different time than the network , or may not be broadcast on the station at all .
Most private affiliates generally opt out of CBC 's afternoon schedule and Thursday night arts programming .
Most private affiliates produce their own local newscasts for a duration of at least 35 minutes .
Some of the private affiliates have begun adding CBC 's overnight programming to their schedules since the network began broadcasting 24 hours a day .
Private CBC affiliates are not as common as they were in the past , as many such stations have been purchased either by the CBC itself or by Canwest Global or CHUM Limited , respectively becoming E! or A-Channel -LRB- later A , now CTV Two -RRB- stations .
When a private CBC affiliate reaffiliates with another network , the CBC has normally added a retransmitter of its nearest O&O station to ensure that CBC service is continued .
With the closure of E! and other changes in the media landscape , several former CBC affiliates have since joined City or Global , or closed altogether .
Incidentally , that was also the date for analogue to digital transition in Canada .
Given recent practice and the CBC 's decision not to convert any retransmitters to digital , even in markets with populations in the hundreds in thousands , it is not expected that the CBC will open new transmitters to replace its affiliates , and indeed may pare back its existing transmitter network .
Whether the stations will remain CBC affiliates or become owned-and-operated stations of CTV or CTV Two following the completion of the merger is undetermined .
CBC Television stations can be received in many United States communities along the Canadian border over-the-air and have a significant audience in those areas .
Both CBC - Toronto and CBC - Windsor are both over 100 miles from London , ON and out of range for even the largest antennas -LSB- citation needed -RSB- .
Due to financial difficulties reported by the corporation , the corporation published digital transition plans for none of its analogue retransmitters in mandatory markets to be converted to digital by the deadline .
Under this plan , communities that receive analogue signals by rebroadcast transmitters in mandatory markets would lose their over-the-air signals as of the deadline .
Rebroadcast transmitters account for 23 of the 48 CBC and Radio-Canada transmitters in mandatory markets .
In both of those markets , the corporation 's television transmitters are the only ones that were not planned to be converted to digital by the deadline .
Because rebroadcast transmitters were not planned to be converted to digital , many markets stood to lose over-the-air coverage from CBC or Radio-Canada , or both .
As a result , only seven of the markets subject to the August 31 , 2011 transition deadline were planned to have both CBC and Radio-Canada in digital , and 13 other markets were planned to have either CBC or Radio-Canada in digital .
This CRTC decision prevented many markets subject to the transition deadline from losing signals for CBC or Radio-Canada , or both at the transition deadline .
In markets where a digital transmitter was installed , existing coverage areas were not necessarily maintained .
For instance , the CBC implemented a digital transmitter covering Fredericton , New Brunswick in the place of the existing transmitter covering Saint John , New Brunswick and Fredericton , and decided to maintain analogue service to Saint John .
No plans have been announced to use subchannels to maintain over-the-air signals for both CBC and Radio-Canada in markets where the corporation has one digital transmitter .
In fact , in its CRTC application to shut down all of its analogue television transmitters , the CBC communicated its opposition to use of subchannels , citing costs , amongst other reasons .
Additionally , the CBC stated in the release that it was asking the CRTC for permission to continue broadcasting in analogue until the identified transmitters for transition were up and running .
At the time of the press release , only eight of the corporation 's transmitters -LRB- four CBC and four Radio Canada -RRB- were broadcasting in digital .
On November 30 , 2010 , CBC 's senior director of regulatory affairs issued a letter to the CRTC regarding CBC 's plans for transitioning to digital .
The letter states , `` CBC/Radio-Canada will not be converting its analogue retransmitters in mandatory markets to digital after August 31 , 2011 . ''
The CBC issued a press release stating `` CBC/Radio-Canada intends to re-file its application with the CRTC to provide more detailed cost estimates that will allow the Commission to better understand the unfeasibility of replicating the Corporation 's current analogue coverage . ''
Before that deadline , CBC 's licence renewal process would take place and CBC 's digital transition plans would be examined as part of that process .
In some cases , CBC has opted to reduce the power of existing transmitters to low-power transmitters , which will result in signal loss for some viewers .
The Appalachian chain is a barrier to east-west travel as it forms a series of alternating ridgelines and valleys oriented in opposition to any road running east-west .
Definitions vary on the precise boundaries of the Appalachians .
The system is divided into a series of ranges , with the individual mountains averaging around 3,000 ft -LRB- 910 m -RRB- .
The highest of the group is Mount Mitchell in North Carolina at 6,684 feet -LRB- 2,037 m -RRB- , which is the highest point in the United States east of the Mississippi River .
Most broadly , it refers to the entire mountain range with its surrounding hills and the dissected plateau region .
Pánfilo de Narváez 's expedition first entered Apalachee territory on June 15 , 1528 , and applied the name .
Now spelled `` Appalachian , '' it is the fourth-oldest surviving European place-name in the US .
The Appalachian belt includes , with the ranges enumerated above , the plateaus sloping southward to the Atlantic Ocean in New England , and south-eastward to the border of the coastal plain through the central and southern Atlantic states ; and on the north-west , the Allegheny and Cumberland plateaus declining toward the Great Lakes and the interior plains .
In the Chic-Choc and Notre Dame mountain ranges in Quebec , the higher summits rise to about 4,000 ft -LRB- 1,200 m -RRB- elevation .
In the Green Mountains the highest point , Mt. Mansfield , is 4,393 ft -LRB- 1,339 m -RRB- in elevation ; others include Killington Peak at 4,226 ft -LRB- 1,288 m -RRB- , Camel 's Hump at 4,083 ft -LRB- 1,244 m -RRB- , Mt. Abraham at 4,006 ft -LRB- 1,221 m -RRB- , and a number of other heights exceeding 3,000 ft -LRB- 900 m -RRB- .
A number of other points in the state rise above 4,800 ft -LRB- 1,500 m -RRB- .
Snowshoe Mountain at Thorny Flat 4,848 ft -LRB- 1,478 m -RRB- and Bald Knob 4,842 ft -LRB- 1,476 m -RRB- are among the more notable peaks in West Virginia .
In the Virginia Blue Ridge , the following are some of the highest peaks north of the Roanoke River : Stony Man 4,031 ft -LRB- 1,229 m -RRB- , Hawksbill Mountain 4,066 ft -LRB- 1,239 m -RRB- , Apple Orchard Mountain 4,225 ft -LRB- 1,288 m -RRB- and Peaks of Otter 4,001 and 3,875 ft -LRB- 1,220 and 1,181 m -RRB- .
Many frontier settlers held that the defeat of the French opened the land west of the mountains to English settlement , only to find settlement barred by the British King 's proclamation .
These latecomers to the New World were forced to the frontier to find cheap land .
, hickories -LRB- Carya spp . -RRB-
and , in the past , by the American chestnut -LRB- Castanea dentata -RRB- .
In the northern Appalachians the oaks , except for white and northern red , drop out , while the latter extends farthest north .
The `` ability of a system to perform work '' is a common description , but it is difficult to give one single comprehensive definition of energy because of its many forms .
-LSB- note 1 -RSB- However , there are many other definitions of energy , depending on the context , such as thermal energy , radiant energy , electromagnetic , nuclear , etc. , where definitions are derived that are the most convenient .
All of the many forms of energy are convertible to other kinds of energy .
For `` closed systems '' with no external source or sink of energy , the first law of thermodynamics states that a system 's energy is constant unless energy is transferred in or out by mechanical work or heat , and that no energy is lost in transfer .
This means that it is impossible to create or destroy energy .
Mechanical and other forms of energy can be transformed in the other direction into thermal energy without such limitations .
Lifting against gravity performs mechanical work on the object and stores gravitational potential energy in the object .
If the object falls to the ground , gravity does mechanical work on the object which transforms the potential energy in the gravitational field to the kinetic energy released as heat on impact with the ground .
The total energy of a system can be subdivided and classified in various ways .
It may also be convenient to distinguish gravitational energy , thermal energy , several types of nuclear energy -LRB- which utilize potentials from the nuclear force and the weak force -RRB- , electric energy -LRB- from the electric field -RRB- , and magnetic energy -LRB- from the magnetic field -RRB- , among others .
An example is mechanical energy which is the sum of -LRB- usually macroscopic -RRB- kinetic and potential energy in a system .
-LSB- need quotation to verify -RSB- .
The list is also not necessarily complete .
Whenever physical scientists discover that a certain phenomenon appears to violate the law of energy conservation , new forms are typically added that account for the discrepancy .
The modern analog of this property , kinetic energy , differs from vis viva only by a factor of two .
It was argued for some years whether heat was a physical substance , dubbed the caloric , or merely a physical quantity , such as momentum .
Thus , since 1918 , theorists have understood that the law of conservation of energy is the direct mathematical consequence of the translational symmetry of the quantity conjugate to energy , namely time .
This formalism is as fundamental as the Hamiltonian , and both can be used to derive the equations of motion or be derived from them .
It was invented in the context of classical mechanics , but is generally useful in modern physics .
A generalisation of the seminal formulations on constants of motion in Lagrangian and Hamiltonian mechanics -LRB- 1788 and 1833 , respectively -RRB- , it does not apply to systems that can not be modeled with a Lagrangian ; for example , dissipative systems with continuous symmetries need not have a corresponding conservation law .
Since a chemical transformation is accompanied by a change in one or more of these kinds of structure , it is invariably accompanied by an increase or decrease of energy of the substances involved .
Some energy is transferred between the surroundings and the reactants of the reaction in the form of heat or light ; thus the products of a reaction may have more or less energy than the reactants .
A reaction is said to be exergonic if the final state is lower on the energy scale than the initial state ; in the case of endergonic reactions the situation is the reverse .
Within an organism it is responsible for growth and development of a biological cell or an organelle of a biological organism .
For example , if our bodies run -LRB- on average -RRB- at 80 watts , then a light bulb running at 100 watts is running at 1.25 human equivalents -LRB- 100 ÷ 80 -RRB- i.e. 1.25 H-e .
For tasks lasting a few minutes , a fit human can generate perhaps 1,000 watts .
For an activity that must be sustained for an hour , output drops to around 300 ; for an activity kept up all day , 150 watts is about the maximum .
The human equivalent assists understanding of energy flows in physical and biological systems by expressing energy units in human terms : it provides a `` feel '' for the use of a given amount of energy .
In growing organisms the energy that is converted to heat serves a vital purpose , as it allows the organism tissue to be highly ordered with regard to the molecules it is built from .
The conversion of a portion of the chemical energy to heat at each step in a metabolic pathway is the physical reason behind the pyramid of biomass observed in ecology : to take just the first step in the food chain , of the estimated 124.7 Pg/a of carbon that is fixed by photosynthesis , 64.3 Pg/a -LRB- 52 % -RRB- are used for the metabolism of green plants , i.e. reconverted into carbon dioxide and heat .
This slow lifting represents a kind of gravitational potential energy storage of the thermal energy , which may be later released to active kinetic energy in landslides , after a triggering event .
Prior to this , they represent release of energy that has been stored in heavy atoms since the collapse of long-destroyed supernova stars created these atoms .
In cosmology and astronomy the phenomena of stars , nova , supernova , quasars and gamma-ray bursts are the universe 's highest-output energy transformations of matter .
Energy in such transformations is either from gravitational collapse of matter -LRB- usually molecular hydrogen -RRB- into various classes of astronomical objects -LRB- stars , black holes , etc. -RRB- , or from nuclear fusion -LRB- of lighter elements , primarily hydrogen -RRB- .
At that time , according to theory , space expanded and the universe cooled too rapidly for hydrogen to completely fuse into heavier elements .
Such a fusion process is triggered by heat and pressure generated from gravitational collapse of hydrogen clouds when they produce stars , and some of the fusion energy is then transformed into sunlight .
Its results can be considered as a definition of measurement of energy in quantum mechanics .
The solution of this equation for a bound system is discrete -LRB- a set of permitted states , each characterized by an energy level -RRB- which results in the concept of quanta .
In the solution of the Schrödinger equation for any oscillator -LRB- vibrator -RRB- and for electromagnetic waves in a vacuum , the resulting energy states are related to the frequency by Planck 's relation : -LRB- where is Planck 's constant and the frequency -RRB- .
In the case of an electromagnetic wave these energy states are called quanta of light or photons .
In this system the matter -LRB- electrons and positrons -RRB- is destroyed and changed to non-matter energy -LRB- the photons -RRB- .
However , the total system mass and energy do not change during this interaction .
However , some energy transformations can be quite efficient .
Energy transformations in the universe over time are characterized by various kinds of potential energy that has been available since the Big Bang later being `` released '' -LRB- transformed to more active types of energy such as kinetic or radiant energy -RRB- when a triggering mechanism is available .
This energy is triggered and released in nuclear fission bombs or in civil nuclear power generation .
Yet another example is that of a pendulum .
At its highest points the kinetic energy is zero and the gravitational potential energy is at maximum .
At its lowest point the kinetic energy is at maximum and is equal to the decrease of potential energy .
If one -LRB- unrealistically -RRB- assumes that there is no friction or other losses , the conversion of energy between these processes would be perfect , and the pendulum would continue swinging forever .
It is also equivalent to mass , and this mass is always associated with it .
In different theoretical frameworks , similar formulas were derived by J. J. Thomson -LRB- 1881 -RRB- , Henri Poincaré -LRB- 1900 -RRB- , Friedrich Hasenöhrl -LRB- 1904 -RRB- and others -LRB- see Mass-energy equivalence #History for further information -RRB- .
However , since is extremely large relative to ordinary human scales , the conversion of ordinary amount of matter -LRB- for example , 1 kg -RRB- to other forms of energy -LRB- such as heat , light , and other radiation -RRB- can liberate tremendous amounts of energy -LRB- ~ joules = 21 megatons of TNT -RRB- , as can be seen in nuclear reactors and nuclear weapons .
An irreversible process is one in which energy is dissipated -LRB- spread -RRB- into empty energy states available in a volume , from which it can not be recovered into more concentrated forms -LRB- fewer quantum states -RRB- , without degradation of even more energy .
For example , conversion of energy from one type of potential field to another , is reversible , as in the pendulum system described above .
In processes where heat is generated , quantum states of lower energy , present as possible excitations in fields between atoms , act as a reservoir for part of the energy , from which it can not be recovered , in order to be converted with 100 % efficiency into other forms of energy .
In this case , the energy must partly stay as heat , and can not be completely recovered as usable energy , except at the price of an increase in some other kind of heat-like increase in disorder in quantum states , in the universe -LRB- such as an expansion of matter , or a randomisation in a crystal -RRB- .
It can only be transformed .
Energy is subject to a strict global conservation law ; that is , whenever one measures -LRB- or calculates -RRB- the total energy of a system of particles whose interactions do not depend explicitly on time , it is found that the total energy of the system always remains constant .
This law is a fundamental principle of physics .
Put differently , yesterday , today , and tomorrow are physically indistinguishable .
The uncertainty principle should not be confused with energy conservation - rather it provides mathematical limits to which energy can in principle be defined and measured .
In particle physics , this inequality permits a qualitative understanding of virtual particles which carry momentum , exchange by which and with real particles , is responsible for the creation of all known fundamental forces -LRB- more accurately known as fundamental interactions -RRB- .
The portion of the energy which is transferred by conservative forces over a distance is measured as the work the source system does on the receiving system .
-LSB- note 4 -RSB- Energy can be transferred between systems in a variety of ways .
When an isolated system is given more degrees of freedom -LRB- i.e. , given new available energy states that are the same as existing states -RRB- , then total energy spreads over all available degrees equally without distinction between `` new '' and `` old '' degrees .
East Prussia enclosed the bulk of the ancestral lands of the Baltic Old Prussians .
From the 13th century , East Prussia was part of the monastic state of the Teutonic Knights .
After the Second Peace of Thorn in 1466 it became a fief of the Kingdom of Poland .
In 1525 , with the Prussian Homage , the province became the Duchy of Prussia .
After the annexation of most of western Royal Prussia in the First Partition of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1772 , eastern -LRB- ducal -RRB- Prussia was connected by land with the rest of the Prussian state and was reorganized as a province the following year -LRB- 1773 -RRB- .
The capital city Königsberg was renamed Kaliningrad in 1946 .
The German population of the province was largely evacuated during the war or expelled shortly thereafter in the expulsion of Germans after World War II .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Together with Warmia it formed the province of Royal Prussia .
Eastern Prussia remained under the Knights , but as a fief of Poland .
1466 and 1525 arrangements by kings of Poland were not verified by the Holy Roman Empire as well as the previous gains of the Teutonic Knights were not verified .
Walter von Cronberg , the next Grand Master , was enfeoffed with the title to Prussia after the Diet of Augsburg in 1530 , but the Order never regained possession of the territory .
In 1569 the Hohenzollern prince-electors of the Margraviate of Brandenburg became co-regents with Albert 's son , the feeble-minded Albert Frederick .
The absolutist elector also subdued the noble estates of Prussia .
The new kingdom ruled by the Hohenzollern dynasty became known as the Kingdom of Prussia .
The designation `` Kingdom of Prussia '' was gradually applied to the various lands of Brandenburg-Prussia .
The plague , probably brought by foreign troops during the Great Northern War , killed 250,000 East Prussians , especially in the province 's eastern regions .
Crown Prince Frederick William I led the rebuilding of East Prussia , founding numerous towns .
Thousands of Protestants expelled from the Archbishopric of Salzburg were allowed to settle in depleted East Prussia .
The former Polish Pomerelian lands beyond the Vistula River together with Malbork and Chełmno Land formed the Province of West Prussia with its capital at Marienwerder -LRB- Kwidzyn -RRB- .
Napoleon had to stay at the Finckenstein Palace , but in May , after a siege of 75 days , his troops led by Marshal François Joseph Lefebvre were able to capture the city Danzig , which had been tenaciously defended by General Count Friedrich Adolf von Kalkreuth .
On 14 June , Napoleon ended the War of the Fourth Coalition with his victory at the Battle of Friedland .
Frederick William and Queen Louise met with Napoleon for peace negotiations , and on 9 July the Prussian king signed the Treaty of Tilsit .
In the course of the Prussian restoration by the 1815 Congress of Vienna , the East Prussian territories were re-arranged in the Regierungsbezirke of Gumbinnen and Königsberg .
From 1905 , the southern districts of East Prussia formed the separate Regierungsbezirk of Allenstein .
The Low Prussian dialect predominated in East Prussia , although High Prussian was spoken in Warmia .
The Polish-speaking population concentrated in the south of the province -LRB- Masuria and Warmia -RRB- and all German geographic atlases at the start of 20th century showed the southern part of East Prussia as Polish with the number of Poles estimated at the time to be 300,000 .
Kursenieki inhabited the areas around the Curonian lagoon , while Lithuanian-speaking Prussians concentrated in the northeast in -LRB- Lithuania Minor -RRB- .
The Old Prussian ethnic group became completely Germanized over time and the Old Prussian language died out in the 18th century .
The Russians were followed by the German Army advancing into Russian territory .
Most of West Prussia and the former Prussian Province of Posen , territories annexed by Prussia in the 18th century Partitions of Poland , were ceded to the Second Polish Republic according to the Treaty of Versailles .
East Prussia became an exclave , being separated from mainland Germany .
Because most of West Prussia became part of the Second Polish Republic as the Polish Corridor , the formerly West Prussian Marienwerder region became part of East Prussia -LRB- as Regierungsbezirk Westpreußen -RRB- .
Also Soldau district in Allenstein region was part of Second Polish Republic .
He led the district from 1932 .
This period was characterized by efforts to collectivize the local agriculture and ruthlessness in dealing with his critics inside and outside the Party .
These actions made him unpopular among the local peasants .
In 1932 the local paramilitary SA had already started to terrorise their political opponents .
Members of the Reichsbanner were attacked and the local Reichsbanner Chairman of Lötzen , Kurt Kotzan , was murdered on 6 August 1932 .
Koch 's industrialization plans led him into conflict with R. Walther Darré , who held the office of the Reich Peasant Leader -LRB- Reichsbauernführer -RRB- and Minister of Agriculture .
Darré , a neopaganist rural romantic , wanted to enforce his vision of an agricultural East Prussia .
When his `` Land '' representatives challenged Koch 's plans , Koch had them arrested .
Most German East Prussians , Masurians , Kursieniki , and Lietuvininkai were Lutheran , while the population of Ermland was mainly Roman Catholic due to the history of its bishopric .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Southern East Prussia was placed under Polish administration , while northern East Prussia was divided between the Soviet republics of Russia -LRB- the Kaliningrad Oblast -RRB- and Lithuania -LRB- the constituent counties of the Klaipėda Region -RRB- .
Shortly after the end of the war in May 1945 , Germans who had fled in early 1945 tried to return to their homes in East Prussia .
Many more were prevented from returning , -LSB- citation needed -RSB- and the German population of East Prussia was almost completely expelled by the communist regimes .
Subsequently Polish expatriates from Polish lands annexed by the Soviet Union as well as Ukrainians and Lemkos from southern Poland , expelled in Operation Vistula in 1947 , were settled in the southern part of East Prussia , now the Polish Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship .
Local toponyms were Polonised by the Polish Commission for the Determination of Place Names .
In June 1946 114,070 German and 41,029 Soviet citizens were registered in the Oblast , with an unknown number of disregarded unregistered persons .
The last remaining Germans left in November 1949 -LRB- 1,401 persons -RRB- and January 1950 -LRB- 7 persons -RRB- .
A similar fate befell the Curonians who lived in the area around the Curonian Lagoon .
Only 219 lived along the Curonian Spit in 1955 .
Many had German names such as Fritz or Hans , a cause for anti-German discrimination .
The exclave was a military zone , which was closed to foreigners ; Soviet citizens could only enter with special permission .
In 1967 the remnants of Königsberg Castle were demolished on the orders of Leonid Brezhnev to make way for a new `` House of the Soviets '' .
Initially the assemblies of the urban and rural districts elected representatives for the provincial diets -LRB- Provinziallandtage -RRB- , which were thus indirectly elected .
These parliaments legislated within the competences transferred to the provincial associations .
The provincial diet of East Prussia elected a provincial executive body -LRB- government -RRB- , the provincial committee -LRB- Provinzialausschuss -RRB- , and a head of province , the Landeshauptmann -LRB- `` Land Captain '' ; till the 1880s titled Landdirektor , land director -RRB- .
The Ottomans ended the Byzantine Empire with the 1453 conquest of Constantinople by Mehmed the Conqueror .
Some of these were later absorbed into the Ottoman Empire , while others were granted various types of autonomy during the course of centuries .
-LSB- dn 4 -RSB-
While the Empire was able to largely hold its own during the conflict , it was struggling with internal dissent , especially with the Arab Revolt in its Arabian holdings .
Starting before the war , but growing increasingly common and violent during it , major atrocities were committed by the Ottoman government against the Armenians , Assyrians and Pontic Greeks .
The Empire 's defeat and the occupation of part of its territory by the Allied Powers in the aftermath of World War I resulted in the emergence of a new state , Turkey , in the Ottoman Anatolian heartland following the Turkish War of Independence , as well as the founding of modern Balkan and Middle Eastern states and the partitioning of the Ottoman Empire .
-LSB- dn 5 -RSB- In Modern Turkish , it is known as Osmanlı İmparatorluğu -LRB- `` Ottoman Empire '' -RRB- or Osmanlı Devleti -LRB- `` The Ottoman State '' -RRB- .
One of the emirates was led by Osman I -LRB- 1258 -- 1326 -RRB- , from whom the name Ottoman is derived .
It is not well understood how the early Ottomans came to dominate their neighbours , as the history of medieval Anatolia is still little known .
In the century after the death of Osman I , Ottoman rule began to extend over the Eastern Mediterranean and the Balkans .
This Ottoman conquest meant the loss of Byzantine control over northwestern Anatolia .
The Battle of Nicopolis in 1396 , widely regarded as the last large-scale crusade of the Middle Ages , failed to stop the advance of the victorious Ottoman Turks .
The ensuing civil war lasted from 1402 to 1413 as Bayezid 's sons fought over succession .
It ended when Mehmed I emerged as the sultan and restored Ottoman power , bringing an end to the Interregnum , also known as the Fetret Devri .
He then laid siege to Vienna in 1529 , but failed to take the city .
Transylvania , Wallachia and , intermittently , Moldavia , became tributary principalities of the Ottoman Empire .
In the east , the Ottoman Turks took Baghdad from the Persians in 1535 , gaining control of Mesopotamia and naval access to the Persian Gulf .
In 1555 , the Caucasus became officially partitioned for the first time between the Safavids and the Ottomans , a status quo that would remain until the end of the Russo-Turkish War -LRB- 1768 -- 74 -RRB- .
By this partitioning of the Caucasus as signed in the Peace of Amasya , Western Armenia , and Western Georgia fell into Ottoman hands , while Dagestan , Eastern Armenia , Eastern Georgia , and Azerbaijan remained Persian .
A month prior to the siege of Nice , France supported the Ottomans with an artillery unit during the 1543 Ottoman conquest of Esztergom in northern Hungary .
Although there are dissenting scholars , most historians point to `` degenerate Sultans , incompetent Grand Viziers , debilitated and ill-equipped armies , corrupt officials , avaricious speculators , grasping enemies , and treacherous friends . ''
The main cause was a failure of leadership , as Lee argues the first 10 sultans from 1292 to 1566 , with one exception , had performed admirably .
In a highly centralized system , the failure at the center proved fatal .
A direct result was the strengthening of provincial elites who increasingly ignored Constantinople .
Secondly the military strength of European enemies grew stronger and stronger , while the Ottoman armies and arms scarcely improved .
The battle was far more damaging to the Ottoman navy in sapping experienced manpower than the loss of ships , which were rapidly replaced .
By contrast , the Habsburg frontier had settled somewhat , a stalemate caused by a stiffening of the Habsburg defences .
This contributed to problems of indiscipline and outright rebelliousness within the corps , which were never fully solved .
In spite of these problems , the Ottoman state remained strong , and its army did not collapse or suffer crushing defeats .
The only exceptions were campaigns against the Safavid dynasty of Persia , where many of the Ottoman eastern provinces were lost , some permanently .
Campaigns during this era became increasingly inconclusive , even against weaker states with much smaller forces , such as Poland or Austria .
The resulting Treaty of Zuhab of that same year decisively parted the Caucasus and adjacent regions between the two neighbouring empires as it had already been defined in the 1555 Peace of Amasya .
The Sultanate of women -LRB- 1648 -- 1656 -RRB- was a period in which the mothers of young sultans exercised power on behalf of their sons .
The Ottomans surrendered control of significant territories , many permanently .
Mustafa II -LRB- 1695 -- 1703 -RRB- led the counterattack of 1695 -- 96 against the Habsburgs in Hungary , but was undone at the disastrous defeat at Zenta -LRB- in modern Serbia -RRB- , 11 September 1697 .
The Treaty also revealed that the Ottoman Empire was on the defensive and unlikely to present any further aggression in Europe .
After this treaty the Ottoman Empire was able to enjoy a generation of peace , as Austria and Russia were forced to deal with the rise of Prussia .
In 1754 the artillery school was reopened on a semi-secret basis .
By the late 18th century , a number of defeats in several wars with Russia led some people in the Ottoman Empire to conclude that the reforms of Peter the Great had given the Russians an edge , and the Ottomans would have to keep up with Western technology in order to avoid further defeats .
The suzerain states -- the Principality of Serbia , Wallachia , Moldavia and Montenegro -- moved towards de jure independence during the 1860s and 1870s .
The Christian population of the empire , owing to their higher educational levels , started to pull ahead of the Muslim majority , leading to much resentment on the part of the latter .
In turn , the higher educational levels of the Christians allowed them to play a large role in the economy .
Of course , it would be a mistake to ignore the geopolitical dimensions of this dynamic .
The preponderance of Christian merchants owed not to any innate business sense on their part , although plenty of European observers were keen on making this point .
-LSB- page needed -RSB- Some Circassian organisations give much higher numbers , totaling 1 -- 1.5 million deported or killed .
As the Ottoman state attempted to modernize its infrastructure and army in response to threats from the outside , it also opened itself up to a different kind of threat : that of creditors .
Serbia and Montenegro finally gained complete independence , but with smaller territories .
In 1878 , Austria-Hungary unilaterally occupied the Ottoman provinces of Bosnia-Herzegovina and Novi Pazar .
The constitution offered hope by freeing the empire 's citizens to modernize the state 's institutions , rejuvenate its strength , and enable it to hold its own against outside powers .
Its guarantee of liberties promised to dissolve inter-communal tensions and transform the empire into a more harmonious place .
Instead , this period became the story of the twilight struggle of the Empire .
Young Turks movement members once underground -LRB- named committee , group , etc. -RRB- established -LRB- declared -RRB- their parties .
On the other end of the spectrum were ethnic parties which included ; Poale Zion , Al-Fatat , and Armenian national movement organized under Armenian Revolutionary Federation .
The last of Ottoman censuses was performed with the 1914 census .
Ottoman military reforms resulted with the Ottoman Modern Army which engaged with Italo-Turkish War -LRB- 1911 -RRB- , Balkan Wars -LRB- 1912 -- 1913 -RRB- , and continuous unrest -LRB- Counter coup followed by restoration and Saviors followed by Raid on Porte -RRB- in the Empire up to World War I.
This treaty , as designed in the conference of London , allowed the Sultan to retain his position and title .
The sultanate was abolished on 1 November 1922 , and the last sultan , Mehmed VI -LRB- reigned 1918 -- 22 -RRB- , left the country on 17 November 1922 .
The caliphate was abolished on 3 March 1924 .
Driven forward by military escorts , the deportees were deprived of food and water and subjected to periodic robbery , rape , and systematic massacre .
Before the reforms of the 19th and 20th centuries , the state organisation of the Ottoman Empire was a simple system that had two main dimensions , which were the military administration and the civil administration .
Certain pre-Islamic Turkish traditions that had survived the adoption of administrative and legal practices from Islamic Iran remained important in Ottoman administrative circles .
There were only two attempts in Ottoman history to unseat the ruling Ottoman dynasty , both failures , which suggests a political system that for an extended period was able to manage its revolutions without unnecessary instability .
The primary purpose of the Imperial Harem was to ensure the birth of male heirs to the Ottoman throne and secure the continuation of the direct patrilineal -LRB- male-line -RRB- descendance of the Ottoman sultans .
It was ruled by the Valide Sultan .
On occasion , the Valide Sultan would become involved in state politics .
For a time , the women of the Harem effectively controlled the state in what was termed the `` Sultanate of Women '' .
New sultans were always chosen from the sons of the previous sultan .
The palace schools , which would also educate the future administrators of the state , were not a single track .
First , the Madrasa -LRB- Ottoman Turkish : Medrese -RRB- was designated for the Muslims , and educated scholars and state officials according to Islamic tradition .
The financial burden of the Medrese was supported by vakifs , allowing children of poor families to move to higher social levels and income .
The Grand Vizier had considerable independence from the sultan with almost unlimited powers of appointment , dismissal and supervision .
Beginning with the late 16th century , sultans withdrew from politics and the Grand Vizier became the de facto head of state .
The Ottoman legal system accepted the religious law over its subjects .
The Ottoman Empire was always organized around a system of local jurisprudence .
Ottoman power revolved crucially around the administration of the rights to land , which gave a space for the local authority to develop the needs of the local millet .
The jurisdictional complexity of the Ottoman Empire was aimed to permit the integration of culturally and religiously different groups .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The Ottoman state tended not to interfere with non-Muslim religious law systems , despite legally having a voice to do so through local governors .
The Ottoman Islamic legal system was set up differently from traditional European courts .
In an attempt to clarify the division of judicial competences , an administrative council laid down that religious matters were to be handled by religious courts , and statute matters were to be handled by the Nizamiye courts .
The military system became an intricate organization with the advance of the Empire .
The Ottoman military was a complex system of recruiting and fief-holding .
The Ottoman cavalry depended on high speed and mobility rather than heavy armour , using bows and short swords on fast Turkoman and Arabian horses -LRB- progenitors of the Thoroughbred racing horse -RRB- , and often applied tactics similar to those of the Mongol Empire , such as pretending to retreat while surrounding the enemy forces inside a crescent-shaped formation and then making the real attack .
The decline in the army 's performance became clear from the mid-17th century and after the Great Turkish War .
The 18th century saw some limited success against Venice , but in the north the European-style Russian armies forced the Ottomans to concede land .
Sultan Abdülaziz -LRB- reigned 1861 -- 1876 -RRB- attempted to reestablish a strong Ottoman navy , building the largest fleet after those of Britain and France .
The shipyard at Barrow , England , built its first submarine in 1886 for the Ottoman Empire .
However , the collapsing Ottoman economy could not sustain the fleet 's strength for too long .
The Ottoman Navy Foundation was established in 1910 to buy new ships through public donations .
The founding of the Aviation School quickened advancement in the military aviation program , increased the number of enlisted persons within it , and gave the new pilots an active role in the Ottoman Army and Navy .
With the outbreak of World War I , the modernization process stopped abruptly .
The Ottoman aviation squadrons fought on many fronts during World War I , from Galicia in the west to the Caucasus in the east and Yemen in the south .
The tolerance displayed by the Turks was welcomed by the immigrants .
The effectiveness of this professional financial body stands behind the success of many great Ottoman statesmen .
Some regions conversely had population falls -- Belgrade saw its population drop from 25,000 to 8,000 mainly due to political strife .
Economic and political migrations made an impact across the empire .
Some migrations left indelible marks such as political tension between parts of the empire -LRB- e.g. Turkey and Bulgaria -RRB- whereas centrifugal effects were noticed in other territories , simpler demographics emerging from diverse populations .
Economies were also impacted with the loss of artisans , merchants , manufacturers and agriculturists .
Since the 19th century , a large proportion of Muslim peoples from the Balkans emigrated to present-day Turkey .
The ethnic groups continued to speak within their families and neighborhoods -LRB- mahalles -RRB- with their own languages -LRB- e.g. , Jews , Greeks , Armenians , etc. -RRB- .
In villages where two or more populations lived together , the inhabitants would often speak each other 's language .
With these conquests , Selim further solidified the Ottoman claim for being an Islamic caliphate , although Ottoman sultans had been claiming the title of caliph since the 14th century starting with Murad I -LRB- reigned 1362 to 1389 -RRB- .
The caliphate would remain held by Ottoman sultans for the rest of the office 's duration , which ended with its abolition on 3 March 1924 by the Grand National Assembly of Turkey and the exile of the last caliph , Abdülmecid II , to France .
Numerous traditions and cultural traits of previous empires -LRB- in fields such as architecture , cuisine , music , leisure and government -RRB- were adopted by the Ottoman Turks , who elaborated them into new forms , which resulted in a new and distinctively Ottoman cultural identity .
Intercultural marriages also played their part in creating the characteristic Ottoman elite culture .
When compared to the Turkish folk culture , the influence of these new cultures in creating the culture of the Ottoman elite was clear .
Nevertheless , there was a tradition of prose in the literature of the time , though exclusively non-fictional in nature .
The first novel published in the Ottoman Empire was by an Armenian named Vartan Pasha .
Published in 1851 , the novel was entitled The Story of Akabi -LRB- Turkish : Akabi Hikyayesi -RRB- and was written in Turkish but with Armenian script .
An earlier play , a farce entitled `` Vakâyi ' - i ` Acibe ve Havâdis-i Garibe-yi Kefşger Ahmed '' -LRB- `` The Strange Events and Bizarre Occurrences of the Cobbler Ahmed '' -RRB- , dates from the beginning of the 19th century , but there remains some doubt about its authenticity .
Both religious and non-religious books could be illuminated .
Also sheets for albums levha consisted of illuminated calligraphy -LRB- hat -RRB- of tughra , religious texts , verses from poems or proverbs , and purely decorative drawings .
They were also commonly donated to mosques , which often amassed large collections of them .
Ottoman classical music arose largely from a confluence of Byzantine music , Armenian music , Arabic music , and Persian music .
In the provinces , several different kinds of folk music were created .
The most dominant regions with their distinguished musical styles are : Balkan-Thracian Türküs , North-Eastern -LRB- Laz -RRB- Türküs , Aegean Türküs , Central Anatolian Türküs , Eastern Anatolian Türküs , and Caucasian Türküs .
Many common dishes in the region , descendants of the once-common Ottoman cuisine , include yogurt , döner kebab/gyro/shawarma , cacık / tzatziki , ayran , pita bread , feta cheese , baklava , lahmacun , moussaka , yuvarlak , köfte / keftés / kofta , börek / boureki , rakı / rakia/tsipouro/tsikoudia , meze , dolma , sarma , rice pilaf , Turkish coffee , sujuk , kashk , keşkek , manti , lavash , kanafeh , and more .
Over the course of Ottoman history , the Ottomans managed to build a large collection of libraries complete with translations of books from other cultures , as well as original manuscripts .
The main sports Ottomans were engaged in were Turkish Wrestling , hunting , Turkish archery , horseback riding , Equestrian javelin throw , arm wrestling , and swimming .
Ancient Greek philosophers , including Parmenides and Heraclitus , wrote essays on the nature of time .
If no one asks me , I know : if I wish to explain it to one that asketh , I know not . ''
His experimental proof of the intromission model of vision led to changes in the understanding of the visual perception of space , contrary to the previous emission theory of vision supported by Euclid and Ptolemy .
In `` tying the visual perception of space to prior bodily experience , Alhacen unequivocally rejected the intuitiveness of spatial perception and , therefore , the autonomy of vision .
Kant denies that either space or time are substance , entities in themselves , or learned by experience ; he holds , rather , that both are elements of a systematic framework we use to structure our experience .
Spatial measurements are used to quantify how far apart objects are , and temporal measurements are used to quantitatively compare the interval between -LRB- or duration of -RRB- events .
Although space and time are held to be transcendentally ideal in this sense , they are also empirically real -- that is , not mere illusions .
Such a situation , however , is not possible , according to Leibniz , for if it were , a universe 's position in absolute space would have no sufficient reason , as it might very well have been anywhere else .
Therefore , it contradicts the principle of sufficient reason , and there could exist two distinct universes that were in all ways indiscernible , thus contradicting the identity of indiscernibles .
Motion exists only as a relation between those objects .
These objects can be described as moving in relation to space itself .
If we were to imagine a universe that only contains a bucket , on Newton 's account , this bucket could be set to spin relative to absolute space , and the water it contained would form the characteristic concave surface .
The water inside the bucket could possibly have a slight curve .
However , Maxwell 's equations give no indication of what this speed is relative to .
In contrast , the theory of special relativity postulates that light propagates at the speed of light in all inertial frames , and examines the implications of this postulate .
An object that moves against a geodesic experiences a force .
In light of this , the bucket of water rotating in empty space will experience a force because it rotates with respect to the geodesic .
Instead we must choose some physical object , say the Standard Metre at the Bureau International des Poids et Mesures -LRB- International Bureau of Weights and Measures -RRB- , or the wavelength of cadmium to stand in as our unit of length .
Although we can , presumably , directly test the equality of length of two measuring rods when they are next to one another , we can not find out as much for two rods distant from one another .
Even supposing that two rods , whenever brought near to one another are seen to be equal in length , we are not justified in stating that they are always equal in length .
This impossibility undermines our ability to decide the equality of length of two distant objects .
Glasses can fall and break , but shards of glass can not reassemble and fly up onto tables .
We feel we ca n't change the past but can influence the future .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
This is the only reality we can deal with and we can not for example say that Homer exists because at the present time he does not .
One argument perdurantists use to state the superiority of their view is that perdurantism is able to take account of change in objects .
In this order , the causes of the resultant pattern of cup fragments and water spill is easily attributable in terms of the trajectory of the cup , irregularities in its structure , angle of its impact on the floor , etc. .
However , applying the same event in reverse , it is difficult to explain why the various pieces of the cup should fly up into the human hand and reassemble precisely into the shape of a cup , or why the water should position itself entirely within the cup .
The causes of the resultant structure and shape of the cup and the encapsulation of the water by the hand within the cup are not easily attributable , as neither hand nor floor can achieve such formations of the cup or water .
The Neolithic is a progression of behavioral and cultural characteristics and changes , including the use of wild and domestic crops and of domesticated animals .
As the Natufians had become dependent on wild cereals in their diet , and a sedentary way of life had begun among them , the climatic changes associated with the Younger Dryas are thought to have forced people to develop farming .
At least seven stone circles , covering 25 acres -LRB- 10 ha -RRB- , contain limestone pillars carved with animals , insects , and birds .
Stone tools were used by perhaps as many as hundreds of people to create the pillars , which might have supported roofs .
Other early PPNA sites dating to around 9,500 to 9,000 BCE have been found in Jericho , Israel -LRB- notably Ain Mallaha , Nahal Oren , and Kfar HaHoresh -RRB- , Gilgal in the Jordan Valley , and Byblos , Lebanon .
The start of Neolithic 1 overlaps the Tahunian and Heavy Neolithic periods to some degree .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
As with the PPNA dates , there are two versions from the same laboratories noted above .
This system of terminology , however , is not convenient for southeast Anatolia and settlements of the middle Anatolia basin .
Around 6,400 BC the Halaf culture appeared in Lebanon , Israel and Palestine , Syria , Anatolia , and Northern Mesopotamia and subsisted on dryland agriculture .
Natufian -LRB- 1 -RRB- between 12,000 and 10,200 BC , Khiamian -LRB- 2 -RRB- between 10,200-8 ,800 BC , PPNA : Sultanian -LRB- Jericho -RRB- , Mureybetian , early PPNB -LRB- PPNB ancien -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- between 8,800-7 ,600 BC , middle PPNB -LRB- PPNB moyen -RRB- 7,600-6 ,900 BC , late PPNB -LRB- PPNB récent -RRB- -LRB- 4 -RRB- between 7,500 and 7,000 BC and a PPNB -LRB- sometimes called PPNC -RRB- transitional stage -LRB- PPNB final -RRB- -LRB- 5 -RRB- where Halaf and dark faced burnished ware begin to emerge between 6,900-6 ,400 BC .
They also advanced the idea of a transitional stage between the PPNA and PPNB between 8,800 and 8,600 BC at sites like Jerf el Ahmar and Tell Aswad .
Among the earliest cultural complexes of this area are the Sesklo culture in Thessaly , which later expanded in the Balkans giving rise to Starčevo-Körös -LRB- Cris -RRB- , Linearbandkeramik , and Vinča .
The Cucuteni-Trypillian culture built enormous settlements in Romania , Moldova and Ukraine from 5300 to 2300 BC .
The megalithic temple complexes of Ġgantija on the Mediterranean island of Gozo -LRB- in the Maltese archipelago -RRB- and of Mnajdra -LRB- Malta -RRB- are notable for their gigantic Neolithic structures , the oldest of which date back to c. 3600 BC .
The Hypogeum of Ħal-Saflieni , Paola , Malta , is a subterranean structure excavated c. 2500 BC ; originally a sanctuary , it became a necropolis , the only prehistoric underground temple in the world , and showing a degree of artistry in stone sculpture unique in prehistory to the Maltese islands .
After 2500 BC , the Maltese Islands were depopulated for several decades until the arrival of a new influx of Bronze Age immigrants , a culture that cremated its dead and introduced smaller megalithic structures called dolmens to Malta .
In most cases there are small chambers here , with the cover made of a large slab placed on upright stones .
They are claimed to belong to a population certainly different from that which built the previous megalithic temples .
It is presumed the population arrived from Sicily because of the similarity of Maltese dolmens to some small constructions found in the largest island of the Mediterranean sea .
`` No remains of an agricultural field from the Neolithic period have been found in any East Asian country before , the institute said , adding that the discovery reveals that the history of agricultural cultivation at least began during the period on the Korean Peninsula '' .
`` In 2002 , researchers discovered prehistoric earthenware , jade earrings , among other items in the area '' .
The Formative stage is equivalent to the Neolithic Revolution period in Europe , Asia , and Africa .
In the Southwestern United States it occurred from 500 to 1200 C.E. when there was a dramatic increase in population and development of large villages supported by agriculture based on dryland farming of maize , and later , beans , squash , and domesticated turkeys .
Although some late Eurasian Neolithic societies formed complex stratified chiefdoms or even states , states evolved in Eurasia only with the rise of metallurgy , and most Neolithic societies on the whole were relatively simple and egalitarian .
Beyond Eurasia , however , states were formed during the local Neolithic in three areas , namely in the Preceramic Andes with the Norte Chico Civilization , Formative Mesoamerica and Ancient Hawaiʻi .
This supplanted an earlier view of the Linear Pottery Culture as living a `` peaceful , unfortified lifestyle '' .
Whether a non-hierarchical system of organization existed is debatable , and there is no evidence that explicitly suggests that Neolithic societies functioned under any dominating class or individual , as was the case in the chiefdoms of the European Early Bronze Age .
The roof was supported by beams from the inside .
The rough ground was covered by platforms , mats , and skins on which residents slept .
Stilt-houses settlements were common in the Alpine and Pianura Padana -LRB- Terramare -RRB- region .
Remains have been found at the Ljubljana Marshes in Slovenia and at the Mondsee and Attersee lakes in Upper Austria , for example .
These developments are also believed to have greatly encouraged the growth of settlements , since it may be supposed that the increased need to spend more time and labor in tending crop fields required more localized dwellings .
In some cultures , there would have been a significant shift toward increased starch and plant protein .
The relative nutritional benefits and drawbacks of these dietary changes and their overall impact on early societal development is still debated .
They were also skilled manufacturers of a range of other types of stone tools and ornaments , including projectile points , beads , and statuettes .
Together with the adze , fashioning wood for shelter , structures and canoes for example , this enabled them to exploit their newly won farmland .
Neolithic people in the British Isles built long barrows and chamber tombs for their dead and causewayed camps , henges , flint mines and cursus monuments .
It was also important to figure out ways of preserving food for future months , such as fashioning relatively airtight containers , and using substances like salt as preservatives .
Friedrich 's father , from whom he received his middle name , was also born in Vienna in 1871 .
August von Hayek was also a part-time botany lecturer at the University of Vienna .
Friedrich 's mother was born in 1875 to a wealthy , conservative , land-owning family .
Von Juraschek was a statistician and was later employed by the Austrian government .
His mother often played with Wittgenstein 's sisters , and had known Ludwig well .
After Wittgenstein 's death , Hayek had intended to write a biography of Wittgenstein and worked on collecting family materials ; and he later assisted biographers of Wittgenstein .
Hayek displayed an intellectual and academic bent from a very young age .
It located connective learning at the physical and neurological levels , rejecting the `` sense data '' associationism of the empiricists and logical positivists .
It was sometime after reading Socialism that Hayek began attending von Mises ' private seminars , joining several of his university friends , including Fritz Machlup , Alfred Schutz , Felix Kaufmann , and Gottfried Haberler , who were also participating in Hayek 's own , more general , private seminar .
It was written between 1940 and 1943 .
The book is widely popular among those advocating individualism and classical liberalism .
He completed The Constitution of Liberty in May 1959 , with publication in February 1960 .
Hayek was concerned `` with that condition of men in which coercion of some by others is reduced as much as is possible in society '' .
Hayek regarded his years at Freiburg as `` very fruitful '' .
Before he had finished , Thatcher `` reached into her briefcase and took out a book .
Interrupting our pragmatist , she held the book up for all of us to see .
` This ' , she said sternly , ` is what we believe ' , and banged Hayek down on the table '' .
Certainly no liberal can in future vote ` Liberal ' '' .
After his 20 min audience with the Queen , he was `` absolutely besotted '' with her according to his daughter-in-law , Esca Hayek .
Hayek said a year later that he was `` amazed by her .
That ease and skill , as if she 'd known me all my life . ''
The audience with the Queen was followed by a dinner with family and friends at the Institute of Economic Affairs .
There he argued for a monetary approach to the origins of the cycle .
Hayek claimed that `` the past instability of the market economy is the consequence of the exclusion of the most important regulator of the market mechanism , money , from itself being regulated by the market process '' .
Sraffa elaborated on the effect of inflation-induced `` forced savings '' on the capital sector and about the definition of a `` natural '' interest rate in a growing economy .
Others who responded negatively to Hayek 's work on the business cycle included John Hicks , Frank Knight , and Gunnar Myrdal .
At the University of Chicago , Hayek was not part of the economics department and did not influence the rebirth of neoclassical theory which took place there -LRB- see Chicago school of economics -RRB- .
Milton Friedman declared himself `` an enormous admirer of Hayek , but not for his economics .
I think Prices and Production is a very flawed book .
I think his -LSB- Pure Theory of Capital -RSB- is unreadable .
They argued , if some of the prices chosen by socialist managers were wrong , gluts or shortages would appear , signalling them to adjust the prices up or down , just as in a free market .
He used the term catallaxy to describe a `` self-organizing system of voluntary co-operation '' .
These ideas were informed by a moral philosophy derived from epistemological concerns regarding the inherent limits of human knowledge .
He generally regarded government redistribution of income or capital as an unacceptable intrusion upon individual freedom : `` the principle of distributive justice , once introduced , would not be fulfilled until the whole of society was organized in accordance with it .
Like the market , ecosystems contain complex networks of information , involve an ongoing dynamic process , contain orders within orders , and the entire system operates without being directed by a conscious mind .
On this analysis , species takes the place of price as a visible element of the system formed by a complex set of largely unknowable elements .
With regard to a safety net , Hayek advocated `` some provision for those threatened by the extremes of indigence or starvation , be if only in the interest of those who require protection against acts of desperation on the part of the needy . ''
In the 1973 Law , Legislation , and Liberty , Hayek wrote :
Diamond argued that : `` The human mind , Hayek says , is not just limited in its ability to synthesize a vast array of concrete facts , it is also limited in its ability to give a deductively sound ground to ethics .
Here is where the tension develops , for he also wants to give a reasoned moral defense of the free market .
Asked about the liberal , non-democratic rule by a Chilean interviewer , Hayek is translated from German to Spanish to English as having said , `` As long term institutions , I am totally against dictatorships .
Hayek admitted that `` it is not very likely that this will succeed , even if , at a particular point in time , it may be the only hope there is . ''
, he explained , however , `` It is not certain hope , because it will always depend on the goodwill of an individual , and there are very few individuals one can trust .
But if it is the sole opportunity which exists at a particular moment it may be the best solution despite this .
And only if and when the dictatorial government is visibly directing its steps towards limited democracy '' .
The only one was Chile under Allende '' .
Hayek 's influence on the development of economics is widely acknowledged .
A number of Nobel Laureates in economics , such as Vernon Smith and Herbert A. Simon , recognise Hayek as the greatest modern economist .
In retrospect hindsight tells us that its mumbo-jumbo about the period of production grossly misdiagnosed the macroeconomics of the 1927 -- 1931 -LRB- and the 1931 -- 2007 -RRB- historical scene '' .
Hayek is widely recognised for having introduced the time dimension to the equilibrium construction and for his key role in helping inspire the fields of growth theory , information economics , and the theory of spontaneous order .
-LRB- See Hacohen , 2000 -RRB- .
Their friendship and mutual admiration , however , do not change the fact that there are important differences between their ideas .
He had a wide-reaching influence on contemporary economics , politics , philosophy , sociology , psychology and anthropology .
However , Whiggery as a political doctrine had little affinity for classical political economy , the tabernacle of the Manchester School and William Gladstone .
It is an outlook , says Pirie , that Hayek and conservatives both share .
Loose but non-watery stools in babies who are breastfed , however , may be normal .
These infections are often acquired from food or water that has been contaminated by stool , or directly from another person who is infected .
The short duration watery diarrhea may be due to an infection by cholera , although this is rare in the developed world .
A number of non-infectious causes may also result in diarrhea , including hyperthyroidism , lactose intolerance , inflammatory bowel disease , a number of medications , and irritable bowel syndrome .
In most cases , stool cultures are not required to confirm the exact cause .
Zinc tablets are also recommended .
These treatments have been estimated to have saved 50 million children in the past 25 years .
When people have diarrhea it is recommended that they continue to eat healthy food and babies continue to be breastfed .
If commercial ORS are not available , homemade solutions may be used .
In those with severe dehydration , intravenous fluids may be required .
Most cases ; however , can be managed well with fluids by mouth .
Loperamide may help decrease the number of bowel movement but is not recommended in those with severe disease .
Total deaths from diarrhea are estimated at 1.26 million in 2013 -- down from 2.58 million in 1990 .
In 2012 , it is the second most common cause of deaths in children younger than five -LRB- 0.76 million or 11 % -RRB- .
There is little to no structural damage .
Therefore , to maintain a charge balance in the lumen , sodium is carried with it , along with water .
In this type of diarrhea intestinal fluid secretion is isotonic with plasma even during fasting .
It continues even when there is no oral food intake .
Osmotic diarrhea can also be the result of maldigestion -LRB- e.g. , pancreatic disease or Coeliac disease -RRB- , in which the nutrients are left in the lumen to pull in water .
A person who has lactose intolerance can have difficulty absorbing lactose after an extraordinarily high intake of dairy products .
In persons who have fructose malabsorption , excess fructose intake can also cause diarrhea .
High-fructose foods that also have a high glucose content are more absorbable and less likely to cause diarrhea .
Sugar alcohols such as sorbitol -LRB- often found in sugar-free foods -RRB- are difficult for the body to absorb and , in large amounts , may lead to osmotic diarrhea .
In most of these cases , osmotic diarrhea stops when offending agent -LRB- e.g. milk , sorbitol -RRB- is stopped .
Features of all three of the other types of diarrhea -LSB- clarification needed -RSB- can be found in this type of diarrhea .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
About 30 % of patients with diarrhea-predominant IBS have bile acid malabsorption diagnosed with an abnormal SeHCAT test .
The absence of certain resources compromises the ability of the poor to defend themselves against infectious diarrhea .
`` Poverty is associated with poor housing , crowding , dirt floors , lack of access to clean water or to sanitary disposal of fecal waste -LRB- sanitation -RRB- , cohabitation with domestic animals that may carry human pathogens , and a lack of refrigerated storage for food , all of which increase the frequency of diarrhea ... Poverty also restricts the ability to provide age-appropriate , nutritionally balanced diets or to modify diets when diarrhea develops so as to mitigate and repair nutrient losses .
It is especially important to young children who do not have a fully developed immune system .
Zinc deficiency , a condition often found in children in developing countries can , even in mild cases , have a significant impact on the development and proper functioning of the human immune system .
Indeed , this relationship between zinc deficiency reduced immune functioning corresponds with an increased severity of infectious diarrhea .
While some argue that a relationship does not exist between the rate of disease and vitamin A status , others suggest an increase in the rate associated with deficiency .
The researchers indeed themselves observed that : `` Lomotil may be contraindicated in shigellosis .
Diarrhea may represent a defense mechanism '' .
This lack of access is one of many challenges to proper hygiene in less developed countries . ''
In fact , it has been proposed that we might expect an 88 % reduction in child mortality resulting from diarrheal disease as a result of improved water sanitation and hygiene .
Similarly , a Cholera vaccine showed a strong reduction in morbidity and mortality , though the overall impact of vaccination was minimal as Cholera is not one of the major causative pathogens of diarrheal disease .
Since this time , more effective vaccines have been developed that have the potential to save many thousands of lives in developing nations , while reducing the overall cost of treatment , and the costs to society .
Supplementation with vitamin A and/or zinc .
The majority of the literature suggests that vitamin A supplementation is advantageous in reducing disease incidence .
Research does not support the limiting of milk to children as doing so has no effect on duration of diarrhea .
CDC recommends that children and adults with cholera also continue to eat .
Home solutions such as water in which cereal has been cooked , unsalted soup , green coconut water , weak tea -LRB- unsweetened -RRB- , and unsweetened fresh fruit juices can have from half a teaspoon to full teaspoon of salt -LRB- from one-and-a-half to three grams -RRB- added per liter .
Clean plain water can also be one of several fluids given .
Rehydration Project recommends adding the same amount of sugar but only one-half a teaspoon of salt , stating that this more dilute approach is less risky with very little loss of effectiveness .
Both agree that drinks with too much sugar or salt can make dehydration worse .
Plain water may be used if more specific and effective ORT preparations are unavailable or are not palatable .
Additionally , a mix of both plain water and drinks perhaps too rich in sugar and salt can alternatively be given to the same person , with the goal of providing a medium amount of sodium overall .
A child should also continue to be breastfed .
The WHO states `` Food should never be withheld and the child 's usual foods should not be diluted .
Breastfeeding should always be continued . ''
And in the specific example of cholera , CDC also makes the same recommendation .
In young children who are not breast-fed and live in the developed world , a lactose-free diet may be useful to speed recovery .
In resource-poor countries , treatment with antibiotics may be beneficial .
Antibiotics can also cause diarrhea , and antibiotic-associated diarrhea is the most common adverse effect of treatment with general antibiotics .
Madrasa -LRB- Arabic : مدرسة , madrasah , pl .
The word is variously transliterated madrasah , madarasaa , medresa , madrassa , madraza , medrese , etc. .
The word is also present as a loanword with the same innocuous meaning in many Arabic-influenced languages , such as : Urdu , Bengali , Hindi , Persian , Turkish , Azeri , Kurdish , Indonesian , Malay and Bosnian / Croatian .
Unlike the use of the word school in British English , the word madrasah more closely resembles the term school in American English , in that it can refer to a university-level or post-graduate school as well as to a primary or secondary school .
The usual Arabic word for a university , however , is جامعة -LRB- jāmiʻah -RRB- .
The Hebrew cognate midrasha also connotes the meaning of a place of learning ; the related term midrash literally refers to study or learning , but has acquired mystical and religious connotations .
In the Ottoman Empire , during the Early Modern Period , the study of hadiths was introduced by Süleyman I. Depending on the educational demands , some madaris also offer additional advanced courses in Arabic literature , English and other foreign languages , as well as science and world history .
Ottoman madaris along with religious teachings also taught `` styles of writing , grammary , syntax , poetry , composition , natural sciences , political sciences , and etiquette . ''
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- A good number of the ḥuffāẓ -LRB- plural of ḥāfiẓ -RRB- are the product of the madaris .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
For details Read `` A Qur ' anic Methodology for Integrating Knowledge and Education : Implications for Malaysia 's Islamic Education Strategy '' written Tareq M Zayed and `` Knowledge of Shariah and Knowledge to Manage ` Self ' and ` System ' : Integration of Islamic Epistemology with the Knowledge and Education '' authored by Tareq M Zayed
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- After Hijrah -LRB- migration -RRB- the madrasa of `` Suffa '' was established in Madina on the east side of the Al-Masjid an-Nabawi mosque .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- In the curriculum of the madrasa , there were teachings of The Qur ` an , The Hadith , fara'iz , tajweed , genealogy , treatises of first aid , etc. .
The first part of madrasa based education is estimated from the first day of `` nabuwwat '' to the first portion of the `` Umaiya '' caliphate .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Not only was the madrasa a potent symbol of status but it was an effective means of transmitting wealth and status to their descendants .
At the beginning of the Caliphate or Islamic Empire , the reliance on courts initially confined sponsorship and scholarly activities to major centres .
In addition to religious subjects , they also taught the `` rational sciences , '' as varied as mathematics , astronomy , astrology , geography , alchemy , philosophy , magic , and occultism , depending on the curriculum of the specific institution in question .
During this time , -LSB- when ? -RSB-
Like madaris -LRB- which referred to higher education -RRB- , a maktab was often attached to an endowed mosque .
The curriculum slowly began to diversify , with many later madaris teaching both the religious and the `` secular sciences '' , such as logic , mathematics and philosophy .
Some madaris further extended their curriculum to history , politics , ethics , music , metaphysics , medicine , astronomy and chemistry .
Many more were also established in the Andalusian cities of Córdoba , Seville , Toledo , Granada -LRB- Madrasah of Granada -RRB- , Murcia , Almería , Valencia and Cádiz during the Caliphate of Córdoba .
However , in an earlier article , he considered the ijāzah to be of `` fundamental difference '' to the medieval doctorate , since the former was awarded by an individual teacher-scholar not obliged to follow any formal criteria , whereas the latter was conferred on the student by the collective authority of the faculty .
The `` doctorate was obtained after an oral examination to determine the originality of the candidate 's theses '' , and to test the student 's `` ability to defend them against all objections , in disputations set up for the purpose . ''
These were scholarly exercises practised throughout the student 's `` career as a graduate student of law . ''
After students completed their post-graduate education , they were awarded ijazas giving them the status of faqīh ` scholar of jurisprudence ' , muftī ` scholar competent in issuing fatwās ' , and mudarris ` teacher ' .
The Arabic term ijāzat al-tadrīs was awarded to Islamic scholars who were qualified to teach .
The mufti -LRB- professor of legal opinions -RRB- took this question , studied it , researched it intensively in the sacred scriptures , in order to find a solution to it .
There is disagreement whether madaris ever became universities .
Other scholars regard the university as uniquely European in origin and characteristics .
Such an institution has thus been described as an `` Islamic university '' .
Mustansiriya University , established by the ʻAbbāsid caliph al-Mustanṣir in 1233 , in addition to teaching the religious subjects , offered courses dealing with philosophy , mathematics and the natural sciences .
However , the classification of madaris as `` universities '' is disputed on the question of understanding of each institution on its own terms .
Other academic subjects , including the natural sciences , philosophy and literary studies , were only treated `` ancillary '' to the study of the Sharia .
Toby Huff summarises the difference as follows :
As Muslim institutions of higher learning , the madrasa had the legal designation of waqf .
Unlike the corporate designation of Western institutions of higher learning , the waqf designation seemed to have led to the exclusion of non-orthodox religious subjects such a philosophy and natural science from the curricula .
It should also be noted that many medieval universities were run for centuries as Christian cathedral schools or monastic schools prior to their formal establishment as universitas scholarium ; evidence of these immediate forerunners of the university dates back to the 6th century AD , thus well preceding the earliest madaris .
George Makdisi , who has published most extensively on the topic concludes in his comparison between the two institutions :
Makdisi and Hugh Goddard have also highlighted other terms and concepts now used in modern universities which most likely have Islamic origins , including `` the fact that we still talk of professors holding the ` Chair ' of their subject '' being based on the `` traditional Islamic pattern of teaching where the professor sits on a chair and the students sit around him '' , the term ` academic circles ' being derived from the way in which Islamic students `` sat in a circle around their professor '' , and terms such as `` having ` fellows ' , ` reading ' a subject , and obtaining ` degrees ' , can all be traced back '' to the Islamic concepts of aṣḥāb -LRB- ` companions , as of Muhammad ' -RRB- , qirāʼah -LRB- ` reading aloud the Qur ` an ' -RRB- and ijāzah -LRB- ` licence -LSB- to teach -RSB- ' -RRB- respectively .
The Islamic scholarly system of fatwá and ijmāʻ , meaning opinion and consensus respectively , formed the basis of the `` scholarly system the West has practised in university scholarship from the Middle Ages down to the present day . ''
According to Makdisi and Goddard , `` the idea of academic freedom '' in universities was also `` modelled on Islamic custom '' as practised in the medieval Madrasa system from the 9th century .
Islamic influence was `` certainly discernible in the foundation of the first deliberately planned university '' in Europe , the University of Naples Federico II founded by Frederick II , Holy Roman Emperor in 1224 .
However , all of these facets of medieval university life are considered by standard scholarship to be independent medieval European developments with no tracable Islamic influence .
The taliqa only reached Islamic Spain , the only likely point of transmission , after the establishment of the first medieval universities .
In fact , there is no Latin translation of the taliqa and , most importantly , no evidence of Latin scholars ever showing awareness of Arab influence on the Latin method of disputation , something they would have certainly found noteworthy .
Rather , it was the medieval reception of the Greek Organon which set the scholastic sic et non in motion .
More recently , the scholar Mohammad Akram Nadwi , currently a researcher from the Oxford Centre for Islamic Studies , has written 40 volumes on the muḥaddithāt -LRB- the women scholars of ḥadīth -RRB- , and found at least 8,000 of them .
Mahbuba was one of these .
Another feminine figure to be remembered for her achievements was Tawaddud , `` a slave girl who was said to have been bought at great cost by Hārūn al-Rashīd because she had passed her examinations by the most eminent scholars in astronomy , medicine , law , philosophy , music , history , Arabic grammar , literature , theology and chess '' .
Ibn ʻAsakir had himself studied under 80 different female teachers in his time .
`` When an Ottoman sultan established a new medrese , he would invite scholars from the Islamic world -- for example , Murad II brought scholars from Persia , such as ʻAlāʼ al-Dīn and Fakhr al-Dīn who helped enhance the reputation of the Ottoman medrese '' .
This reveals that the Islamic world was interconnected in the early modern period as they travelled around to other Islamic states exchanging knowledge .
This sense that the Ottoman Empire was becoming modernised through globalization is also recognised by Hamadeh who says : `` Change in the eighteenth century as the beginning of a long and unilinear march toward westernisation reflects the two centuries of reformation in sovereign identity . ''
Hence , this reveals that similar to today 's modern world , individuals from the early modern society travelled abroad to receive education and share knowledge and that the world was more interconnected than it seems .
Also , it reveals how the system of `` schooling '' was also similar to today 's modern world where students travel abroad to different countries for studies .
Examples of Ottoman madaris are the ones built by Mehmed the Conqueror .
The students who completed their education in the lower medreses became known as danismends .
This reveals that similar to the education system today , the Ottomans ' educational system involved different kinds of schools attached to different kinds of levels .
`` The goal of all knowledge and in particular , of the spiritual sciences is knowledge of God . ''
Religion , for the most part , determines the significance and importance of each science .
As İnalcık mentions : `` Those which aid religion are good and sciences like astrology are bad . ''
However , even though mathematics , or studies in logic were part of the madrasa 's curriculum , they were all centred around religion .
Even mathematics had a religious impulse behind its teachings .
`` The Ulema of the Ottoman medreses held the view that hostility to logic and mathematics was futile since these accustomed the mind to correct thinking and thus helped to reveal divine truths '' -- key word being `` divine '' .
Hence , madaris -- schools were basically religious centres for religious teachings and learning in the Ottoman world .
Similarly , in Europe `` Jewish children learned the Hebrew letters and texts of basic prayers at home , and then attended a school organised by the synagogue to study the Torah . ''
Wiesner-Hanks also says that Protestants also wanted to teach `` proper religious values . ''
This shows that in the early modern period , Ottomans and Europeans were similar in their ideas about how schools should be managed and what they should be primarily focused on .
As with any other country during the Early Modern Period , such as Italy and Spain in Europe , the Ottoman social life was interconnected with the medrese .
`` The mosques to which medreses were attached , dominated the social life in Ottoman cities . ''
As Goffman says : `` Just as mosques dominated social life for the Ottomans , churches and synagogues dominated life for the Christians and Jews as well . ''
Hence , social life and the medrese were closely linked , since medreses taught many curricula , such as religion , which highly governed social life in terms of establishing orthodoxy .
Overall , the fact that mosques contained medreses comes to show the relevance of education to religion in the sense that education took place within the framework of religion and religion established social life by trying to create a common religious orthodoxy .
In India the majority of these schools follow the Hanafi school of thought .
The HR -LSB- clarification needed -RSB- ministry of the government of India has recently -LSB- when ? -RSB-
declared that a Central Madrasa Board would be set up .
This will enhance the education system of madaris in India .
Today , the system of Arabic and Islamic education has grown and further integrated with Kerala government administration .
Arabic colleges -LRB- over eleven of which exist within the state-run University of Calicut and the Kannur University -RRB- provide B.A. and Masters ' level degrees .
Islamic education boards are independently run by the following organizations , accredited by the Kerala state government : Samastha Kerala Islamic Education Board , Kerala Nadvathul Mujahideen , Jamaat-e-Islami Hind , and Jamiat Ulema-e-Hind .
In Singapore , madrasahs are private schools which are overseen by Majlis Ugama Islam Singapura -LRB- MUIS , English : Islamic Religious Council of Singapore -RRB- .
Four Madrasahs are coeducational and two are for girls .
Students take a range of Islamic Studies subjects in addition to mainstream MOE curriculum subjects and sit for the PSLE and GCE ` O ' Levels like their peers .
In 2009 , MUIS introduced the `` Joint Madrasah System '' -LRB- JMS -RRB- , a joint collaboration of Madrasah Al-Irsyad Al-Islamiah primary school and secondary schools Madrasah Aljunied Al-Islamiah -LRB- offering the ukhrawi , or religious stream -RRB- and Madrasah Al-Arabiah Al-Islamiah -LRB- offering the academic stream -RRB- .
For students who wish to attend a mainstream school , they may opt to take classes on weekends at the madrasah instead of enrolling full-time .
While there are state-recognised Islamic schools , such as Ibn Siena Integrated School in the Islamic City of Marawi , Sarang Bangun LC in Zamboanga and SMIE in Jolo , their Islamic studies programmes initially varied in application and content .
The seminary was established by Mazhar Alam under the direction of his teacher the leading Indian Tablighi scholar Muhammad Zakariya Kandhlawi and focuses on the traditional Hanafi school of thought and shuns Salafist / Wahabi teachings .
In Arabic the word madrasa simply means `` school '' and does not imply a political or religious affiliation , radical or otherwise .
Although early madaris were founded primarily to gain `` knowledge of God '' they also taught subjects such as mathematics and poetry .
In the 19th century , Philadelphia became a major industrial center and railroad hub that grew from an influx of European immigrants .
Based on the similar shifts underway the nation 's economy after 1960 , Philadelphia experienced a loss of manufacturing companies and jobs to lower taxed regions of the USA and often overseas .
In addition , consolidation in several American industries -LRB- retailing , financial services and health care in particular -RRB- reduced the number of companies headquartered in Philadelphia .
The economic impact of these changes would reduce Philadelphia 's tax base and the resources of local government .
Revitalization began in the 1990s , with gentrification turning around many neighborhoods and reversing its decades-long trend of population loss .
The area 's many universities and colleges make Philadelphia a top international study destination , as the city has evolved into an educational and economic hub .
The Philadelphia skyline is growing , with several nationally prominent skyscrapers .
Philadelphia has more outdoor sculptures and murals than any other American city , and Fairmount Park is the largest landscaped urban park in the world .
The 67 National Historic Landmarks in the city helped account for the $ 10 billion generated by tourism .
Philadelphia is the only World Heritage City in the United States .
Before Europeans arrived , the Philadelphia area was home to the Lenape -LRB- Delaware -RRB- Indians in the village of Shackamaxon .
They are also called Delaware Indians and their historical territory was along the Delaware River watershed , western Long Island and the Lower Hudson Valley .
-LSB- a -RSB- Most Lenape were pushed out of their Delaware homeland during the 18th century by expanding European colonies , exacerbated by losses from intertribal conflicts .
The American Revolutionary War and United States ' independence pushed them further west .
In the 1860s , the United States government sent most Lenape remaining in the eastern United States to the Indian Territory -LRB- present-day Oklahoma and surrounding territory -RRB- under the Indian removal policy .
In 1638 , Swedish settlers led by renegade Dutch established the colony of New Sweden at Fort Christina -LRB- present day Wilmington , Delaware -RRB- and quickly spread out in the valley .
In 1644 , New Sweden supported the Susquehannocks in their military defeat of the English colony of Maryland .
In 1648 , the Dutch built Fort Beversreede on the west bank of the Delaware , south of the Schuylkill near the present-day Eastwick section of Philadelphia , to reassert their dominion over the area .
The Swedes responded by building Fort Nya Korsholm , named New Korsholm after a town that is now in Finland .
In 1655 , a Dutch military campaign led by New Netherland Director-General Peter Stuyvesant took control of the Swedish colony , ending its claim to independence , although the Swedish and Finnish settlers continued to have their own militia , religion , and court , and to enjoy substantial autonomy under the Dutch .
Penn made a treaty of friendship with Lenape chief Tammany under an elm tree at Shackamaxon , in what is now the city 's Fishtown section .
Penn named the city Philadelphia , which is Greek for brotherly love -LRB- from philos , `` love '' or `` friendship '' , and adelphos , `` brother '' -RRB- .
This tolerance , far more than afforded by most other colonies , led to better relations with the local Native tribes and fostered Philadelphia 's rapid growth into America 's most important city .
Penn planned a city on the Delaware River to serve as a port and place for government .
The city 's inhabitants did not follow Penn 's plans , as they crowded by the Delaware River , the port , and subdivided and resold their lots .
It became an important trading center , poor at first , but with tolerable living conditions by the 1750s .
Benjamin Franklin , a leading citizen , helped improve city services and founded new ones , such as fire protection , a library , and one of the American colonies ' first hospitals .
Philadelphia 's importance and central location in the colonies made it a natural center for America 's revolutionaries .
By the 1750s , Philadelphia had surpassed Boston to become the largest city and busiest port in British America , and second in the British Empire , behind London .
The city remained the young nation 's largest with a population of nearly 50,000 at the turn of the 19th century ; it was a financial and cultural center .
The free black community also established many schools for its children , with the help of Quakers .
Major corporations in the 19th and early 20th centuries included the Baldwin Locomotive Works , William Cramp and Sons Ship and Engine Building Company , and the Pennsylvania Railroad .
They established a network of Catholic churches and schools , and dominated the Catholic clergy for decades .
Anti-Irish , anti-Catholic Nativist riots had erupted in Philadelphia in 1844 .
In the latter half of the century , immigrants from Russia , Eastern Europe and Italy ; and African Americans from the southern U.S. settled in the city .
Twentieth-century black newcomers were part of the Great Migration out of the rural South to northern and midwestern industrial cities .
In July 1919 , Philadelphia was one of more than 36 industrial cities nationally to suffer a race riot of ethnic whites against blacks during Red Summer , in post-World War I unrest , as recent immigrants competed with blacks for jobs .
In the 1920s , the public flouting of Prohibition laws , mob violence , and police involvement in illegal activities led to the appointment of Brigadier General Smedley Butler of the U.S. Marine Corps as director of public safety , but political pressure prevented any long-term success in fighting crime and corruption .
In 1940 , non-Hispanic whites constituted 86.8 % of the city 's population .
In addition , suburbanization had been drawing off many of the wealthier residents to outlying railroad commuting towns and newer housing .
Revitalization and gentrification of neighborhoods began in the late 1970s and continues into the 21st century , with much of the development in the Center City and University City areas of the city .
Glass-and-granite skyscrapers were built in Center City .
Historic areas such as Independence National Historical Park located in Old City and Society Hill were renovated during the reformist mayoral era of the 1950s through the 1980s .
They are now among the most desirable living areas of Center City .
Center City is structured with long straight streets running east-west and north-south forming a grid pattern .
The original city plan was designed to allow for easy travel and to keep residences separated by open space that would help prevent the spread of fire .
The zoning changes were intended to rectify incorrect zoning mapping that would streamline future community preferences and development , which the city forecasts an additional 100,000 residents and 40,000 jobs to be added to Philadelphia in 2035 .
Numerous glass and granite skyscrapers were built in Philadelphia 's Center City from the late 1980s onwards .
The dewpoint in the summer averages between 59.1 °F -LRB- 15 °C -RRB- to 64.5 °F -LRB- 18 °C -RRB- .
From the 1960s up until 2006 , the city 's population declined year after year .
Since 2006 , Philadelphia added 71,587 residents in eight years .
The racial breakdown of Philadelphia 's Hispanic/Latino population was 63,636 -LRB- 33.9 % -RRB- White , 17,552 -LRB- 9.4 % -RRB- African American , 3,498 -LRB- 1.9 % -RRB- Native American , 884 -LRB- 0.47 % -RRB- Asian , 287 -LRB- 0.15 % -RRB- Pacific Islander , 86,626 -LRB- 46.2 % -RRB- from other races , and 15,128 -LRB- 8.1 % -RRB- from two or more races .
The Census reported that 1,468,623 people -LRB- 96.2 % of the population -RRB- lived in households , 38,007 -LRB- 2.5 % -RRB- lived in non-institutionalized group quarters , and 19,376 -LRB- 1.3 % -RRB- were institutionalized .
The city reported 34.1 percent of all households were made up of individuals while 10.5 percent had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older .
Of Philadelphia 's adults , 31 percent were married or lived as a couple , 55 percent were not married , 11 percent were divorced or separated , and 3 percent were widowed .
For comparison , the median household income among metropolitan areas was $ 60,482 , down 8.2 percent in the same period , and the national median household income was $ 55,250 , down 7.0 percent from 2008 .
The city 's wealth disparity is evident when neighborhoods are compared .
During the last decade , Philadelphia experienced a large shift in its age profile .
In 2000 , the city 's population pyramid had a largely stationary shape .
In 2013 , the city took on an expansive pyramid shape , with an increase in the three millennial age groups , 20 to 24 , 25 to 29 , and 30 to 34 .
The median age was 33.5 years .
For every 100 females there were 89.4 males .
For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 85.7 males .
Another factor attributing to the population increase is Philadelphia 's immigration rate .
In 2013 , 12.7 percent of residents were foreign-born , just shy of the national average , 13.1 percent .
The Pennsport neighborhood and Gray 's Ferry section of South Philadelphia , home to many Mummer clubs , are well known as Irish neighborhoods .
Port Richmond is well known in particular as the center of the Polish immigrant and Polish-American community in Philadelphia , and it remains a common destination for Polish immigrants .
Northeast Philadelphia , although known for its Irish and Irish-American population , is also home to a large Jewish and Russian population .
Philadelphia is also home to a significant gay and lesbian population .
Similarly , the rate of new jobs added to the city 's economy lagged behind the national job growth .
Philadelphia is home to many national historical sites that relate to the founding of the United States .
Philadelphia alone has 67 National Historic Landmarks , the third most of any city in the country .
History museums include the National Constitution Center , the Atwater Kent Museum of Philadelphia History , the National Museum of American Jewish History , the African American Museum in Philadelphia , the Historical Society of Pennsylvania , the Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted Masons in the state of Pennsylvania and The Masonic Library and Museum of Pennsylvania and Eastern State Penitentiary .
-LSB- f -RSB-
The Wilma Theatre and Philadelphia Theatre Company have new buildings constructed in the last decade on the avenue .
They produce a variety of new works .
In 1959 , lobbying by the Artists Equity Association helped create the Percent for Art ordinance , the first for a U.S. city .
Philadelphia artists have had a prominent national role in popular music .
The city reprised this role for the Live 8 concert , bringing some 700,000 people to the Ben Franklin Parkway on July 2 , 2005 .
Philadelphia is home to the world-renowned Philadelphia Boys Choir & Chorale , which has performed its music all over the world .
Dr. Robert G. Hamilton , founder of the choir , is a notable native Philadelphian .
The Philly Pops is another famous Philadelphia music group .
The city has played a major role in the development and support of American rock music and rap music .
The regattas are hosted and organized by the Schuylkill Navy , an association of area rowing clubs that has produced numerous Olympic rowers .
Democrats currently hold 14 seats , with Republicans representing two allotted at-large seats for the minority party , as well as the Northeast-based Tenth District .
The current council president is Darrell Clarke .
It is funded and operated largely by city resources and employees .
The current District Attorney is Seth Williams , a Democrat .
After the Great Depression , Democratic registrations increased , but the city was not carried by Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt in his landslide victory of 1932 -LRB- in which Pennsylvania was one of the few states won by Republican Herbert Hoover -RRB- .
Four years later , however , voter turnout surged and the city finally flipped to the Democrats .
The city has remained loyally Democratic in every presidential election since .
Obama 's win was even greater in 2012 , capturing 85 % of the vote .
All but Fitzpatrick are Democrats .
Although they are usually swamped by Democrats in city , state and national elections , Republicans still have some support in the area , primarily in the northeast .
The murder count dropped in 2002 to 288 , then rose four years later to 406 in 2006 and 392 in 2007 .
A few years later , Philadelphia began to see a rapid drop in homicides and violent crime .
And in 2014 , there were 248 homicides , up by one since 2013 .
The number of shootings in the city has declined significantly in the last 10 years .
That number has dropped 44 percent to 1,047 shootings in 2014 .
Similarly , major crimes in the city has decreased gradually in the last ten years since its peak in 2006 when 85,498 major crimes were reported .
Violent crimes , which include homicide , rape , aggravated assault , and robbery , decreased 14 percent in the past three years with a reported 15,771 occurrences in 2014 .
During the same time period , the enrollment in charter schools has increased from 33,995 students in 2010 to 62,358 students in 2015 .
Scores on the state 's standardized test , the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment -LRB- PSSA -RRB- have trended upward from 2005 to 2011 but have decreased since .
In 2005 , the district-run schools scored an average of 37.4 % on math and 35.5 % on reading .
The city 's schools reached its peak scores in 2011 with 59.0 % on math and 52.3 % on reading .
In 2014 , the scores dropped significantly to 45.2 % on math and 42.0 % on reading .
Hospitals , universities , and higher education research institutions in Philadelphia 's four congressional districts received more than $ 252 million in National Institutes of Health grants in 2015 .
Both newspapers were purchased from The McClatchy Company -LRB- after buying out Knight Ridder -RRB- in 2006 by Philadelphia Media Holdings and operated by the group until the organization declared bankruptcy in 2010 .
The two newspapers have a combined circulation of about 500,000 readers .
The highest-rated stations in Philadelphia include soft rock WBEB , KYW Newsradio , and urban adult contemporary WDAS-FM .
WCAU-TV , WPVI-TV , WHYY-TV , WPHL-TV , and WTXF-TV had all been founded by the 1970s .
Today , as in many large metropolitan areas , each of the commercial networks has an affiliate , and call letters have been replaced by corporate IDs : CBS3 , 6ABC , NBC10 , Fox29 , Telefutura28 , Telemundo62 , Univision65 , plus My PHL 17 and CW Philly 57 .
The region is served also by public broadcasting stations WYBE-TV -LRB- Philadelphia -RRB- , WHYY-TV -LRB- Wilmington , Delaware and Philadelphia -RRB- , WLVT-TV -LRB- Lehigh Valley -RRB- , and NJTV -LRB- New Jersey -RRB- .
In September 2007 , Philadelphia approved a Public-access television cable TV channel .
These projects include the proposed Schuylkill Valley Metro to Wyomissing , PA , and extension of the Media/Elwyn line back to Wawa , PA. .
SEPTA 's Airport Regional Rail Line Regional Rail offers direct service to the Philadelphia International Airport .
Philadelphia International Airport provides scheduled domestic and international air service , while Northeast Philadelphia Airport serves general and corporate aviation .
It meets the Pennsylvania Turnpike at King of Prussia , Pennsylvania , providing access to Harrisburg , Pennsylvania and points west .
In 2006 , the Philadelphia Greyhound Terminal was the second busiest Greyhound terminal in the United States , after the Port Authority Bus Terminal in New York .
Other services include Megabus and Bolt Bus .
The two companies also operated competing commuter rail systems in the area , known collectively as the Regional Rail system .
The two systems today , for the most part still intact but now connected , operate as a single system under the control of the SEPTA , the regional transit authority .
Additionally , the PATCO Speedline subway system and NJ Transit 's Atlantic City Line operate successor services to southern New Jersey .
In 1909 , Water Works was decommissioned as the city transitioned to modern sand filtration methods .
A 2007 investigation by the Environmental Protection Agency found elevated levels of Iodine-131 in the city 's potable water .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- In 2012 , the EPA 's readings discovered that the city had the highest readings of I-131 in the nation .
The city campaigned against an Associated Press report that the high levels of I-131 were the results of local gas drilling in the Upper Delaware River .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In 2014 , the Philadelphia City Council refused to conduct hearings on a $ 1.86 billion sale of PGW , part of a two-year effort that was proposed by the mayor .
The refusal led to the prospective buyer terminating its offer .
A plan in 2001 to introduce a third overlay code to both service areas -LRB- area code 445 to 215 , area code 835 to 610 -RRB- was delayed and later rescinded .
Philadelphia has dedicated landmarks to its sister cities .
Kerry was born in Aurora , Colorado and attended boarding school in Massachusetts and New Hampshire .
He appeared in the Fulbright Hearings before the Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs where he deemed United States war policy in Vietnam to be the cause of war crimes .
On the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , he led a series of hearings from 1987 to 1989 which were a precursor to the Iran -- Contra affair .
Kerry was re-elected to additional terms in 1990 , 1996 , 2002 and 2008 .
In 2002 , Kerry voted to authorize the President `` to use force , if necessary , to disarm Saddam Hussein '' , but warned that the administration should exhaust its diplomatic avenues before launching war .
Kerry returned to the Senate , becoming Chairman of the Senate Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship in 2007 and then of the Foreign Relations Committee in 2009 .
In January 2013 , Kerry was nominated by President Barack Obama to succeed outgoing Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and then confirmed by the U.S. Senate , assuming the office on February 1 , 2013 .
He was the second oldest of four children born to Richard John Kerry , a Foreign Service officer and lawyer , and Rosemary Isabel Forbes , a nurse and social activist .
The children were raised in their father 's faith ; John Kerry served as an altar boy .
His involvement with the Political Union gave him an opportunity to be involved with important issues of the day , such as the civil rights movement and the New Frontier program .
He began his active duty military service on August 19 , 1966 .
During the 2004 election , Kerry posted his military records at his website , and permitted reporters to inspect his medical records .
In 2005 , Kerry released his military and medical records to the representatives of three news organizations , but has not authorized full public access to those records .
`` When I signed up for the swift boats , they had very little to do with the war .
However , his second choice of billet was on a river patrol boat , or `` PBR '' , which at the time was serving a more dangerous duty on the rivers of Vietnam .
It was for this injury that Kerry received his first Purple Heart Medal .
The plan had been for the Swift boats to be accompanied by support helicopters .
On the way up the Bo De , however , the helicopters were attacked .
Kerry continues to have shrapnel embedded in his left thigh because the doctors that first treated him decided to remove the damaged tissue and close the wound with sutures rather than make a wide opening to remove the shrapnel .
Though wounded like several others earlier that day , Kerry did not lose any time off from duty .
Moving a short distance upstream , Kerry 's boat was the target of a B-40 rocket round ; Kerry charged the enemy positions and as his boat hove to and beached , a Viet Cong -LRB- `` VC '' -RRB- insurgent armed with a rocket launcher emerged from a spider hole and ran .
While the boat 's gunner opened fire , wounding the VC in the leg , and while the other boats approached and offered cover fire , Kerry jumped from the boat to pursue the VC insurgent , subsequently killing him and capturing his loaded rocket launcher .
The Navy 's account of Kerry 's actions is presented in the original medal citation signed by Zumwalt .
According to the documentation for the event , Kerry 's arm was injured when he was thrown against a bulkhead during the explosion .
PCF 94 returned to the scene and Kerry rescued Rassmann who was receiving sniper fire from the water .
Kerry had agreed to an extension of his active duty obligation from December 1969 to August 1970 in order to perform Swift Boat duty .
John Kerry was on active duty in the United States Navy from August 1966 until January 1970 .
The group held press conferences , ran ads and endorsed a book questioning Kerry 's service record and his military awards .
The group included several members of Kerry 's unit , such as Larry Thurlow , who commanded a swift boat alongside of Kerry 's , and Stephen Gardner , who served on Kerry 's boat .
Most of Kerry 's former crewmates have stated that SBVT 's allegations are false .
After returning to the United States , Kerry joined the Vietnam Veterans Against the War -LRB- VVAW -RRB- .
The day after this testimony , Kerry participated in a demonstration with thousands of other veterans in which he and other Vietnam War veterans threw their medals and service ribbons over a fence erected at the front steps of the United States Capitol building to dramatize their opposition to the war .
Jack Smith , a Marine , read a statement explaining why the veterans were returning their military awards to the government .
Each veteran gave his or her name , hometown , branch of service and a statement .
All were given the Miranda Warning and were hauled away on school buses to spend the night at the Lexington Public Works Garage .
Kerry and the other protesters later paid a $ 5 fine , and were released .
The mass arrests caused a community backlash and ended up giving positive coverage to the VVAW .
In February 1972 , Kerry 's wife bought a house in Worcester , with Kerry intending to run against the 4th district 's ageing thirteen-term incumbent Democrat , Harold Donohue .
The couple never moved in .
The couple instead rented an apartment in Lowell , so that Kerry could run to succeed him .
Kerry ran a `` very expensive , sophisticated campaign '' , financed by out-of-state backers and supported by many young volunteers .
DiFruscia 's campaign headquarters shared the same building as Kerry 's .
They were arrested and charged with `` breaking and entering with the intent to commit grand larceny '' , but the charges were dropped a year later .
At the time of the incident , DiFruscia alleged that the two were trying to disrupt his get-out-the vote efforts .
The paper editorialized against him .
It also ran critical news stories about his out-of-state contributions and his `` carpetbagging '' , because he had only moved into the district in April .
Kerry himself asserts that Nixon sent operatives to Lowell to help derail his campaign .
The race was the most expensive for Congress in the country that year and four days before the general election , Durkin withdrew and endorsed Cronin , hoping to see Kerry defeated .
The week before , a poll had put Kerry 10 points ahead of Cronin , with Dukin on 13 % .
After his defeat , Kerry lamented in a letter to supporters that `` for two solid weeks , -LSB- The Sun -RSB- called me un-American , New Left antiwar agitator , unpatriotic , and labeled me every other ` un - ' and ` anti- ' that they could find .
It 's hard to believe that one newspaper could be so powerful , but they were . ''
As First Assistant , Kerry tried cases , which included winning convictions in a high-profile rape case and a murder .
He also played a role in administering the office , including initiating the creation of special white-collar and organized crime units , creating programs to address the problems of rape and other crime victims and witnesses , and managing trial calendars to reflect case priorities .
The inquiry ended with no charges being brought after investigators and prosecutors determined that Brooke 's misstatements were pertinent to the case , but were not material enough to have affected the outcome .
However , Droney was re-elected and his health improved ; he went on to re-assume many of the duties that he had delegated to Kerry .
Again as in 1982 , however , Kerry prevailed in a close primary .
The Sandinista government was opposed by the right-wing CIA-backed rebels known as the Contras .
While in Nicaragua , Kerry and Harkin talked to people on both sides of the conflict .
Through the senators , Ortega offered a cease-fire agreement in exchange for the U.S. dropping support of the Contras .
The offer was denounced by the Reagan administration as a `` propaganda initiative '' designed to influence a House vote on a $ 14 million Contra aid package , but Kerry said `` I am willing ... .
to take the risk in the effort to put to test the good faith of the Sandinistas . ''
The House voted down the Contra aid , but Ortega flew to Moscow to accept a $ 200 million loan the next day , which in part prompted the House to pass a larger $ 27 million aid package six weeks later .
Kerry 's staff investigation , based on a year-long inquiry and interviews with fifty unnamed sources , is said to raise `` serious questions about whether the United States has abided by the law in its handling of the contras over the past three years . ''
The Kerry Committee report found that `` the Contra drug links included ... .
The report showed that the bank was crooked and was working with terrorists , including Abu Nidal .
It blasted the Department of Justice , the Department of the Treasury , the Customs Service , the Federal Reserve Bank , as well as influential lobbyists and the CIA .
The race was covered nationwide as one of the most closely watched Senate races that year .
During the campaign , Kerry spoke briefly at the 1996 Democratic National Convention .
Kerry won re-election with 53 percent to Weld 's 45 percent .
In Kerry 's prepared remarks , which he released during the ensuing media frenzy , the corresponding line was '' ... you end up getting us stuck in a war in Iraq .
Just ask President Bush . ''
Most analyses place Kerry 's voting record on the left within the Senate Democratic caucus .
However , that rating was based only upon voting on legislation within that past year .
Most analyses find that Kerry is at least slightly more liberal than the typical Democratic Senator .
Kerry has stated that he opposes privatizing Social Security , supports abortion rights for adult women and minors , supports same-sex marriage , opposes capital punishment except for terrorists , supports most gun control laws , and is generally a supporter of trade agreements .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
He is a brutal , murderous dictator ; leading an oppressive regime he presents a particularly grievous threat because he is so consistently prone to miscalculation .
So the threat of Saddam Hussein with weapons of mass destruction is real . ''
Kerry did , however , warn that the administration should exhaust its diplomatic avenues before launching war : `` Mr. President , do not rush to war , take the time to build the coalition , because it 's not winning the war that 's hard , it 's winning the peace that 's hard . ''
His victory in the Iowa caucuses is widely believed to be the tipping point where Kerry revived his sagging campaign in New Hampshire and the February 3 , 2004 , primary states like Arizona , South Carolina and New Mexico .
Kerry then went on to win landslide victories in Nevada and Wisconsin .
Kerry thus won the Democratic nomination to run for President of the United States against incumbent George W. Bush .
Democratic strategist Bob Shrum , who was Kerry 's 2004 campaign adviser , wrote an article in Time magazine claiming that after the election , Kerry had said that he wished he 'd never picked Edwards , and that the two have since stopped speaking to each other .
In a subsequent appearance on ABC 's This Week , Kerry refused to respond to Shrum 's allegation , calling it a `` ridiculous waste of time . ''
Through Keeping America 's Promise in 2005 , Kerry raised over $ 5.5 million for other Democrats up and down the ballot .
`` Cumulatively , John Kerry has done as much if not more than any other individual senator '' , Hassan Nemazee , the national finance chairman of the DSCC said .
On December 21 , Obama proposed the nomination which received positive commentary .
His confirmation hearing took place on January 24 , 2013 , before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , the same panel where he first testified in 1971 .
In a letter to Massachusetts Governor Deval Patrick , Kerry announced his resignation from the Senate effective February 1 .
In the State Department , Kerry quickly earned a reputation `` for being aloof , keeping to himself , and not bothering to read staff memos . ''
When asked whether he was traveling too much , he responded , `` Hell no .
I 'm not slowing down . ''
Despite Kerry 's early achievements , morale at State is lower than under Hillary Clinton according to department employees .
However , after Kerry 's first six months in the State Department , a Gallup poll found he had high approval ratings among Americans as Secretary of State .
After a year , another poll showed Kerry 's favorability continued to rise .
We welcome that support .
Turn it over , all of it , without delay , and allow a full and total accounting for that .
But he is n't about to do it , and it ca n't be done , obviously . ''
Syria quickly welcomed this proposal and on September 14 , the UN formally accepted Syria 's application to join the convention banning chemical weapons , and separately , the U.S. and Russia agreed on a plan to eliminate Syria 's chemical weapons by the middle of 2014 .
He went on to explain , `` The relationship that we seek and that we have worked hard to foster is not about a United States declaration about how and when it will intervene in the affairs of other American states .
It 's about all of our countries viewing one another as equals , sharing responsibilities , cooperating on security issues , and adhering not to doctrine , but to the decisions that we make as partners to advance the values and the interests that we share . ''
Fred was born as `` Fritz Kohn '' before he and Ida took on the `` Kerry '' name and moved to the United States .
Fred and Ida were born Jewish , and converted to Catholicism together in Austria .
His maternal ancestors were of Scottish and English descent , and his maternal grandfather James Grant Forbes II was a member of the Forbes family , while his maternal grandmother Margaret Tyndal Winthrop was a member of the Dudley -- Winthrop family .
Margaret 's paternal grandfather Robert Charles Winthrop served as the 22nd Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives .
Robert 's father was Governor Thomas Lindall Winthrop .
Thomas ' father John Still Winthrop was a great-great-grandson of Massachusetts Bay Colony Governor John Winthrop and great-grandson of Governor Thomas Dudley .
Through his mother , John is a first cousin once removed of French politician Brice Lalonde .
Alexandra was born days before Kerry began law school .
Thorne supported Kerry 's 2004 presidential run .
She died of cancer on April 27 , 2006 .
Early the following year , Senator Heinz was killed in a plane crash near Lower Merion .
Teresa has three sons from her previous marriage to Heinz , Henry John Heinz IV , André Thierstein Heinz , and Christopher Drake Heinz .
Heinz and Kerry were married on May 26 , 1995 , in Nantucket , Massachusetts .
Regardless of which figure is correct , Kerry was the wealthiest U.S. Senator while serving in the Senate .
This assessment was based on Heinz and Kerry 's combined assets , but the couple signed a prenuptial agreement that keeps their assets separate .
Kerry 's financial disclosure form for 2011 put his personal assets in the range of $ 230,000,000 to $ 320,000,000 , including the assets of his spouse and any dependent children .
This included slightly more than three million dollars worth of H. J. Heinz Company assets , which increased in value by over six hundred thousand dollars in 2013 when Berkshire Hathaway announced their intention to purchase the company .
While Kerry is personally against abortion , he supports a woman 's legal right to have one .
Discussing his faith , Kerry said , `` I thought of being a priest .
I was very religious while at school in Switzerland .
I was very centered around the Mass and the church . ''
Even during his many campaigns , he was reported to have visited bicycle stores in both his home state and elsewhere .
However , on July 27 , 2010 , Kerry stated he had yet to take legal possession of the boat , had not intended to avoid the taxes , and that when he took possession , he would pay the taxes whether he owed them or not .
Elsewhere it is bordered by the other Indian states : Punjab to the north ; Haryana and Uttar Pradesh to the northeast ; Madhya Pradesh to the southeast ; and Gujarat to the southwest .
Rajasthan is also home to two national tiger reserves , the Ranthambore National Park in Sawai Madhopur and Sariska Tiger Reserve in Alwar .
The Indo-Scythians invaded the area of Ujjain and established the Saka era -LRB- with their calendar -RRB- , marking the beginning of the long-lived Saka Western Satraps state .
Matsya , a state of the Vedic civilisation of India , is said to roughly corresponded to the former state of Jaipur in Rajasthan and included the whole of Alwar with portions of Bharatpur .
The capital of Matsya was at Viratanagar -LRB- modern Bairat -RRB- , which is said to have been named after its founder king Virata .
All these tribes suffered great difficulties in protecting their culture and the land .
Millions of them were killed trying to protect their land .
He further notes that historians of India have wondered at the slow progress of Muslim invaders in India , as compared with their rapid advance in other parts of the world .
Marwar -LRB- Jodhpur -RRB- , Bikaner , Mewar -LRB- Chittorgarh -RRB- , Alwar and Dhundhar -LRB- Jaipur -RRB- were some of the main Rajput princely states .
The Rajputs put up a valiant resistance to the Islamic invasions and protected this land with their warfare and chivalry for more than 500 years .
They also resisted Mughal incursions into India and thus contributed to their slower-than-anticipated access to the Indian subcontinent .
Later , the Mughals , through skilled warfare , were able to get a firm grip on northern India , including Rajasthan .
Mewar led other kingdoms in its resistance to outside rule .
Most notably , Rana Sanga fought the Battle of Khanua against Babur , the founder of the Mughal empire .
The Aravalli Range does not intercept the moisture-giving southwest monsoon winds off the Arabian Sea , as it lies in a direction parallel to that of the coming monsoon winds , leaving the northwestern region in a rain shadow .
This area is also important defence point of view .
Jodhpur airbase is Indias largest airbase and military , BSF bases are also situated here .
A single civil airport is also situated in Jodhpur .
The Northwestern thorn scrub forests lie in a band around the Thar Desert , between the desert and the Aravallis .
Temperatures can exceed 48 °C in the summer months and drop below freezing in the winter .
The Godwar , Marwar , and Shekhawati regions lie in the thorn scrub forest zone , along with the city of Jodhpur .
The Luni River and its tributaries are the major river system of Godwar and Marwar regions , draining the western slopes of the Aravallis and emptying southwest into the great Rann of Kutch wetland in neighboring Gujarat .
This river is saline in the lower reaches and remains potable only up to Balotara in Barmer district .
The Ghaggar River , which originates in Haryana , is an intermittent stream that disappears into the sands of the Thar Desert in the northern corner of the state and is seen as a remnant of the primitive Saraswati river .
North of Vagad lies the Mewar region , home to the cities of Udaipur and Chittaurgarh .
The Hadoti region lies to the southeast , on the border with Madhya Pradesh .
North of Hadoti and Mewar lies the Dhundhar region , home to the state capital of Jaipur .
Mewat , the easternmost region of Rajasthan , borders Haryana and Uttar Pradesh .
Eastern and southeastern Rajasthan is drained by the Banas and Chambal rivers , tributaries of the Ganges .
The northwest tract is sandy and unproductive with little water but improves gradually from desert land in the far west and northwest to comparatively fertile and habitable land towards the east .
The area includes the Thar Desert .
in the south lies the hilly tract of Mewar .
Farther north the country levels out ; the flat plains of the northeastern Bharatpur district are part of an alluvial basin .
Merta City lies in the geographical center of Rajasthan .
The region is a haven for migratory and resident birds of the desert .
One can see many eagles , harriers , falcons , buzzards , kestrels and vultures .
Prominent among the wildlife sanctuaries are Mount Abu Sanctuary , Bhensrod Garh Sanctuary , Darrah Sanctuary , Jaisamand Sanctuary , Kumbhalgarh Wildlife Sanctuary , Jawahar Sagar sanctuary , and Sita Mata Wildlife Sanctuary .
Wheat and barley are cultivated over large areas , as are pulses , sugarcane , and oilseeds .
The water for irrigation comes from wells and tanks .
The Indira Gandhi Canal irrigates northwestern Rajasthan .
The main industries are mineral based , agriculture based , and textile based .
Several prominent chemical and engineering companies are located in the city of Kota , in southern Rajasthan .
Rajasthan is pre-eminent in quarrying and mining in India .
The state is the second largest source of cement in India .
Dimensional stone mining is also undertaken in Rajasthan .
Jodhpur sandstone is mostly used in monuments , important buildings and residential buildings .
This stone is termed as `` chittar patthar '' .
Jodhpur leads in Handicraft and Guar Gum industry .
Rajasthan is also a part of the Mumbai-Delhi Industrial corridor is set to benefit economically .
The State gets 39 % of the DMIC , with major districts of Jaipur , Alwar , Kota and Bhilwara benefiting .
Rajasthan is -LSB- when ? -RSB-
earning Rs .
150 million -LRB- approx .
US$ 2.5 million -RRB- per day as revenue from the crude oil sector .
Once this limit is achieved Rajasthan will become a leader in Crude extraction in Country .
Once the limit if 300,000 barrels per day is reached , the overall production of the country will increase by 15 percent .
Rajasthani cooking was influenced by both the war-like lifestyles of its inhabitants and the availability of ingredients in this arid region .
4 Dal-Bati-Churma is very popular in Rajasthan .
The traditional way to serve it is to first coarsely mash the Baati then pour pure Ghee on top of it .
It is served with the daal -LRB- lentils -RRB- and spicy garlic chutney .
Also served with Besan -LRB- gram flour -RRB- ki kadi .
It is commonly served at all festivities , including religious occasions , wedding ceremonies , and birthday parties in Rajasthan .
`` Dal-Baati-Churma '' , is a combination of three different food items -- Daal -LRB- lentils -RRB- , Baati and Churma -LRB- Sweet -RRB- .
It is a typical Rajasthani dish .
Kathputli , Bhopa , Chang , Teratali , Ghindr , Kachchhighori , and Tejaji are examples of traditional Rajasthani culture .
Rajasthan is known for its traditional , colorful art .
Handicraft items like wooden furniture and crafts , carpets , and blue pottery are commonly found here .
Shopping reflects the colorful culture , Rajasthani clothes have a lot of mirror work and embroidery .
A piece of cloth is used to cover the head , both for protection from heat and maintenance of modesty .
Some of the spirits possessing Rajasthanis are seen as good and beneficial while others are seen as malevolent .
Bad spirits include perpetual debtors who die in debt , stillborn infants , deceased widows , and foreign tourists .
In recent decades , the literacy rate of Rajasthan has increased significantly .
At the Census 2011 , Rajasthan had a literacy rate of 67.06 % -LRB- 80.51 % male and 52.66 % female -RRB- .
Other major educational institutions are Birla Institute of Technology and Science Pilani , Malaviya National Institute of Technology Jaipur , IIM Udaipur r and LNMIIT .
Apart from above there 41 Private universities like Amity University Rajasthan , Jaipur , Manipal University Jaipur , OPJS University , Churu , Mody University of Technology and Science Lakshmangarh -LRB- Women 's University , Sikar -RRB- , RNB Global University , Bikaner .
The state has 23 polytechnic colleges and 152 Industrial Training Institutes -LRB- ITIs -RRB- that impart vocational training .
Tourism is a flourishing industry in Rajasthan .
Many old and neglected palaces and forts have been converted into heritage hotels .
Tourism has increased employment in the hospitality sector .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Rajasthan 's Jaipur Jantar Mantar , Mehrangarh Fort and Stepwell of Jodhpur , Dilwara Temples , Chittorgarh Fort , Lake Palace , miniature paintings in Bundi , and numerous city palaces and haveli 's are part of the architectural heritage of India .
In Jodhpur , maximum houses are painted blue .
At Ajmer , there is white marble Bara-dari on the Anasagar lake .
Guamanians are American citizens by birth .
Guam has an area of 544 km2 -LRB- 210 sq mi -RRB- and a density of 297/km ² -LRB- 770/sq mi -RRB- .
It is the largest and southernmost of the Mariana Islands , and the largest island in Micronesia .
Among its municipalities , Mongmong-Toto-Maite has the highest density at 1,425 / km ² -LRB- 3,691 / sq mi -RRB- , whereas Inarajan and Umatac have the lowest density at 47/km ² -LRB- 119/sq mi -RRB- .
Between the 1500s and the 1700s , Guam was an important stopover for the Spanish Manila Galleons .
During the Spanish -- American War , the United States captured Guam on June 21 , 1898 .
Guam is amongst the seventeen Non-Self-Governing Territories of the United Nations .
During the occupation , Guamanians were subjected to culture alignment , forced labor , beheadings , rape , and torture .
Guam endured hostilities when American forces recaptured the island on July 21 , 1944 ; Liberation Day commemorates the victory .
Since the 1960s , the economy is supported by two industries : tourism and the United States Armed Forces .
Matua and mana ` chang rarely communicated with each other , and matua often used achaot as intermediaries .
There were also `` makåhna '' -LRB- similar to shamans -RRB- , skilled in healing and medicine .
Belief in spirits of ancient Chamorros called `` Taotao mo ` na '' still persists as a remnant of pre-European culture .
Their society was organized along matrilineal clans. :21
Antonio Pigafetta , one of Magellan 's original 18 the name `` Island of Sails '' , but he also writes that the inhabitants `` entered the ships and stole whatever they could lay their hands on '' , including `` the small boat that was fastened to the poop of the flagship . ''
:129 `` Those people are poor , but ingenious and very thievish , on account of which we called those three islands Islas de los Ladrones -LRB- `` Islands of thieves '' -RRB- . ''
:131
It is the biggest single segment of Micronesia , the largest islands between the island of Kyushu -LRB- Japan -RRB- , New Guinea , the Philippines , and the Hawaiian Islands .
Other reminders of colonial times include the old Governor 's Palace in Plaza de España and the Spanish Bridge , both in Hagatña .
While Guam 's Chamorro culture has indigenous roots , the cultures of both Guam and the Northern Marianas have many similarities with Spanish and Mexican culture due to three centuries of Spanish rule .
:86 Precipitated by the death of Quipuha , and the murder of Father San Vitores and Pedro Calungsod by local rebel chief Matapang , tensions led to a number of conflicts .
Guam came to serve as a station for American ships traveling to and from the Philippines , while the Northern Mariana Islands passed to Germany , and then to Japan .
The Northern Mariana Islands had become a Japanese protectorate before the war .
After the war , this would cause resentment between the Guamanian Chamorros and the Chamorros of the Northern Marianas .
The Governor of Guam was federally appointed until 1968 , when the Guam Elective Governor Act provided for the office 's popular election. :242 Since Guam is not a U.S. state , U.S. citizens residing on Guam are not allowed to vote for president and their congressional representative is a non-voting member .
It is the southernmost and largest island in the Mariana island chain and is also the largest island in Micronesia .
Guam is the closest land mass to the Mariana Trench , a deep subduction zone , that lies beside the island chain to the east .
The highest point in Guam is Mount Lamlam at an elevation of 1,334 feet -LRB- 407 meters -RRB- .
In recent years , earthquakes with epicenters near Guam have had magnitudes ranging from 5.0 to 8.7 .
Unlike the Anatahan volcano in the Northern Mariana Islands , Guam is not volcanically active .
The weather is generally very warm and humid with little seasonal temperature variation .
The remaining months -LRB- July to November -RRB- constitute the rainy season .
The highest temperature ever recorded in Guam was 96 °F -LRB- 36 °C -RRB- on April 18 , 1971 and April 1 , 1990 , and the lowest temperature ever recorded was 65 °F -LRB- 18 °C -RRB- on February 8 , 1973 .
Post-European-contact Chamorro culture is a combination of American , Spanish , Filipino , other Micronesian Islander and Mexican traditions , with few remaining indigenous pre-Hispanic customs .
These influences are manifested in the local language , music , dance , sea navigation , cuisine , fishing , games -LRB- such as batu , chonka , estuleks , and bayogu -RRB- , songs and fashion .
Post-contact Chamorro cuisine is largely based on corn , and includes tortillas , tamales , atole and chilaquiles , which are a clear influence from Spanish trade between Mesoamerica and Asia .
Many Chamorros also have Spanish surnames because of their conversion to Roman Catholic Christianity and the adoption of names from the Catálogo alfabético de apellidos , a phenomenon also common to the Philippines .
Chenchule ' is the intricate system of reciprocity at the heart of Chamorro society .
It is rooted in the core value of inafa ` maolek .
Inafa ` maolek , or interdependence , is the key , or central value , in Chamorro culture ... Inafa ` maolek depends on a spirit of cooperation and sharing .
This is the armature , or core , that everything in Chamorro culture revolves around .
It is a powerful concern for mutuality rather than individualism and private property rights . ''
However , in sending delegates to the Republican and Democratic national conventions , Guam does have influence in the national presidential race .
These delegates are elected by local party conventions .
However , the federal government rejected the version of a commonwealth that the government of Guam proposed , due to it having clauses incompatible with the Territorial Clause -LRB- Art .
IV , Sec. 3 , cl .
2 -RRB- of the U.S. Constitution .
Including the required construction workers , this buildup would increase Guam 's population by 45 % .
In a February 2010 letter , the United States Environmental Protection Agency sharply criticized these plans because of a water shortfall , sewage problems and the impact on coral reefs .
Although 75 % of the tourists are Japanese , Guam receives a sizable number of tourists from South Korea , the U.S. , the Philippines , and Taiwan .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Over the years , Congress had appropriated `` Compact Impact '' aids to Guam , the Northern Mariana Islands and Hawaii , and eventually this appropriation was written into each renewed Compact .
Some , however , continue to claim the compensation is not enough or that the distribution of actual compensation received is significantly disproportionate .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Fourth-class mail , such as magazines , are transported by sea after reaching Hawaii .
Incoming mail not from the Americas should be addressed to `` Guam '' instead of `` USA '' to avoid being routed the long way through the U.S. mainland and possibly charged a higher rate -LRB- especially from Asia -RRB- .
The port is also the regional transhipment hub for over 500,000 customers throughout the Micronesian region .
The port is the shipping and receiving point for containers designated for the island 's U.S. Department of Defense installations , Andersen Air Force Base and Commander , Naval Forces Marianas and eventually the Third Marine Expeditionary Force .
Therefore , the U.S. Customs and Border Protection only carries immigration -LRB- but not customs -RRB- functions .
Since Guam is under federal immigration jurisdiction , passengers arriving directly from the United States skip immigration and proceed directly to Guam Customs and Quarantine .
The problem was exacerbated because the reptile has no natural predators on the island .
The brown tree snake , known locally as the kulebla , is native to northern and eastern coasts of Australia , Papua New Guinea , and the Solomon Islands .
While slightly venomous , the snake is relatively harmless to human beings .
Although some studies have suggested a high density of these serpents on Guam , residents rarely see the nocturnal creatures .
The United States Geological Survey also has dogs capable of detecting snakes in forested environments around the region 's islands .
Before the introduction of the brown tree snake , Guam was home to several endemic bird species .
Today the flycatcher is entirely extinct while the Guam rail is extinct in the wild but bred in captivity by the Division of Aquatic and Wildlife Resources .
The devastation caused by the snake has been significant over the past several decades .
Delimiting surveys performed September 13 -- 25 , 2007 indicated that the infestation was limited to Tumon Bay and Faifai Beach , an area of approximately 900 acres -LRB- 3.6 km2 -RRB- .
Guam Department of Agriculture -LRB- GDA -RRB- placed quarantine on all properties within the Tumon area on October 5 and later expanded the quarantine to about 2,500 acres -LRB- 10 km2 -RRB- on October 25 ; approximately 0.5 miles -LRB- 800 m -RRB- radius in all directions from all known locations of CRB infestation .
Poachers often start fires to attract deer to the new growth .
Invasive grass species that rely on fire as part of their natural life cycle grow in many regularly burned areas .
Grasslands and `` barrens '' have replaced previously forested areas leading to greater soil erosion .
Eroded silt also destroys the marine life in reefs around the island .
Soil stabilization efforts by volunteers and forestry workers -LRB- planting trees -RRB- have had little success in preserving natural habitats .
-LRB- Since Guam is a significant vacation spot for scuba divers , this is important . -RRB-
In recent years , the Department of Agriculture , Division of Aquatic and Wildlife Resources has established several new marine preserves where fish populations are monitored by biologists .
Before adopting U.S. Environmental Protection Agency standards , portions of Tumon Bay were dredged by the hotel chains to provide a better experience for hotel guests .
Tumon Bay has since been made into a preserve .
UOG is a member of the exclusive group of only 76 U.S. land-grant institutions in the entire United States .
They offer courses at both the undergraduate and graduate levels .
Guam 's educational system has always faced unique challenges as a small community located 6,000 miles -LRB- 9,700 km -RRB- from the U.S. mainland with a very diverse student body including many students who come from backgrounds without traditional American education .
An economic downturn in Guam since the mid-1990s has compounded the problems in schools .
U.S. board certified doctors and dentists practice in all specialties .
In addition , the U.S. Naval Hospital in Agana Heights serves active-duty members and dependents of the military community .
There is one subscriber-based air ambulance located on the island , CareJet , which provides emergency patient transportation across Guam and surrounding islands .
Philosophical empiricists hold no knowledge to be properly inferred or deduced unless it is derived from one 's sense-based experience .
Similarly Robert Boyle , a prominent advocate of the experimental method , held that we have innate ideas .
This idea was later developed in ancient philosophy by the Stoic school .
For Avicenna -LRB- Ibn Sina -RRB- , for example , the tabula rasa is a pure potentiality that is actualized through education , and knowledge is attained through `` empirical familiarity with objects in this world from which one abstracts universal concepts '' developed through a `` syllogistic method of reasoning in which observations lead to propositional statements which when compounded lead to further abstract concepts '' .
The Latin translation of his philosophical novel , entitled Philosophus Autodidactus , published by Edward Pococke the Younger in 1671 , had an influence on John Locke 's formulation of tabula rasa in An Essay Concerning Human Understanding .
In political and historical writing Niccolò Machiavelli and his friend Francesco Guicciardini initiated a new realistic style of writing .
It is known that he was the essential pedagogical influence upon the young Galileo , his eldest son -LRB- cf. Coelho , ed .
Music and Science in the Age of Galileo Galilei -RRB- , arguably one of the most influential empiricists in history .
Vincenzo , through his tuning research , found the underlying truth at the heart of the misunderstood myth of ` Pythagoras ' hammers ' -LRB- the square of the numbers concerned yielded those musical intervals , not the actual numbers , as believed -RRB- , and through this and other discoveries that demonstrated the fallibility of traditional authorities , a radically empirical attitude developed , passed on to Galileo , which regarded `` experience and demonstration '' as the sine qua non of valid rational enquiry .
John Locke , George Berkeley , and David Hume were the primary exponents of empiricism in the 18th century Enlightenment , with Locke being the person who is normally known as the founder of empiricism as such .
There are two sources of our ideas : sensation and reflection .
In both cases , a distinction is made between simple and complex ideas .
The former are unanalysable , and are broken down into primary and secondary qualities .
Primary qualities are essential for the object in question to be what it is .
Without specific primary qualities , an object would not be what it is .
For example , an apple is an apple because of the arrangement of its atomic structure .
If an apple was structured differently , it would cease to be an apple .
Secondary qualities are the sensory information we can perceive from its primary qualities .
For example , an apple can be perceived in various colours , sizes , and textures but it is still identified as an apple .
Therefore , its primary qualities dictate what the object essentially is , while its secondary qualities define its attributes .
Complex ideas combine simple ones , and divide into substances , modes , and relations .
According to Locke , our knowledge of things is a perception of ideas that are in accordance or discordance with each other , which is very different from the quest for certainty of Descartes .
-LRB- For Berkeley , God fills in for humans by doing the perceiving whenever humans are not around to do it . -RRB-
In his text Alciphron , Berkeley maintained that any order humans may see in nature is the language or handwriting of God .
Berkeley 's approach to empiricism would later come to be called subjective idealism .
Hume argued in keeping with the empiricist view that all knowledge derives from sense experience , but he accepted that this has implications not normally acceptable to philosophers .
On this view , we must say that it is only probable that all men must die or that the sun will rise to-morrow , because neither of these can be demonstrated .
But to conform our language more to common use , we ought to divide arguments into demonstrations , proofs , and probabilities -- by ` proofs ' meaning arguments from experience that leave no room for doubt or opposition . ''
And ,
Mathematical and logical propositions -LRB- e.g. `` that the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares of the two sides '' -RRB- are examples of the first , while propositions involving some contingent observation of the world -LRB- e.g. `` the sun rises in the East '' -RRB- are examples of the second .
For Hume , an `` impression '' corresponds roughly with what we call a sensation .
To remember or to imagine such impressions is to have an `` idea '' .
Ideas are therefore the faint copies of sensations .
Among his many arguments Hume also added another important slant to the debate about scientific method -- that of the problem of induction .
Among Hume 's conclusions regarding the problem of induction is that there is no certainty that the future will resemble the past .
According to an extreme empiricist theory known as phenomenalism , anticipated by the arguments of both Hume and George Berkeley , a physical object is a kind of construction out of our experiences .
Ultimately , only mental objects , properties , events , exist -- hence the closely related term subjective idealism .
By the phenomenalistic line of thinking , to have a visual experience of a real physical thing is to have an experience of a certain kind of group of experiences .
This type of set of experiences possesses a constancy and coherence that is lacking in the set of experiences of which hallucinations , for example , are a part .
Mill 's empiricism went a significant step beyond Hume in still another respect : in maintaining that induction is necessary for all meaningful knowledge including mathematics .
As summarized by D.W. Hamlin :
This misses some key discussion concerning conditions under which such `` groups of permanent possibilities of sensation '' might exist in the first place .
In the end , lacking an acknowledgement of an aspect of `` reality '' that goes beyond mere `` possibilities of sensation '' , such a position leads to a version of subjective idealism .
Questions of how floor beams continue to support a floor while unobserved , how trees continue to grow while unobserved and untouched by human hands , etc. , remain unanswered , and perhaps unanswerable in these terms .
Thirdly , Mill 's position , by calling mathematics merely another species of inductive inference , misapprehends mathematics .
If a physical object statement is to be translatable into a sense-data statement , the former must be at least deducible from the latter .
But it came to be realized that there is no finite set of statements about actual and possible sense-data from which we can deduce even a single physical-object statement .
Remember that the translating or paraphrasing statement must be couched in terms of normal observers in normal conditions of observation .
According to phenomenalism , to say that a normal observer is present is to make the hypothetical statement that were a doctor to inspect the observer , the observer would appear to the doctor to be normal .
But , of course , the doctor himself must be a normal observer .
And if we are to specify in sensory terms that the second doctor is a normal observer , we must refer to a third doctor , and so on -LRB- also see the third man -RRB- .
Some of the key figures in this movement were Otto Neurath , Moritz Schlick and the rest of the Vienna Circle , along with A.J. Ayer , Rudolf Carnap and Hans Reichenbach .
The neopositivists subscribed to a notion of philosophy as the conceptual clarification of the methods , insights and discoveries of the sciences .
This gave rise to what they saw as metaphysical pseudoproblems and other conceptual confusions .
On this basis , they formulated a strong principle of demarcation between sentences that have sense and those that do not : the so-called verification principle .
Any sentence that is not purely logical , or is unverifiable is devoid of meaning .
That is , instead of translating sentences about physical objects into sense-data , such sentences were to be translated into so-called protocol sentences , for example , `` X at location Y and at time T observes such and such . ''
Along with its pragmatic theory of truth , this perspective integrates the basic insights of empirical -LRB- experience-based -RRB- and rational -LRB- concept-based -RRB- thinking .
Indeed , he concurred with the main ideas of rationalism , most importantly the idea that rational concepts can be meaningful and the idea that rational concepts necessarily go beyond the data given by empirical observation .
To this , Peirce added the concept of abductive reasoning .
The combined three forms of reasoning serve as a primary conceptual foundation for the empirically based scientific method today .
Peirce 's approach `` presupposes that -LRB- 1 -RRB- the objects of knowledge are real things , -LRB- 2 -RRB- the characters -LRB- properties -RRB- of real things do not depend on our perceptions of them , and -LRB- 3 -RRB- everyone who has sufficient experience of real things will agree on the truth about them .
First among these he listed the peripatetic-thomist observation mentioned above , but he further observed that this link between sensory perception and intellectual conception is a two-way street .
That is , it can be taken to say that whatever we find in the intellect is also incipiently in the senses .
Hence , if theories are theory-laden then so are the senses , and perception itself can be seen as a species of abductive inference , its difference being that it is beyond control and hence beyond critique -- in a word , incorrigible .
Scientific concepts , on the other hand , are general in nature , and transient sensations do in another sense find correction within them .
James maintained that the empirically observed `` directly apprehended universe needs ... no extraneous trans-empirical connective support '' , by which he meant to rule out the perception that there can be any value added by seeking supernatural explanations for natural phenomena .
James 's `` radical empiricism '' is thus not radical in the context of the term `` empiricism '' , but is instead fairly consistent with the modern use of the term `` empirical '' .
-LRB- His method of argument in arriving at this view , however , still readily encounters debate within philosophy even today . -RRB-
The role of sense experience in Dewey 's theory is crucial , in that he saw experience as unified totality of things through which everything else is interrelated .
Therefore , humans adapt their past experiences of things to perform experiments upon and test the pragmatic values of such experience .
The value of such experience is measured experientially and scientifically , and the results of such tests generate ideas that serve as instruments for future experimentation , in physical sciences as in ethics .
Thus , ideas in Dewey 's system retain their empiricist flavour in that they are only known a posteriori .
As an ontological doctrine , idealism goes further , asserting that all entities are composed of mind or spirit .
The earliest extant arguments that the world of experience is grounded in the mental derive from India and Greece .
Idealism is a term with several related meanings .
In ordinary use , as when speaking of Woodrow Wilson 's political idealism , it generally suggests the priority of ideals , principles , values , and goals over concrete realities .
In the arts , similarly , idealism affirms imagination and attempts to realize a mental conception of beauty , a standard of perfection , juxtaposed to aesthetic naturalism and realism .
Beyond this , idealists disagree on which aspects of the mental are more basic .
Thus Kant defines idealism as `` the assertion that we can never be certain whether all of our putative outer experience is not mere imagining '' .
He claimed that , according to idealism , `` the reality of external objects does not admit of strict proof .
On the contrary , however , the reality of the object of our internal sense -LRB- of myself and state -RRB- is clear immediately through consciousness . ''
However , not all idealists restrict the real or the knowable to our immediate subjective experience .
Objective idealists make claims about a transempirical world , but simply deny that this world is essentially divorced from or ontologically prior to the mental .
The theology of Christian Science includes a form of idealism : it teaches that all that truly exists is God and God 's ideas ; that the world as it appears to the senses is a distortion of the underlying spiritual reality , a distortion that may be corrected -LRB- both conceptually and in terms of human experience -RRB- through a reorientation -LRB- spiritualization -RRB- of thought .
Nevertheless , Plato holds that matter is real , though transitory and imperfect , and is perceived by our body and its senses and given existence by the eternal ideas that are perceived directly by our rational soul .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Matter as a cause of that image , is unthinkable and therefore nothing to us .
An external world as absolute matter unrelated to an observer does not exist as far as we are concerned .
The universe can not exist as it appears if there is no perceiving mind .
This argument does not take into account the issues pertaining to hermeneutics , especially at the backdrop of analytic philosophy .
Foster 's The Case for Idealism argues that the physical world is the logical creation of natural , non-logical constraints on human sense-experience .
Foster 's latest defense of his views is in his book A World for Us : The Case for Phenomenalistic Idealism .
Kant says that it is not possible to infer the ` I ' as an object -LRB- Descartes ' cogito ergo sum -RRB- purely from `` the spontaneity of thought '' .
Kant focused on ideas drawn from British philosophers such as Locke , Berkeley and Hume but distinguished his transcendental or critical idealism from previous varieties ;
The images in our head are what comprise the ideal .
The world that appears is only a representation or mental picture of objects .
All objects that are external to the mind are known indirectly through the mediation of our mind .
He offered a history of the concept of the `` ideal '' as `` ideational '' or `` existing in the mind as an image '' .
The famous `` thing-in-itself '' was called a product of philosophical habit , which seeks to introduce a grammatical subject : because wherever there is cognition , there must be a thing that is cognized and allegedly it must be added to ontology as a being -LRB- whereas , to Nietzsche , only the world as ever changing appearances can be assumed -RRB- .
Qualitative infinity , on the other hand , would be more self-determining and hence more fully real .
Hegel certainly intends to preserve what he takes to be true of German idealism , in particular Kant 's insistence that ethical reason can and does go beyond finite inclinations .
But until Spirit 's `` self-realization '' occurs and Spirit graduates from Spirit to Absolute Spirit status , subject -LRB- a human mind -RRB- mistakenly thinks every `` object '' it observes is something `` alien , '' meaning something separate or apart from `` subject . ''
In Hegel 's words , `` The object is revealed to it -LSB- to `` subject '' -RSB- by -LSB- as -RSB- something alien , and it does not recognize itself . ''
Self-realization occurs when Hegel -LRB- part of Spirit 's nonsupernatural Mind , which is the collective mind of all humans -RRB- arrives on the scene and realizes that every `` object '' is himself , because both subject and object are essentially Spirit .
The picture Hegel presents is `` a picture of a self-glorifying humanity striving compulsively , and at the end successfully , to rise to divinity . ''
`` What is rational is actual ; and what is actual is rational '' .
Hegel 's absolute idealism blurs the distinction between existence and thought : our mortal nature places limits on our understanding of reality ;
Submitting one 's will to the State denies personal freedom , choice , and responsibility .
But the relation between time and eternity is outside time and this is the `` logical structure '' that Hegel thinks we can know .
Kierkegaard disputes this assertion , because it eliminates the clear distinction between ontology and epistemology .
Existence and thought are not identical and one can not possibly think existence .
Moore claimed that Bradley did not understand the statement that something is real .
The 1903 article The Refutation of Idealism is one of the first demonstrations of Moore 's commitment to analysis .
He examines each of the three terms in the Berkeleian aphorism esse est percipi , `` to be is to be perceived '' , finding that it must mean that the object and the subject are necessarily connected so that `` yellow '' and `` the sensation of yellow '' are identical - `` to be yellow '' is `` to be experienced as yellow '' .
But it also seems there is a difference between `` yellow '' and `` the sensation of yellow '' and `` that esse is held to be percipi , solely because what is experienced is held to be identical with the experience of it '' .
This argument did not show that the GEM -LRB- in post -- Stove vernacular , see below -RRB- is logically invalid .
Unlike absolute idealism , pluralistic idealism does not assume the existence of a single ultimate mental reality or `` Absolute '' .
The monads are `` substantial forms of being '' , elemental , individual , subject to their own laws , non-interacting , each reflecting the entire universe .
Monads are centers of force , which is substance while space , matter and motion are phenomenal and their form and existence is dependent on the simple and immaterial monads .
There is a pre-established harmony established by God , the central monad , between the world in the minds of the monads and the external world of objects .
Leibniz 's cosmology embraced traditional Christian Theism .
To deny freedom to pursue truth , beauty , and `` benignant love '' is to undermine every profound human venture , including science , morality , and philosophy .
In The Unreality of Time he argued that time is an illusion because it is impossible to produce a coherent account of a sequence of events .
In his Studies in Hegelian Cosmology -LRB- Cambridge , 1901 , p196 -RRB- he declared that metaphysics are not relevant to social and political action .
McTaggart `` thought that Hegel was wrong in supposing that metaphysics could show that the state is more than a means to the good of the individuals who compose it '' .
For McTaggart `` philosophy can give us very little , if any , guidance in action ... Why should a Hegelian citizen be surprised that his belief as to the organic nature of the Absolute does not help him in deciding how to vote ?
Would a Hegelian engineer be reasonable in expecting that his belief that all matter is spirit should help him in planning a bridge ?
The theory was indebted to Aristotle 's pluralism and his concepts of Soul , the rational , living aspect of a living substance which can not exist apart from the body because it is not a substance but an essence , and nous , rational thought , reflection and understanding .
`` The mind-stuff of the world is , of course , something more general than our individual conscious minds ... .
The mind-stuff is not spread in space and time ; these are part of the cyclic scheme ultimately derived out of it ... .
Education can take place in formal or informal settings and any experience that has a formative effect on the way one thinks , feels , or acts may be considered educational .
The methodology of teaching is called pedagogy .
The medieval universities of Western Christendom were well-integrated across all of Western Europe , encouraged freedom of inquiry , and produced a great variety of fine scholars and natural philosophers , including Thomas Aquinas of the University of Naples , Robert Grosseteste of the University of Oxford , an early expositor of a systematic method of scientific experimentation , and Saint Albert the Great , a pioneer of biological field research .
Founded in 1088 , the University of Bologne is considered the first , and the oldest continually operating university .
Formal education occurs in a structured environment whose explicit purpose is teaching students .
Most school systems are designed around a set of values or ideals that govern all educational choices in that system .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Kindergarten `` provide -LSB- s -RSB- a child-centered , preschool curriculum for three - to seven-year-old children that aim -LSB- s -RSB- at unfolding the child 's physical , intellectual , and moral nature with balanced emphasis on each of them . ''
In general , primary education consists of six to eight years of schooling starting at the age of five or six , although this varies between , and sometimes within , countries .
Globally , around 89 % of children aged six to twelve are enrolled in primary education , and this proportion is rising .
The division between primary and secondary education is somewhat arbitrary , but it generally occurs at about eleven or twelve years of age .
Some education systems have separate middle schools , with the transition to the final stage of secondary education taking place at around the age of fourteen .
Schools that provide primary education , are mostly referred to as primary schools or elementary schools .
Primary schools are often subdivided into infant schools and junior school .
Depending on the system , schools for this period , or a part of it , may be called secondary or high schools , gymnasiums , lyceums , middle schools , colleges , or vocational schools .
The exact meaning of any of these terms varies from one system to another .
The exact boundary between primary and secondary education also varies from country to country and even within them , but is generally around the seventh to the tenth year of schooling .
In the United States , Canada and Australia , primary and secondary education together are sometimes referred to as K-12 education , and in New Zealand Year 1 -- 13 is used .
In order to meet this new job demand , high schools were created , with a curriculum focused on practical job skills that would better prepare students for white collar or skilled blue collar work .
Colleges and universities mainly provide tertiary education .
Collectively , these are sometimes known as tertiary institutions .
Individuals who complete tertiary education generally receive certificates , diplomas , or academic degrees .
A number of career specific courses are now available to students through the Internet .
They focused on individualized instruction and functional skills .
Alternative education developed in part as a reaction to perceived limitations and failings of traditional education .
A broad range of educational approaches emerged , including alternative schools , self learning , homeschooling and unschooling .
Charter schools are another example of alternative education , which have in the recent years grown in numbers in the US and gained greater importance in its public education system .
Often in a post-colonial context , the growing recognition and use of indigenous education methods can be a response to the erosion and loss of indigenous knowledge and language through the processes of colonialism .
Informal learning for young people is an ongoing process that also occurs in a variety of places , such as out of school time , in youth programs at community centers and media labs .
It is experienced directly in its `` natural '' function of everyday life and is often spontaneous .
L.P. Jacks , also an early proponent of lifelong learning , described education through recreation : `` A master in the art of living draws no sharp distinction between his work and his play , his labour and his leisure , his mind and his body , his education and his recreation .
He hardly knows which is which .
He simply pursues his vision of excellence through whatever he is doing and leaves others to determine whether he is working or playing .
To himself he always seems to be doing both .
Enough for him that he does it well . ''
Education through recreation is the opportunity to learn in a seamless fashion through all of life 's activities .
The concept has been revived by the University of Western Ontario to teach anatomy to medical students .
Some autodidacts spend a great deal of time reviewing the resources of libraries and educational websites .
While some may have been informed in a conventional manner in a particular field , they may choose to inform themselves in other , often unrelated areas .
Out of 182 colleges surveyed in 2009 nearly half said tuition for online courses was higher than for campus based ones .
Many large university institutions are now starting to offer free or almost free full courses such as Harvard , MIT and Berkeley teaming up to form edX .
Other universities offering open education are Stanford , Princeton , Duke , Johns Hopkins , Edinburgh , U. Penn , U. Michigan , U. Virginia , U. Washington , and Caltech .
It has been called the biggest change in the way we learn since the printing press .
Despite favorable studies on effectiveness , many people may still desire to choose traditional campus education for social and cultural reasons .
Due to the popularity of open education , these new kind of academic certificates are gaining more respect and equal `` academic value '' to traditional degrees .
Many open universities are working to have the ability to offer students standardized testing and traditional degrees and credentials .
A culture is beginning to form around distance learning for people who are looking to social connections enjoyed on traditional campuses .
For example , students may create study groups , meetups and movements such as UnCollege .
Researchers at the Overseas Development Institute have indicated that the main obstacles to funding for education include conflicting donor priorities , an immature aid architecture , and a lack of evidence and advocacy for the issue .
Furthermore , demand in the developing world for improved educational access is not as high as foreigners have expected .
Indigenous governments are reluctant to take on the ongoing costs involved .
There is also economic pressure from some parents , who prefer their children to earn money in the short term rather than work towards the long-term benefits of education .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Programs such as the International Baccalaureate have contributed to the internationalization of education .
The global campus online , led by American universities , allows free access to class materials and lecture files recorded during the actual classes .
The report examined the main challenges encountered by development organisations which support LCPSs .
This success is attributed to excess demand .
These surveys found concern for :
This education inequality is then associated with income inequality .
Although critical thinking is a goal of education , criticism and blame are often the unintended by products of our current educational process .
Better by products of an educational system would be gratitude and determination .
One merely needs to see through travel or the media how many people in the undeveloped countries live to sense this .
However , one can also use economic data to gain some insight into this .
Gratitude for all these resources and the determination to develop oneself would be more productive than criticism and blame because the resources are readily available and because , if you blame others , there is no need for you to do something different tomorrow or for you to change and improve .
Where there is a will , there is a way .
They sometimes need more determination and will to improve and to educate themselves with the resources that are abundantly available .
Educational psychology in turn informs a wide range of specialties within educational studies , including instructional design , educational technology , curriculum development , organizational learning , special education and classroom management .
Those who have higher intelligence tend to perform better at school and go on to higher levels of education .
Howard Gardner identified a wide range of modalities in his Multiple Intelligences theories .
The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator and Keirsey Temperament Sorter , based on the works of Jung , focus on understanding how people 's personality affects the way they interact personally , and how this affects the way individuals respond to each other within the learning environment .
Guy Claxton has questioned the extent that learning styles such as Visual , Auditory and Kinesthetic -LRB- VAK -RRB- are helpful , particularly as they can have a tendency to label children and therefore restrict learning .
Recent research has argued `` there is no adequate evidence base to justify incorporating learning styles assessments into general educational practice . ''
That is , it may be part of the discipline in the sense of being concerned with the aims , forms , methods , or results of the process of educating or being educated ; or it may be metadisciplinary in the sense of being concerned with the concepts , aims , and methods of the discipline . ''
For example , it might study what constitutes upbringing and education , the values and norms revealed through upbringing and educational practices , the limits and legitimization of education as an academic discipline , and the relation between education theory and practice .
Instruction is the facilitation of another 's learning .
Instructors in post-secondary institutions might be called teachers , instructors , or professors , depending on the type of institution ; and they primarily teach only their specific discipline .
With the passing of NCLB in the United States -LRB- No Child Left Behind -RRB- , teachers must be highly qualified .
A popular way to gauge teaching performance is to use student evaluations of teachers -LRB- SETS -RRB- , but these evaluations have been criticized for being counterproductive to learning and inaccurate due to student bias .
Therefore , a country 's ability to learn from the leader is a function of its stock of `` human capital '' .
Recent study of the determinants of aggregate economic growth have stressed the importance of fundamental economic institutions and the role of cognitive skills .
The chief controversies revolve around how to interpret the impact of schooling .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Tennessee -LRB- i/t ɛnᵻˈsiː / -RRB- -LRB- Cherokee : ᏔᎾᏏ , Tanasi -RRB- is a state located in the southeastern United States .
Tennessee is the 36th largest and the 17th most populous of the 50 United States .
Occupied by Union forces from 1862 , it was the first state to be readmitted to the Union at the end of the war .
Tennessee furnished more soldiers for the Confederate Army than any other state , and more soldiers for the Union Army than any other Southern state .
Tennessee has played a critical role in the development of many forms of American popular music , including rock and roll , blues , country , and rockabilly .
-LSB- not verified in body -RSB- The 1927 Victor recording sessions in Bristol generally mark the beginning of the country music genre and the rise of the Grand Ole Opry in the 1930s helped make Nashville the center of the country music recording industry .
Moreover , the Rockabilly Hall of Fame , an online site recognizing the development of rockabilly in which Tennessee played a crucial role , is based in Nashville .
-LSB- not verified in body -RSB-
Tennessee 's major industries include agriculture , manufacturing , and tourism .
It is not known whether this was the same town as the one encountered by Juan Pardo , although recent research suggests that Pardo 's `` Tanasqui '' was located at the confluence of the Pigeon River and the French Broad River , near modern Newport .
Clingmans Dome , which lies on Tennessee 's eastern border , is the highest point on the Appalachian Trail , and is the third highest peak in the United States east of the Mississippi River .
The state line between Tennessee and North Carolina crosses the summit .
This area of Tennessee is covered by fertile valleys separated by wooded ridges , such as Bays Mountain and Clinch Mountain .
East Tennessee has several important transportation links with Middle and West Tennessee , as well as the rest of the nation and the world , including several major airports and interstates .
The easternmost section , about 10 miles -LRB- 16 km -RRB- in width , consists of hilly land that runs along the western bank of the Tennessee River .
In Memphis , the Tennessee Bottoms end in steep bluffs overlooking the river .
This area of lowlands , flood plains , and swamp land is sometimes referred to as the Delta region .
The driest months , on average , are August to October .
Snowfall ranges from 5 inches -LRB- 13 cm -RRB- in West Tennessee to over 16 inches -LRB- 41 cm -RRB- in the higher mountains in East Tennessee .
Winters tend to be mild to cool , increasing in coolness at higher elevations .
Generally , for areas outside the highest mountains , the average overnight lows are near freezing for most of the state .
Occasionally , strong or violent tornadoes occur , such as the devastating April 2011 tornadoes that killed 20 people in North Georgia and Southeast Tennessee .
Tornadoes in Tennessee can be severe , and Tennessee leads the nation in the percentage of total tornadoes which have fatalities .
Fog is a persistent problem in parts of the state , especially in East Tennessee .
Memphis has the largest population of any city in the state .
Pardo recorded the name `` Tanasqui '' from a local Indian village , which evolved to the state 's current name .
Fort Loudoun became the westernmost British outpost to that date .
After its completion , Captain Raymond Demeré relinquished command on August 14 , 1757 to his brother , Captain Paul Demeré .
They opposed North Carolina 's annexation of the Washington District and the concurrent settling of the Transylvania Colony further north and west .
Efforts to obtain admission to the Union failed , and the counties -LRB- now numbering eight -RRB- had re-joined North Carolina by 1789 .
It was the first state created from territory under the jurisdiction of the United States federal government .
The Cherokees were not the only American Indians forced to emigrate as a result of the Indian removal efforts of the United States , and so the phrase `` Trail of Tears '' is sometimes used to refer to similar events endured by other American Indian peoples , especially among the `` Five Civilized Tribes '' .
Following the Confederate attack upon Fort Sumter in April and Lincoln 's call for troops from Tennessee and other states in response , Governor Isham Harris began military mobilization , submitted an ordinance of secession to the General Assembly , and made direct overtures to the Confederate government .
They held off the Confederate counterattack at Shiloh in April .
Thus , Tennessee was not among the states enumerated in the Proclamation , and the Proclamation did not free any slaves there .
Nonetheless , enslaved African Americans escaped to Union lines to gain freedom without waiting for official action .
Old and young , men , women and children camped near Union troops .
After the formal end of Reconstruction , the struggle over power in Southern society continued .
Through violence and intimidation against freedmen and their allies , White Democrats regained political power in Tennessee and other states across the South in the late 1870s and 1880s .
Legislation included implementation of a poll tax , timing of registration , and recording requirements .
Tens of thousands of taxpaying citizens were without representation for decades into the 20th century .
Also in 2002 , Tennessee amended the state constitution to allow for the establishment of a lottery .
The state constitution was amended to reject same-sex marriage .
An estimated 21 -- 24 % of Tennesseans are of predominantly English ancestry .
The Southern Baptist Convention maintains its general headquarters in Nashville .
Publishing houses of several denominations are located in Nashville .
Major outputs for the state include textiles , cotton , cattle , and electrical power .
Soybeans are also heavily planted in West Tennessee , focusing on the northwest corner of the state .
All taxable dividends and interest which exceed the $ 1,250 single exemption or the $ 2,500 joint exemption are taxable at the rate of 6 % .
Local sales taxes are collected in most jurisdictions , at rates varying from 1.5 % to 2.75 % , bringing the total sales tax to between 8.5 % and 9.75 % , one of the highest levels in the nation .
Intangible property is assessed on the shares of stock of stockholders of any loan company , investment company , insurance company or for-profit cemetery companies .
The assessment ratio is 40 % of the value multiplied by the tax rate for the jurisdiction .
Tourism contributes billions of dollars each year to the state 's economy and Tennessee is ranked among the Top 10 destinations in the US .
International travelers to Tennessee accounted for $ 533 million in spending .
Interstate 40 crosses the state in a west-east orientation .
Its branch interstate highways include I-240 in Memphis ; I-440 in Nashville ; I-140 from Knoxville to Alcoa and I-640 in Knoxville .
In a north-south orientation are highways I-55 , I-65 , I-75 , and I-81 .
I-155 is a branch highway from I-55 .
The only spur highway of I-75 in Tennessee is I-275 , which is in Knoxville .
When completed , I-69 will travel through the western part of the state , from South Fulton to Memphis .
This division was related to the state 's pattern of farming , plantations and slaveholding .
These areas became defined as Democratic after the war .
Numerous African Americans were elected to local offices , and some to state office .
Following Reconstruction , Tennessee continued to have competitive party politics .
In 1913 the state legislature enacted a bill enabling cities to adopt this structure without legislative approval .
After disenfranchisement of blacks , the GOP in Tennessee was historically a sectional party supported by whites only in the eastern part of the state .
In that postwar decade , it twice voted for Republican Dwight D. Eisenhower , former Allied Commander of the Armed Forces during World War II .
Tennessee has selected governors from different parties since 1970 .
The latter area includes a large African-American population .
Historically , Republicans had their greatest strength in East Tennessee before the 1960s .
Those districts ' residents supported the Union over the Confederacy during the Civil War ; they identified with the GOP after the war and have stayed with that party ever since .
The 2nd has been held continuously by Republicans or their antecedents since 1859 .
It also required both houses of state legislatures to be based on population for representation and not geographic districts such as counties .
The ruling also applied to numerous other states long controlled by rural minorities , such as Alabama , Vermont , and Montana .
Incorporated municipalities are required to maintain a police department to provide police services within their corporate limits .
Capital punishment has existed in Tennessee at various times since statehood .
From 1972 to 1978 , after the Supreme Court ruled -LRB- Furman v. Georgia -RRB- capital punishment unconstitutional , there were no further executions .
Capital punishment was restarted in 1978 , although those prisoners awaiting execution between 1960 and 1978 had their sentences mostly commuted to life in prison .
For a variety of reasons there were no further executions until 2000 .
Artists embraced electronic music , black dance styles and the avant-garde , as well as novel recording technology and production techniques .
They repudiated its populist claims to accessibility and raw simplicity , instead seeing an opportunity to break with musical tradition , subvert commonplaces and challenge audiences .
While post-punk musicians often avoided or intentionally obscured conventional influences , previous musical styles did serve as touchstones for the movement , including particular brands of glam , art rock and '' -LSB- the -RSB- dark undercurrent of '60s music '' .
Many artists viewed their work in explicitly political terms .
Additionally , in some locations , the creation of post-punk music was closely linked to the development of efficacious subcultures , which played important roles in the production of art , multimedia performances , fanzines and independent labels related to the music .
Journalists also became an important element of the culture , and popular music magazines and critics became immersed in the movement .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The two sports have shared origins and are closely related but have significant differences .
-LRB- The American game has a similar `` neutral zone '' but it is only the length of the football . -RRB-
Montreal formed a team April 8 , 1872 , Toronto was formed on October 4 , 1873 , and the Ottawa FBC on September 20 , 1876 .
The CRFU reorganized into an umbrella organization forming the Canadian Rugby Union -LRB- CRU -RRB- in 1891 .
And then in 1958 the CFC left The CRFU to become The CFL .
The Burnside Rules had teams reduced to 12 men per side , introduced the Snap-Back system , required the offensive team to gain 10 yards on three downs , eliminated the Throw-In from the sidelines , allowed only six men on the line , stated that all goals by kicking were to be worth two points and the opposition was to line up 10 yards from the defenders on all kicks .
The rules were an attempt to standardize the rules throughout the country .
The Canadian field width was one rule that was not based on American rules , as the Canadian game played in wider fields and stadiums that were not as narrow as the American stadiums .
The move ushered in the modern era of Canadian professional football .
Junior football is played by many after high school before joining the university ranks .
The goalposts may be H-shaped -LRB- both posts fixed in the ground -RRB- although in the higher-calibre competitions the tuning-fork design -LRB- supported by a single curved post behind the goal line , so that each post starts 10 feet -LRB- 3 m -RRB- above the ground -RRB- is preferred .
The sides of the field are marked by white sidelines , the goal line is marked in white , and white lines are drawn laterally across the field every 5 yards -LRB- 4.6 m -RRB- from the goal line .
These lateral lines are called `` yard lines '' and often marked with the distance in yards from and an arrow pointed toward the nearest goal line .
The centre -LRB- 55-yard -RRB- line usually is marked with a `` C '' .
On fields that have a surrounding running track , such as Commonwealth Stadium , Molson Stadium , and many universities , the end zones are often cut off in the corners to accommodate the track .
In 2014 , Edmonton placed turf over the track to create full end zones .
This was particularly common among U.S.-based teams during the CFL 's American expansion , where few American stadiums were able to accommodate the much longer and noticeably wider CFL field .
Before the resumption of play in the second half , the captain that did not have first choice in the first half is given first choice .
Teams usually choose to defer , so it is typical for the team that wins the coin toss to kick to begin the first half and receive to begin the second .
This line is similar to `` no-man 's land '' ; players must stay on their respective sides of this line until the play has begun again .
The defending team must stay a yard or more back from the line of scrimmage .
If the quarterback or punter receives the ball , he may then do any of the following :
Once ten yards have been gained the offence gains a new set of three downs -LRB- rather than the four downs given in American football -RRB- .
Downs do not accumulate .
The team may , however use its third down in an attempt to advance the ball and gain a cumulative 10 yards .
There are many rules to contact in this type of football .
Depending on the penalty , the penalty yardage may be assessed from the original line of scrimmage , from where the violation occurred -LRB- for example , for a pass interference infraction -RRB- , or from where the ball ended after the play .
For particularly severe conduct , the game official -LRB- s -RRB- may eject players -LRB- ejected players may be substituted for -RRB- , or in exceptional cases , declare the game over and award victory to one side or the other .
Penalties do not affect the yard line which the offence must reach to gain a first down -LRB- unless the penalty results in a first down being awarded -RRB- ; if a penalty against the defence results in the first down yardage being attained , then the offence is awarded a first down .
If the original penalty yardage would have resulted in a first down or moving the ball past the goal line , a first down is awarded .
After the kick is made , change of possession occurs and subsequent penalties are assessed against either the spot where the ball is caught , or the runback .
If a quarter 's time expires while the ball is dead , the quarter is extended for one more scrimmage .
Note that the non-penalized team has the option to decline any penalty it considers disadvantageous , so a losing team can not indefinitely prolong a game by repeatedly committing infractions .
In the CFL , if the game is tied at the end of regulation play , then each team is given an equal number of chances to break the tie .
The other team then scrimmages the ball at the same 35-yard line and has the same opportunity to score .
After the teams have completed their possessions , if one team is ahead , then it is declared the winner ; otherwise , the two teams each get another chance to score , scrimmaging from the other 35-yard line .
The result caused uproar across Europe .
Reluctantly , by following the imperial diet , most of the states of the empire joined Austria 's cause .
Sweden , fearing Prussia 's expansionist tendencies , went to war in 1757 to protect its Baltic dominions , seeing its chance when virtually all of Europe opposed Prussia .
Spain , bound by the Pacte de Famille , intervened on behalf of France and together they launched an utterly unsuccessful invasion of Portugal in 1762 .
The Russian Empire was originally aligned with Austria , fearing Prussia 's ambition on the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth , but switched sides upon the succession of Tsar Peter III in 1762 .
Many middle and small powers in Europe , unlike in the previous wars , tried to steer clear away from the escalating conflict , even though they had interests in the conflict or with the belligerents , like Denmark-Norway .
The Native American tribes were excluded from the settlement ; a subsequent conflict , known as Pontiac 's War , was also unsuccessful in returning them to their pre-war status .
In Europe , the war began disastrously for Prussia , but a combination of good luck and successful strategy saw King Frederick the Great manage to retrieve the Prussian position and retain the status quo ante bellum .
Prussia emerged as a new European great power .
Although Austria failed to retrieve the territory of Silesia from Prussia -LRB- its original goal -RRB- its military prowess was also noted by the other powers .
The involvement of Portugal , Spain and Sweden did not return them to their former status as great powers .
Spain lost Florida but gained French Louisiana and regained control of its colonies , e.g. , Cuba and the Philippines , which had been captured by the British during the war .
France and other European powers avenged their defeat in 1778 when the American Revolutionary War broke out , with hopes of destroying Britain 's dominance once and for all .
Realizing that war was imminent , Prussia preemptively struck Saxony and quickly overran it .
The result caused uproar across Europe .
Reluctantly , by following the imperial diet , most of the states of the empire joined Austria 's cause .
The Anglo-Prussian alliance was joined by smaller German states -LRB- especially Hanover -RRB- .
The Russian Empire was originally aligned with Austria , fearing Prussia 's ambition on the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth , but switched sides upon the succession of Tsar Peter III in 1762 .
Many middle and small powers in Europe , unlike in the previous wars , tried to steer clear away from the escalating conflict , even though they had interests in the conflict or with the belligerents , like Denmark-Norway .
Like Sweden , Russia concluded a separate peace with Prussia .
Prussia emerged as a new European great power .
The involvement of Portugal , Spain and Sweden did not return them to their former status as great powers .
France was deprived of many of its colonies and had saddled itself with heavy war debts that its inefficient financial system could barely handle .
Spain lost Florida but gained French Louisiana and regained control of its colonies , e.g. , Cuba and the Philippines , which had been captured by the British during the war .
France and other European powers will soon avenge their defeat in 1778 when American Revolutionary War broke out , with hopes of destroying Britain 's dominance once and for all .
The War of the Austrian Succession had seen the belligerents aligned on a time-honoured basis .
Prussia , the leading anti-Austrian state in Germany , had been supported by France .
Prussia , having secured Silesia , had come to terms with Austria in disregard of French interests .
Even so , France had concluded a defensive alliance with Prussia in 1747 , and the maintenance of the Anglo-Austrian alignment after 1748 was deemed essential by the Duke of Newcastle , British secretary of state in the ministry of his brother Henry Pelham .
In 1756 Austria was making military preparations for war with Prussia and pursuing an alliance with Russia for this purpose .
French policy was , moreover , complicated by the existence of the le Secret du roi -- a system of private diplomacy conducted by King Louis XV .
Neither state could pose as a great power .
A Prussian scheme for compensating Frederick Augustus with Bohemia in exchange for Saxony obviously presupposed further spoliation of Austria .
Not only that , Britain would soon join the Austro-Russian alliance , but complications arose .
Years later , Kaunitz kept trying to establish France 's alliance with Austria .
Frustrated by this decision and by the Dutch Republic 's insistence on neutrality , Britain soon turned to Russia .
Unbeknownst to the other powers , King George II also made overtures to the Prussian king ; Frederick , who began fearing the Austro-Russian intentions , and was excited to welcome a rapprochement with Britain .
The carefully coded word in the agreement proved no less catalytic for the other European powers .
The results were absolute chaos .
Not only that France was so enraged , and terrified , by the sudden betrayal of its only ally .
Austria , particularly Kaunitz , used this situation to their utmost advantage .
This diplomatic revolution proved to be an important cause of the war ; although both treaties were self-defensive in nature , the actions of both coalitions made the war virtually inevitable .
British colonial militia from Virginia were then sent to drive them out .
The two nations eventually dispatched regular troops to North America to enforce their claims .
The first British action was the assault on Acadia on 16 June 1755 in the Battle of Fort Beauséjour , which was immediately followed by their expulsion of the Acadians .
For much of the eighteenth century , France approached its wars in the same way .
Given these military necessities , the French government , unsurprisingly , based its strategy overwhelmingly on the army in Europe : it would keep most of its army on the continent , hoping for victories closer to home .
The British -- by inclination as well as for practical reasons -- had tended to avoid large-scale commitments of troops on the Continent .
:64 -- 66 The British pursued a dual strategy -- naval blockade and bombardment of enemy ports , and rapid movement of troops by sea .
They harassed enemy shipping and attacked enemy colonies , frequently using colonists from nearby British colonies in the effort .
William Pitt , who entered the cabinet in 1756 , had a grand vision for the war that made it entirely different from previous wars with France .
In order to tie the French army down he subsidized his European allies .
It proved completely successful .
Pitt had a clear appreciation of the enormous value of imperial possessions , and realized how vulnerable was the French Empire .
Frederick II of Prussia had received reports of the clashes in North America and had formed an alliance with Great Britain .
He had three goals in his new war on Austria .
Thirdly , he wanted to invade Moravia from Silesia , seize the fortress at Olmütz , and advance on Vienna to force an end to the war .
The Prussian army marched in three columns .
Ferdinand of Brunswick was to close in on the town of Chemnitz .
The Duke of Brunswick-Bevern was to traverse Lusatia to close in on Bautzen .
Meanwhile , Frederick and Field Marshal Keith would make for Dresden .
Frederick occupied Dresden with little or no opposition from the Saxons .
The only significant Austrian success was the partial occupation of Silesia .
Far from being easy , Frederick 's early successes proved indecisive and very costly for Prussia 's smaller army .
This led him to remark that he did not fight the same Austrians as he had during the previous war .
The Prussian army then laid siege to the city .
Austrian Marshal Daun arrived too late to participate in the battle of Prague , but picked up 16,000 men who had escaped from the battle .
With this army he slowly moved to relieve Prague .
The Prussian army was too weak to simultaneously besiege Prague and keep Daun away , and Frederick was forced to attack prepared positions .
The resulting Battle of Kolin was a sharp defeat for Frederick , his first military defeat .
His losses further forced him to lift the siege and withdraw from Bohemia altogether .
Later that summer , the Russians invaded Memel with 75,000 troops .
Memel had one of the strongest fortresses in Prussia .
However , it was not yet able to take Königsberg and retreated soon afterward .
Still , it was a new threat to Prussia .
His defeats on the battlefield brought still more opportunist nations into the war .
Sweden declared war on Prussia and invaded Pomerania with 17,000 men .
However , in November and December of 1757 , the whole situation in Germany was reversed .
George II of Great Britain , on the advice of his British ministers , revoked the Convention of Klosterzeven , and Hanover reentered the war .
The British had suffered further defeats in North America , particularly at Fort William Henry .
At home , however , stability had been established .
Since 1756 , successive governments led by Newcastle and Pitt had fallen .
In August 1757 , the two men agreed to a political partnership and formed a coalition government that gave new , firmer direction to the war effort .
The new strategy emphasised both Newcastle 's commitment to British involvement on the Continent , particularly in defence of Germany , and William Pitt 's determination to use naval power to seize French colonies around the globe .
This `` dual strategy '' would dominate British policy for the next five years .
Subsequently , Hadik was promoted to the rank of Marshal in the Austrian army .
It marked the end of his final attempt to launch a major invasion of Austrian territory .
East Prussia had been occupied by Russian forces over the winter and would remain under their control until 1762 , although Frederick did not see the Russians as an immediate threat and instead entertained hopes of first fighting a decisive battle against Austria that would knock them out of the war .
At the same time , the Russians failed in an attempt to take Kolberg in Pomerania -LRB- now Kołobrzeg , Poland -RRB- from the Prussians .
The disaster resulted partly from his misjudgment of the Russians , who had already demonstrated their strength at Zorndorf and at Gross-Jägersdorf -LRB- now Motornoye , Russia -RRB- , and partly from good cooperation between the Russian and Austrian forces .
However , two sea defeats prevented this .
1762 brought two new countries into the war .
Spain , aided by the French , launched an invasion of Portugal and succeeded in capturing Almeida .
The arrival of British reinforcements stalled a further Spanish advance , and the Battle of Valencia de Alcántara saw British-Portuguese forces overrun a major Spanish supply base .
The invaders were stopped on the heights in front of Abrantes -LRB- called the pass to Lisbon -RRB- where the Anglo-Portuguese were entrenched .
On the eastern front , progress was very slow .
One of them , led by general Platen in September resulted in the loss of 2,000 Russians , mostly captured , and the destruction of 5,000 wagons .
Deprived of men , the Prussians had to resort to this new sort of warfare , raiding , to delay the advance of their enemies .
Nonetheless , at the end of the year , they suffered two critical setbacks .
The loss of Kolberg cost Prussia its last port on the Baltic Sea .
In Britain , it was speculated that a total Prussian collapse was now imminent .
Then on 5 January 1762 the Russian Empress Elizabeth died .
Frederick was then able to muster a larger army of 120,000 men and concentrate it against Austria .
He drove them from much of Saxony , while his brother Henry won a victory in Silesia in the Battle of Freiberg -LRB- 29 October 1762 -RRB- .
At the same time , his Brunswick allies captured the key town of Göttingen and compounded this by taking Cassel .
By 1763 , the war in Central Europe was essentially a stalemate .
Frederick had retaken most of Silesia and Saxony but not the latter 's capital , Dresden .
His manpower had dramatically decreased , and he had lost so many effective officers and generals that a new offensive was perhaps impossible .
Indeed , after having effectively sustained a long war , its administration was in disarray .
By that time , it still held Dresden , the southeastern parts of Saxony , the county of Glatz , and southern Silesia , but the prospect of victory was dim without Russian support .
An army was assembled under the command of Charles Spencer , 3rd Duke of Marlborough ; he was aided by Lord George Sackville .
The naval squadron and transports for the expedition were commanded by Richard Howe .
The force then re-embarked under threat of the arrival of French relief forces .
The troops were reembarked and moved to the Bay of St. Lunaire in Brittany where , on 3 September , they were landed to operate against St. Malo ; however , this action proved impractical .
They could not be saved ; 750 , including Dury , were killed and the rest captured .
However , expansion into the hinterlands of both cities met with stiff resistance .
In the Philippines , the British were confined to Manila until their agreed upon withdrawal at the war 's end .
During the war , the Seven Nations of Canada were allied with the French .
The Iroquois had encroached on Algonquin territory and pushed the Algonquins west beyond Lake Michigan .
Throughout New England , New York , and the North-west Native American tribes formed differing alliances with the major belligerents .
In 1756 and 1757 the French captured forts Oswego and William Henry from the British .
The French forces retreated to Montreal , where on 8 September they surrendered to overwhelming British numerical superiority .
This was the final battle of the war in North America , and it forced the French to surrender to Lieutenant Colonel William Amherst .
The victorious British now controlled all of eastern North America .
France also returned Minorca to the British .
Negotiations had started there on December 31 , 1762 .
Frederick , who had considered ceding East Prussia to Russia if Peter III helped him secure Saxony , finally insisted on excluding Russia -LRB- in fact , no longer a belligerent -RRB- from the negotiations .
At the same time , he refused to evacuate Saxony until its elector had renounced any claim to reparation .
The only concession that Prussia made to Austria was to consent to the election of Archduke Joseph as Holy Roman emperor .
More significantly , its military performance proved far better than during the War of the Austrian Succession and seemed to vindicate Maria Theresa 's administrative and military reforms .
Not only that , Austria now found herself estranged with the new developments within the empire itself .
Bavaria 's growing power and independence was also apparent as she had more voices on the path that its army should have taken , and managed to slip out of the war at its own will .
This power dynamic is important to the future and the latter conflicts of the empire .
Prussia emerged from the war as a great power whose importance could no longer be challenged .
During his lifetime , Feynman became one of the best-known scientists in the world .
and What Do You Care What Other People Think ?
and books written about him , such as Tuva or Bust !
He also stated `` To select , for approbation the peculiar elements that come from some supposedly Jewish heredity is to open the door to all kinds of nonsense on racial theory , '' and adding '' ... at thirteen I was not only converted to other religious views , but I also stopped believing that the Jewish people are in any way ` the chosen people ' . ''
Four years later , Richard gained a sister , Joan , and the family moved to Far Rockaway , Queens .
Their mother thought that women did not have the cranial capacity to comprehend such things .
Upon starting high school , Feynman was quickly promoted into a higher math class .
In high school he was developing the mathematical intuition behind his Taylor series of mathematical operators .
Attendees at Feynman 's first seminar included Albert Einstein , Wolfgang Pauli , and John von Neumann .
Feynman said he was persuaded to join this effort to build it before Nazi Germany developed their own bomb .
In Feynman 's own words , `` There was n't anything to do there . ''
Bored , he indulged his curiosity by learning to pick the combination locks on cabinets and desks used to secure papers .
Feynman played many jokes on colleagues .
In one case he found the combination to a locked filing cabinet by trying the numbers he thought a physicist would use -LRB- it proved to be 27 -- 18 -- 28 after the base of natural logarithms , e = 2.71828 ... -RRB- , and found that the three filing cabinets where a colleague kept a set of atomic bomb research notes all had the same combination .
In the same publication , Feynman also talks about his worries in the atomic bomb age , feeling for some considerable time that there was a high risk that the bomb would be used again soon , so that it was pointless to build for the future .
His appointment was not extended when he did not commit to return .
In a talk given several years later at UW , Feynman quipped , `` It 's great to be back at the only university that ever had the good sense to fire me . ''
One of these was analyzing the physics of a twirling , nutating dish as it is moving through the air .
He gained a reputation for taking great care when giving explanations to his students and for making it a moral duty to make the topic accessible .
Feynman gained great pleasure from coming up with such a `` freshman-level '' explanation , for example , of the connection between spin and statistics .
What he said was that groups of particles with spin 1/2 `` repel '' , whereas groups with integer spin `` clump '' .
This was a brilliantly simplified way of demonstrating how Fermi -- Dirac statistics and Bose -- Einstein statistics evolved as a consequence of studying how fermions and bosons behave under a rotation of 360 ° .
This was also a question he pondered in his more advanced lectures , and to which he demonstrated the solution in the 1986 Dirac memorial lecture .
Feynman 's mental picture for these diagrams started with the hard sphere approximation , and the interactions could be thought of as collisions at first .
It was not until decades later that physicists thought of analyzing the nodes of the Feynman diagrams more closely .
From his diagrams of a small number of particles interacting in spacetime , Feynman could then model all of physics in terms of the spins of those particles and the range of coupling of the fundamental forces .
Feynman attempted an explanation of the strong interactions governing nucleons scattering called the parton model .
The relationship between the two models was murky ; Gell-Mann referred to Feynman 's partons derisively as `` put-ons '' .
It was natural to identify these with quarks , but Feynman 's parton model attempted to interpret the experimental data in a way that did not introduce additional hypotheses .
For example , the data showed that some 45 % of the energy momentum was carried by electrically-neutral particles in the nucleon .
These electrically-neutral particles are now seen to be the gluons that carry the forces between the quarks and carry also the three-valued color quantum number that solves the Omega-minus problem .
At this time in the early 1960s , Feynman exhausted himself by working on multiple major projects at the same time , including a request , while at Caltech , to `` spruce up '' the teaching of undergraduates .
He wanted a picture of a drumhead sprinkled with powder to show the modes of vibration at the beginning of the book .
The Feynman Lectures on Physics occupied two physicists , Robert B. Leighton and Matthew Sands , as part-time co-authors for several years .
Even though the books were not adopted by most universities as textbooks , they continue to sell well because they provide a deep understanding of physics .
So you have to be very careful about that .
After you 've not fooled yourself , it 's easy not to fool other scientists .
You just have to be honest in a conventional way after that . ''
Shortly before his death , Feynman criticized string theory in an interview : `` I do n't like that they 're not calculating anything , '' he said .
These words have since been much-quoted by opponents of the string-theoretic direction for particle physics .
Feynman 's account reveals a disconnect between NASA 's engineers and executives that was far more striking than he expected .
He warned in his appendix to the commission 's report -LRB- which was included only after he threatened not to sign the report -RRB- , `` For a successful technology , reality must take precedence over public relations , for nature can not be fooled . ''
In 1946 , Feynman wrote a letter to her , expressing his deep love and heartbreak , that he kept for the rest of his life .
-LRB- `` Please excuse my not mailing this , '' the letter concluded , `` but I do n't know your new address . '' -RRB-
He was surprised to learn that the same teaching devices were not useful with Michelle .
Out of his enthusiastic interest in reaching Tuva came the phrase `` Tuva or Bust '' -LRB- also the title of a book about his efforts to get there -RRB- , which was tossed about frequently amongst his circle of friends in hope that they , one day , could see it firsthand .
Responding to Hubert Humphrey 's congratulation for his Nobel Prize , Feynman admitted to a long admiration for the then vice president .
Somewhat embarrassed by his actions , he largely sidestepped the issue when dictating his anecdotes ; he mentions it in passing in the `` O Americano , Outra Vez '' section , while the `` Altered States '' chapter in Surely You 're Joking , Mr. Feynman !
describes only marijuana and ketamine experiences at John Lilly 's famed sensory deprivation tanks , as a way of studying consciousness .
, he gives advice on the best way to pick up a girl in a hostess bar .
While the bar lost the court case , it was allowed to remain open as a similar case was pending appeal .
Gell-Mann says no , Dick 's methods are not the same as the methods used here .
The student asks , well , what are Feynman 's methods ?
Gell-Mann leans coyly against the blackboard and says : Dick 's method is this .
You write down the problem .
You think very hard .
-LRB- He shuts his eyes and presses his knuckles parodically to his forehead . -RRB-
The work has endured and is useful to this day .
Ruling by decree , he implemented measures to remove what he viewed as foreign imperialist influence from Libya , and strengthened ties to Arab nationalist governments .
Rejecting his earlier ideological commitments , from 1999 Gaddafi encouraged economic privatization and sought rapprochement with Western nations , also embracing Pan-Africanism and helping to establish the African Union .
NATO intervened militarily on the side of the NTC , bringing about the government 's downfall .
Although Britain and France intended on dividing the nation between their empires , the General Assembly of the United Nations -LRB- UN -RRB- declared that the country be granted political independence .
Gaddafi organized demonstrations and distributed posters criticizing the monarchy .
During this they broke windows of a local hotel accused of serving alcohol .
Catching the authorities ' attention , they expelled his family from Sabha .
Such reports were ignored and Gaddafi quickly progressed through the course .
On 1 September , they occupied airports , police depots , radio stations and government offices in Tripoli and Benghazi .
The coup completed , the RCC proceeded with their intentions of consolidating the revolutionary government and modernizing the country .
For Gaddafi , this was an important step towards socialism .
Long-standing administrative boundaries were re-drawn , crossing tribal boundaries , while pro-revolutionary modernizers replaced traditional leaders , but the communities they served often rejected them .
The ASU recognized the RCC as its `` Supreme Leading Authority '' , and was designed to further revolutionary enthusiasm throughout the country .
In doing so , they greatly expanded the public sector , providing employment for thousands .
Gaddafi propounded Pan-Arab ideas , proclaiming the need for a single Arab state stretching across North Africa and the Middle East .
Such attempts to form a working relationship with the RCC failed ; Gaddafi was determined to reassert national sovereignty and expunge what he described as foreign colonial and imperialist influences .
His administration insisted that the U.S. and U.K. remove their military bases from Libya , with Gaddafi proclaiming that `` the armed forces which rose to express the people 's revolution -LSB- will not -RSB- tolerate living in their shacks while the bases of imperialism exist in Libyan territory . ''
The day became a national holiday .
Compromising , Malta 's government continued allowing NATO use of the island , but only on the condition that they would not use it for launching attacks on Arab territory .
Instead he supported militia like the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine , Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine -- General Command , the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine , As-Sa ` iqa , the Palestinian Popular Struggle Front , and the Abu Nidal Organization .
Though many of these groups were labelled `` terrorists '' by critics of their activities , Gaddafi rejected such a characterisation , instead considering them revolutionaries engaged in liberation struggles .
The fourth point announced that the population must form People 's Committees and be armed to defend the revolution , while the fifth proclaimed the beginning of a cultural revolution to expunge Libya of `` poisonous '' foreign influences .
Above these remained Gaddafi and the RCC , who remained responsible for all major decisions .
While the first two volumes advocated radical reform , the third adopted a socially conservative stance , proclaiming that while men and women were equal , they were biologically designed for different roles in life .
During the years that followed , Gaddafists adopted quotes from The Green Book , such as `` Representation is Fraud '' , as slogans .
Meanwhile , in September 1975 , Gaddafi implemented further measures to increase popular mobilization , introducing objectives to improve the relationship between the Councils and the ASU .
The RCC responded with mass arrests , and introduced compulsory national service for young people .
Dissent also arose from conservative clerics and the Muslim Brotherhood , who were persecuted as anti-revolutionary .
Following Anwar Sadat 's ascension to the Egyptian presidency , Libya 's relations with Egypt deteriorated .
Gaddafi ordered an Egyptian submarine to target the ship , but Sadat cancelled the order , fearing a military escalation .
Offering financial incentives , he successfully convinced 8 African states to break off diplomatic relations with Israel in 1973 .
Intent on propagating Islam , in 1973 Gaddafi founded the Islamic Call Society , which had opened 132 centres across Africa within a decade .
In 1973 he converted Gabonese President Omar Bongo , an action which he repeated three years later with Jean-Bédel Bokassa , president of the Central African Republic .
Retaliating , Gaddafi sponsored anti-government militants in Tunisia into the 1980s .
Seeking to diversify Libya 's economy , Gaddafi 's government began purchasing shares in major European corporations like Fiat as well as buying real estate in Malta and Italy , which would become a valuable source of income during the 1980s oil slump .
On 2 March 1977 the General People 's Congress adopted the `` Declaration of the Establishment of the People 's Authority '' at Gaddafi 's behest .
In principle , the People 's Congresses were Libya 's highest authority , with major decisions proposed by government officials or with Gaddafi himself requiring the consent of the People 's Congresses .
Gaddafi proclaimed that the People 's Congresses provided for Libya 's every political need , rendering other political organizations unnecessary ; all non-authorized groups , including political parties , professional associations , independent trade unions and women 's groups , were banned .
The conflict lasted one week before both sides agreed to sign a peace treaty that was brokered by several Arab states .
He continued exerting considerable influence over Libya , with many critics insisting that the structure of Libya 's direct democracy gave him `` the freedom to manipulate outcomes '' .
Libya began to turn towards socialism .
In March 1978 , the government issued guidelines for housing redistribution , attempting to ensure the population that every adult Libyan owned his own home and that nobody was enslaved to paying their rent .
Most families were banned from owning more than one house , while former rental properties were seized and sold to the tenants at a heavily subsidized price .
Responsible for perpetuating revolutionary fervour , they performed ideological surveillance , later adopting a significant security role , making arrests and putting people on trial according to the `` law of the revolution '' -LRB- qanun al-thawra -RRB- .
With no legal code or safeguards , the administration of revolutionary justice was largely arbitrary and resulted in widespread abuses and the suppression of civil liberties : the `` Green Terror . ''
The Jamahiriya 's radical direction earned the government many enemies .
Many who had seen their wealth and property confiscated turned against the administration , and a number of western-funded opposition groups were founded by exiles .
Following Gaddafi 's command to kill these `` stray dogs '' , under Colonel Younis Bilgasim 's leadership , the Revolutionary Committees set up overseas branches to suppress counter-revolutionary activity , assassinating various dissidents .
Although nearby nations like Syria also used hit squads , Gaddafi was unusual in publicly bragging about his administration 's use of them ; in June 1980 , he ordered all dissidents to return home or be `` liquidated wherever you are . ''
The following year , Libyan fighters began intercepting U.S. fighter jets flying over the Mediterranean , signalling the collapse of relations between the two countries .
Libyan relations with Lebanon and Shi'ite communities across the world also deteriorated due to the August 1978 disappearance of imam Musa al-Sadr when visiting Libya ; the Lebanese accused Gaddafi of having him killed or imprisoned , a charge he denied .
Relations with Syria improved , as Gaddafi and Syrian President Hafez al-Assad shared an enmity with Israel and Egypt 's Sadat .
The mission failed ; 400 Libyans were killed and they were forced to retreat .
Gaddafi later came to regret his alliance with Amin , openly criticising him .
Military spending increased , while other administrative budgets were cut back .
The civil war resumed , and so Libya sent troops back in , clashing with French forces who supported the southern Chadian forces .
Many African nations had tired of Libya 's policies of interference in foreign affairs ; by 1980 , nine African states had cut off diplomatic relations with Libya , while in 1982 the OAU cancelled its scheduled conference in Tripoli in order to prevent Gaddafi gaining chairmanship .
Relations remained strained , particularly due to Morocco 's friendly relations with the U.S. and Israel ; in August 1986 , Hassan abolished the union .
Domestic threats continued to plague Gaddafi ; in May 1984 , his Bab al-Azizia home was unsuccessfully attacked by a joint NFSL -- Muslim Brotherhood militia , and in the aftermath 5000 dissidents were arrested .
The Soviets were nevertheless cautious of Gaddafi , seeing him as an unpredictable extremist .
Closing down Libya 's embassy in Washington , D.C. , Reagan advised U.S. companies operating in the country to reduce the number of American personnel stationed there .
In March 1982 , the U.S. implemented an embargo of Libyan oil , and in January 1986 ordered all U.S. companies to cease operating in the country , although several hundred workers remained .
In Spring 1986 , the U.S. Navy again began performing exercises in the Gulf of Sirte ; the Libyan military retaliated , but failed as the U.S. sank several Libyan ships .
Reagan was supported by the U.K. but opposed by other European allies , who argued that it would contravene international law .
One of the targets had been Gaddafi 's home .
In the immediate aftermath , Gaddafi retreated to the desert to meditate , while there were sporadic clashes between Gaddafists and army officers who wanted to overthrow the government .
Although the U.S. was condemned internationally , Reagan received a popularity boost at home .
Publicly lambasting U.S. imperialism , Gaddafi 's reputation as an anti-imperialist was strengthened both domestically and across the Arab world , and in June 1986 , he ordered the names of the month to be changed in Libya .
The late 1980s saw a series of liberalising economic reforms within Libya designed to cope with the decline in oil revenues .
In March , hundreds of political prisoners were freed , with Gaddafi falsely claiming that there were no further political prisoners in Libya .
Many of the measures suggested in the charter would be implemented the following year , although others remained inactive .
From 1994 through to 1997 , the government initiated cleansing committees to root out corruption , particularly in the economic sector .
The period also saw a growth in domestic Islamist opposition , formulated into groups like the Muslim Brotherhood and the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group .
A number of assassination attempts against Gaddafi were foiled , and in turn , 1989 saw the security forces raid mosques believed to be centres of counter-revolutionary preaching .
The Revolutionary Committees experienced a resurgence to combat these Islamists .
Further problems arose with the west when in January 1989 , two Libyan warplanes were shot down by the U.S. off the Libyan coast .
Many African states opposed the UN sanctions , with Mandela criticising them on a visit to Gaddafi in October 1997 , when he praised Libya for its work in fighting apartheid and awarded Gaddafi the Order of Good Hope .
They would only be suspended in 1998 when Libya agreed to allow the extradition of the suspects to the Scottish Court in the Netherlands , in a process overseen by Mandela .
As the 20th century came to a close , Gaddafi increasingly rejected Arab nationalism , frustrated by the failure of his Pan-Arab ideals ; instead he turned to Pan-Africanism , emphasising Libya 's African identity .
At the third AU summit , held in Libya in July 2005 , he called for a greater level of integration , advocating a single AU passport , a common defence system and a single currency , utilising the slogan : `` The United States of Africa is the hope . ''
On 1 February 2009 , his `` coronation ceremony '' was held in Addis Ababa , Ethiopia , coinciding with Gaddafi 's election as AU chairman for a year .
The era saw Libya 's return to the international arena .
In 1999 , Libya began secret talks with the British government to normalise relations .
In 2001 , Gaddafi condemned the September 11 attacks on the U.S. by al-Qaeda , expressing sympathy with the victims and calling for Libyan involvement in the War on Terror against militant Islamism .
His government continued suppressing domestic Islamism , at the same time as Gaddafi called for the wider application of sharia law .
Removed from the U.S. list of state sponsors of terrorism in 2006 , Gaddafi nevertheless continued his anti-western rhetoric , and at the Second Africa-South America Summit in Venezuela in September 2009 , joined Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez in calling for an `` anti-imperialist '' front across Africa and Latin America .
Gaddafi proposed the establishment of a South Atlantic Treaty Organization to rival NATO .
That month he also addressed the United Nations General Assembly in New York for the first time , using it to condemn `` western aggression '' .
In Spring 2010 , Gaddafi proclaimed jihad against Switzerland after Swiss police accused two of his family members of criminal activity in the country , resulting in the breakdown of bilateral relations .
Libya 's economy witnessed increasing privatization ; although rejecting the socialist policies of nationalized industry advocated in The Green Book , government figures asserted that they were forging `` people 's socialism '' rather than capitalism .
Sectors of Libya 's population reacted against these reforms with public demonstrations , and in March 2006 , revolutionary hard-liners took control of the GPC cabinet ; although scaling back the pace of the changes , they did not halt them .
While there was no accompanying political liberalization , with Gaddafi retaining predominant control , in March 2010 , the government devolved further powers to the municipal councils .
He led a group who proposed the drafting of the new constitution , although it was never adopted , and in October 2009 was appointed to head the PSLC .
Involved in encouraging tourism , Saif founded several privately run media channels in 2008 , but after criticising the government they were nationalised in 2009 .
In October 2010 , Gaddafi apologized to African leaders on behalf of Arab nations for their involvement in the African slave trade .
He suggested that Tunisia 's people would be satisfied if Ben Ali introduced a Jamahiriyah system there .
Fearing domestic protest , Libya 's government implemented preventative measures , reducing food prices , purging the army leadership of potential defectors and releasing several Islamist prisoners .
Shocked at the government 's response , a number of senior politicians resigned or defected to the protesters ' side .
In the conflict 's early months it appeared that Gaddafi 's government -- with its greater firepower -- would be victorious .
Both sides disregarded the laws of war , committing human rights abuses , including arbitrary arrests , torture , extrajudicial executions and revenge attacks .
A week after the implementation of the no-fly zone , NATO announced that it would be enforced .
Western officials remained divided over whether Gaddafi was a legitimate military target under the U.N. Security Council resolution .
Libyan officials rejected the ICC , claiming that it had `` no legitimacy whatsoever '' and highlighting that `` all of its activities are directed at African leaders '' .
That month , Amnesty International published their findings , in which they asserted that many of the accusations of mass human rights abuses made against Gaddafist forces lacked credible evidence , and were instead fabrications of the rebel forces which had been readily adopted by the western media .
Amnesty International did however still accuse Gaddafi forces of numerous war crimes .
Gaddafi responded to the announcement with a speech on Libyan national television , in which he called on supporters to `` Trample on those recognitions , trample on them under your feet ... They are worthless '' .
Surrounding himself with bodyguards , he continually moved residences to escape NTC shelling , devoting his days to prayer and reading the Qur ` an .
The convoy scattered , and Gaddafi and those closest to him fled to a nearby villa , which was shelled by rebel militia from Misrata .
A Misratan militia took Gaddafi prisoner , beating him , causing serious injuries ; the events were filmed on a mobile phone .
A video appears to picture Gaddafi being poked or stabbed in the rear end `` with some kind of stick or knife '' or possibly a bayonet .
Pulled onto the front of a pick-up truck , he fell off as it drove away .
Official NTC accounts claimed that Gaddafi was caught in a cross-fire and died from his bullet wounds .
In response to international calls , on 24 October Jibril announced that a commission would investigate Gaddafi 's death .
His Arab nationalist views led him to believe that there needed to be unity across the Arab world , combining the Arab nation under a single nation-state .
Gaddafi saw his socialist Jamahiriyah as a model for the Arab , Islamic , and non-aligned worlds to follow .
He was driven by a sense of `` divine mission '' , believing himself a conduit of Allah 's will , and thought that he must achieve his goals `` no matter what the cost '' .
He desired unity across the Islamic world , and encouraged the propagation of the faith elsewhere .
He nevertheless clashed with conservative Libyan clerics as to his interpretation of Islam .
Many criticised his attempts to encourage women to enter traditionally male-only sectors of society , such as the armed forces .
Gaddafi was keen to improve women 's status , though saw the sexes as `` separate but equal '' and therefore felt women should usually remain in traditional roles .
A fundamental part of Gaddafi 's ideology was anti-Zionism .
He believed that the state of Israel should not exist , and that any Arab compromise with the Israeli government was a betrayal of the Arab people .
From the late 1990s onward , his view seemed to become more moderate .
Two years later he argued that a single-state solution would `` move beyond old conflicts and look to a unified future based on shared culture and respect . ''
She was told by Gaddafi 's father that even as a child he had been `` always serious , even taciturn '' , a trait he also exhibited in adulthood .
In the 1970s and 1980s there were reports of his making sexual advances toward female reporters and members of his entourage .
After the civil war , more serious charges came to light .
In 2011 Amnesty International questioned this and other claims used to justify NATO 's war in Libya .
In the 1980s , his lifestyle was considered modest in comparison to those of many other Arab leaders .
Gaddafi allegedly worked for years with Swiss banks to launder international banking transactions .
Operated by Tripoli-based Afriqiyah Airways and decorated externally in their colours , it had various luxuries including a jacuzzi .
Gaddafi married his first wife , Fatiha al-Nuri , in 1969 .
They met in 1969 , following his ascension to power , when he was hospitalized with appendicitis ; he claimed that it was love at first sight .
The couple remained married until his death .
He also adopted two children , Hanna Gaddafi and Milad Gaddafi .
Throughout Libya , crowds of supporters would turn up to public events at which he appeared ; described as `` spontaneous demonstrations '' by the government , there are recorded instances of groups being coerced or paid to attend .
He was typically late to public events , and would sometimes not show up at all .
Gaddafi was notably confrontational in his approach to foreign powers , and generally shunned western ambassadors and diplomats , believing them to be spies .
However , according to psychologist Seham Sergewa , after the civil war several of the guards told her they had been pressured into joining and raped by Gaddafi and senior officials .
Gaddafi remained a controversial and divisive figure on the world stage throughout his life and after death .
Supporters praised Gaddafi 's administration for the creation of an almost classless society through domestic reform .
They stress the regime 's achievements in combating homelessness and ensuring access to food and safe drinking water .
Gaddafi claimed that his Jamahiriya was a `` concrete utopia '' , and that he had been appointed by `` popular assent '' , with some Islamic supporters believing that he exhibited barakah .
Critics labelled Gaddafi `` despotic , cruel , arrogant , vain and stupid '' , with western governments and press presenting him as the `` vicious dictator of an oppressed people '' .
According to critics , the Libyan people lived in a climate of fear under Gaddafi 's administration , due to his government 's pervasive surveillance of civilians .
Gaddafi 's Libya was typically described by western commentators as `` a police state '' .
His government 's treatment of non-Arab Libyans has also came in for criticism from human rights activists , with native Berbers , Italians , Jews , refugees , and foreign workers all facing persecution in Gaddafist Libya .
According to journalist Annick Cojean and psychologist Seham Sergewa , Gaddafi and senior officials raped and imprisoned hundreds or thousands of young women and reportedly raped several of his female bodyguards .
International reactions to Gaddafi 's death were divided .
The Daily Times of Nigeria stated that while undeniably a dictator , Gaddafi was the most benevolent in a region that only knew dictatorship , and that he was `` a great man that looked out for his people and made them the envy of all of Africa . ''
The Nigerian newspaper Leadership reported that while many Libyans and Africans would mourn Gaddafi , this would be ignored by western media and that as such it would take 50 years before historians decided whether he was `` martyr or villain . ''
Following his defeat in the civil war , Gaddafi 's system of governance was dismantled and replaced under the interim government of the NTC , who legalised trade unions and freedom of the press .
In July 2012 , elections were held to form a new General National Congress -LRB- GNC -RRB- , who officially took over governance from the NTC in August .
Even though Turkish Cypriots made up only 18 % of the population , the partition of Cyprus and creation of a Turkish state in the north became a policy of Turkish Cypriot leaders and Turkey in the 1950s .
Turkish leaders for a period advocated the annexation of Cyprus to Turkey as Cyprus was considered an `` extension of Anatolia '' by them ; while since the 19th century , the majority Greek Cypriot population and its Orthodox church had been pursuing union with Greece , which became a Greek national policy in the 1950s .
On 15 July 1974 , a coup d'état was staged by Greek Cypriot nationalists and elements of the Greek military junta in an attempt at enosis , the incorporation of Cyprus into Greece .
This action precipitated the Turkish invasion of Cyprus , which led to the capture of the present-day territory of Northern Cyprus the following month , after a ceasefire collapsed , and the displacement of over 150,000 Greek Cypriots and 50,000 Turkish Cypriots .
A separate Turkish Cypriot state in the north was established in 1983 .
These events and the resulting political situation are matters of a continuing dispute .
The occupation is viewed as illegal under international law , amounting to illegal occupation of EU territory since Cyprus became a member of the European Union .
A major wave of Greek settlement is believed to have taken place following the Bronze Age collapse of Mycenaean Greece from 1100 to 1050 BC , with the island 's predominantly Greek character dating from this period .
Beginning in the 8th century BC Phoenician colonies were founded on the south coast of Cyprus , near present-day Larnaca and Salamis .
The Venetians fortified Nicosia by building the Venetian Walls , and used it as an important commercial hub .
The previous Latin elite were destroyed and the first significant demographic change since antiquity took place with the formation of a Muslim community .
This new community also included banished Anatolian tribes , `` undesirable '' persons and members of various `` troublesome '' Muslim sects , as well as a number of new converts on the island .
The ratio of Muslims to Christians fluctuated throughout the period of Ottoman domination .
The Muslim population included numerous crypto-Christians , including the Linobambaki , a crypto-Catholic community that arose due to religious persecution of the Catholic community by the Ottoman authorities ; this community would assimilate into the Turkish Cypriot community during British rule .
Reaction to Ottoman misrule led to uprisings by both Greek and Turkish Cypriots , although none were successful .
After centuries of neglect by the Turks , the unrelenting poverty of most of the people , and the ever-present tax collectors fuelled Greek nationalism , and by the 20th century idea of enosis , or union , with newly independent Greece was firmly rooted among Greek Cypriots .
The Greek Cypriot population , meanwhile , had become hopeful that the British administration would lead to enosis .
The Greek Cypriots viewed the island as historically Greek and believed that union with Greece was a natural right .
However , they were alarmed by the Greek Cypriot calls for enosis as they saw the union of Crete with Greece , which led to the exodus of Cretan Turks , as a precedent to be avoided , and they took a pro-partition stance in response to the militant activity of EOKA .
Meanwhile , in the 1950s , Turkish leader Menderes considered Cyprus an `` extension of Anatolia '' , rejected the partition of Cyprus along ethnic lines and favoured the annexation of the whole island to Turkey .
Nationalistic slogans centred on the idea that `` Cyprus is Turkish '' and the ruling party declared Cyprus to be a part of the Turkish homeland that was vital to its security .
Although after the Zürich and London conferences Turkey seemed to accept the existence of the Cypriot state and to distance itself from its policy of favouring the partition of the island , the goal of the Turkish and Turkish Cypriot leaders remained that of creating an independent Turkish state in the northern part of the island .
Restricted autonomy under a constitution was proposed by the British administration but eventually rejected .
At the same time the Turkish Resistance Organisation -LRB- TMT -RRB- , calling for Taksim , or partition , was established by the Turkish Cypriots as a counterweight .
Woodhouse , a British official in Cyprus , revealed that then British Foreign Secretary Harold Macmillan `` urged the Britons in Cyprus to stir up the Turks in order to neutralise Greek agitation '' .
British officials also tolerated the creation of the Turkish underground organisation T.M.T. .
The Secretary of State for the Colonies in a letter dated 15 July 1958 had advised the Governor of Cyprus not to act against T.M.T despite its illegal actions so as not to harm British relations with the Turkish government .
The crisis resulted in the end of the Turkish Cypriot involvement in the administration and their claiming that it had lost its legitimacy ; the nature of this event is still controversial .
Turkish Cypriots started living in enclaves ; the republic 's structure was changed unilaterally by Makarios and Nicosia was divided by the Green Line , with the deployment of UNFICYP troops .
The junta in Athens , and then the Sampson regime in Cyprus fell from power .
In Nicosia , Glafkos Clerides assumed the presidency and constitutional order was restored , removing the pretext for the Turkish invasion .
There are 1,534 Greek Cypriots and 502 Turkish Cypriots missing as a result of the fighting .
The events of the summer of 1974 dominate the politics on the island , as well as Greco-Turkish relations .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The Turkish invasion , followed by occupation and the declaration of independence of the TRNC have been condemned by United Nations resolutions , which are reaffirmed by the Security Council every year .
The plan was put to a referendum in both Northern Cyprus and the Republic of Cyprus .
Cyprus was accepted into the EU as a whole , although the EU legislation is suspended in the territory occupied by Turkey -LRB- TRNC -RRB- , until a final settlement of the Cyprus problem .
The Troodos Mountains cover most of the southern and western portions of the island and account for roughly half its area .
The narrow Kyrenia Range , extending along the northern coastline , occupies substantially less area , and elevations are lower , reaching a maximum of 1,024 m -LRB- 3,360 ft -RRB- .
The island lies within the Anatolian Plate .
During March , Limassol has average temperatures of 19 -- 20 °C -LRB- 66 -- 68 °F -RRB- during the day and 9 -- 11 °C -LRB- 48 -- 52 °F -RRB- at night , in other coastal locations in Cyprus is generally 17 -- 19 °C -LRB- 63 -- 66 °F -RRB- during the day and 8 -- 10 °C -LRB- 46 -- 50 °F -RRB- at night .
Large fluctuations in temperature are rare .
Water desalination plants are gradually being constructed to deal with recent years of prolonged drought .
Efforts have also been made to raise public awareness of the situation and to encourage domestic water users to take more responsibility for the conservation of this increasingly scarce commodity .
Since 1965 , following clashes between the two communities , the Turkish Cypriot seats in the House remain vacant .
In 1985 the TRNC adopted a constitution and held its first elections .
The political environment is dominated by the communist AKEL , the liberal conservative Democratic Rally , the centrist Democratic Party , the social-democratic EDEK and the centrist EURO.KO .
Due to his involvement in the 2012 -- 13 Cypriot financial crisis , Christofias did not run for re-election in 2013 .
As a result , Anastasiades was sworn in on and has been President since 28 February 2013 .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Over the preceding ten years , civilian transfer by Turkey had `` reached new heights '' , in the words of one US ambassador .
-LSB- f -RSB- Other violations of the Geneva and the Hague Conventions -- both ratified by Turkey -- amount to what archaeologist Sophocles Hadjisavvas called `` the organized destruction of Greek and Christian heritage in the north '' .
These violations include looting of cultural treasures , deliberate destruction of churches , neglect of works of art , and altering the names of important historical sites , which was condemned by the International Council on Monuments and Sites .
Hadjisavvas has asserted that these actions are motivated by a Turkish policy of erasing the Greek presence in Northern Cyprus within a framework of ethnic cleansing , as well as by greed and profit-seeking on the part of the individuals involved .
The air force includes the 449th Helicopter Gunship Squadron -LRB- 449 ΜΑΕ -RRB- -- operating Aérospatiale SA-342L and Bell 206 and the 450th Helicopter Gunship Squadron -LRB- 450 ME/P -RRB- -- operating Mi-35P helicopters and the Britten-Norman BN-2B and Pilatus PC-9 fixed-wing aircraft .
In the early 21st century the Cypriot economy has diversified and become prosperous .
Insured deposits of $ 100,000 or less were not affected .
Economic policy of the Cyprus government has focused on meeting the criteria for admission to the European Union .
In 1996 the Turkish-occupied area had a similar ratio of paved to unpaved , with approximately 1,370 km -LRB- 850 mi -RRB- of paved road and 980 km -LRB- 610 mi -RRB- unpaved .
A series of motorways runs along the coast from Paphos east to Ayia Napa , with two motorways running inland to Nicosia , one from Limassol and one from Larnaca .
Due to the inter-communal ethnic tensions between 1963 and 1974 , an island-wide census was regarded as impossible .
Nevertheless , the Greek Cypriots conducted one in 1973 , without the Turkish Cypriot populace .
The first President of Cyprus , Makarios III , was an archbishop .
English was the sole official language during British colonial rule and the lingua franca until 1960 , and continued to be used -LRB- de facto -RRB- in courts of law until 1989 and in legislation until 1996 .
80.4 % of Cypriots are proficient in the English language as a second language .
Russian , after English and Greek , is the third language used on many signs of shops and restaurants , particularly in Limassol and Paphos .
In addition to these languages , 12 % speak French and 5 % speak German .
State schools are generally seen as equivalent in quality of education to private-sector institutions .
Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots share a lot in common in their culture but also have differences .
Hospitality and buying or offering food and drinks for guests or others are common among both .
Greek Cypriots have influences from Greece and Christianity , while Turkish Cypriots have influences from Turkey and Islam .
In many ways these two artists set the template for subsequent Cypriot art and both their artistic styles and the patterns of their education remain influential to this day .
The instruments commonly associated with Cyprus folk music are the bouzouki , oud -LRB- `` outi '' -RRB- , violin -LRB- `` fkiolin '' -RRB- , lute -LRB- `` laouto '' -RRB- , accordion , Cyprus flute -LRB- `` pithkiavlin '' -RRB- and percussion -LRB- including the `` toumperleki '' -RRB- .
Composers associated with traditional Cypriot music include Evagoras Karageorgis , Marios Tokas , Solon Michaelides and Savvas Salides .
Among musicians is also the acclaimed pianist Cyprien Katsaris and composer and artistic director of the European Capital of Culture initiative Marios Joannou Elia .
Poèmes d'amour written in medieval Greek Cypriot date back from the 16th century .
Some of them are actual translations of poems written by Petrarch , Bembo , Ariosto and G. Sannazzaro .
Gotsis .
In addition on the Greek side of the island there are the private channels ANT1 Cyprus , Plus TV , Mega Channel , Sigma TV , Nimonia TV -LRB- NTV -RRB- and New Extra .
In 1994 , cinematographic production received a boost with the establishment of the Cinema Advisory Committee .
To date , four feature-length films in which a Cypriot was executive producer have received funding from Eurimages .
The theme song to The Road to Ithaka was composed by Costas Cacoyannis and sung by Alexia Vassiliou .
In September 1999 , To Tama -LRB- The Promise -RRB- by Andreas Pantzis also received funding from the Eurimages Fund .
The film was awarded in 2012 with the Best Screenwriting and Best Photography award in London Greek Film Festival -LRB- UK -RRB- and was official selection in Montreal World Film Festival , Cairo International Film Festival , India International Film Festival , Tallinn Black Nights Film Festival , Fantasporto and opening film in the Panorama of European Cinema in Athens .
In 2010 the film was Nominated for the best film from the Hellenic Film Academy .
Common vegetable preparations include potatoes in olive oil and parsley , pickled cauliflower and beets , asparagus and taro .
Pourgouri -LRB- bulgur , cracked wheat -RRB- is the traditional source of carbohydrate other than bread , and is used to make the delicacy koubes .
Fresh vegetables and fruits are common ingredients .
He has been ranked third in the world .
Costas holds a 6-3 record in UFC bouts , and recently defeated `` The Monsoon '' Lorenz Larkin with a Knockout in the 1st round .
His other films include Close Encounters of the Third Kind , the Indiana Jones film series , and A.I. Artificial Intelligence .
In 1950 , his family moved to Haddon Township , New Jersey when his father took a job with RCA .
I was embarrassed by the outward perception of my parents ' Jewish practices .
I was never really ashamed to be Jewish , but I was uneasy at times . ''
It was horrible . ''
I made it and got my merit badge .
That was how it all started . ''
The episode is unusual in his body of work , in that the camerawork is more highly stylized than his later , more `` mature '' films .
The first was a Richard Matheson adaptation called Duel .
Spielberg 's cinematography for the police chase was praised by reviewers , and The Hollywood Reporter stated that `` a major new director is on the horizon . ''
Spielberg has often referred to the gruelling shoot as his professional crucible .
But Spielberg persevered and finished the film .
It also set the domestic record for box office gross , leading to what the press described as `` Jawsmania . ''
This second blockbuster helped to secure Spielberg 's rise .
The film was considered an homage to the cliffhanger serials of the Golden Age of Hollywood .
Raiders is still considered a landmark example of the action-adventure genre .
The film also led to Ford 's casting in Ridley Scott 's Blade Runner .
His next directorial feature was the Raiders prequel Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom .
Teaming up once again with Lucas and Ford , the film was plagued with uncertainty for the material and script .
However , much to the surprise of many , Spielberg did not get a Best Director nomination .
The film garnered much praise from critics and was nominated for several Oscars , but did not yield substantial box office revenues .
Spielberg 's first romantic film , Always was only a moderate success and had mixed reviews .
Spielberg won his second Academy Award for his direction .
The film 's graphic , realistic depiction of combat violence influenced later war films such as Black Hawk Down and Enemy at the Gates .
The film was also the first major hit for DreamWorks , which co-produced the film with Paramount Pictures -LRB- as such , it was Spielberg 's first release from the latter that was not part of the Indiana Jones series -RRB- .
Later , Spielberg and Tom Hanks produced a TV mini-series based on Stephen Ambrose 's book Band of Brothers .
The ten-part HBO mini-series follows Easy Company of the 101st Airborne Division 's 506th Parachute Infantry Regiment .
The series won a number of awards at the Golden Globes and the Emmys .
Unlike E.T. and Close Encounters of the Third Kind , which depicted friendly alien visitors , War of the Worlds featured violent invaders .
It was previously adapted into the 1986 made-for-TV film Sword of Gideon .
The film received strong critical praise , but underperformed at the U.S. and world box-office ; it remains one of Spielberg 's most controversial films to date .
It was Spielberg 's sixth Best Director nomination and fifth Best Picture nomination .
The screenwriter suggested the addition of a `` time element '' to the treatment 's basic idea , which was welcomed by Obst and Thorne .
The following July , Kip Thorne said there was a push by people for him to portray himself in the film .
In early 2009 , Spielberg shot the first film in a planned trilogy of motion capture films based on The Adventures of Tintin , written by Belgian artist Hergé , with Peter Jackson .
The Adventures of Tintin won the award for Best Animated Feature Film at the Golden Globe Awards that year .
It is the first non-Pixar film to win the award since the category was first introduced .
Jackson has been announced to direct the second film .
War Horse received generally positive reviews from critics , and was nominated for six Academy Awards , including Best Picture .
The film 's international distribution was handled by 20th Century Fox .
Upon release , Lincoln received widespread critical acclaim , and was nominated for twelve Academy Awards -LRB- the most of any film that year -RRB- including Best Picture and Best Director for Spielberg .
It won the award for Best Production Design and Day-Lewis won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of Lincoln , becoming the first three time winner in that category as well as the first to win for a performance directed by Spielberg .
Since the mid-1980s , Spielberg has increased his role as a film producer .
, for which he collaborated with Jean MacCurdy and Tom Ruegger .
Due to his work on these series , in the official titles , most of them say , `` Steven Spielberg presents '' as well as making numerous cameos on the shows .
He also served as one of the executive producers of Who Framed Roger Rabbit and its three related shorts -LRB- Tummy Trouble , Roller Coaster Rabbit , Trail Mix-Up -RRB- , which were all released by Disney , under both the Walt Disney Pictures and the Touchstone Pictures banners .
He was furthermore , for a short time , the executive producer of the long-running medical drama ER .
He also collaborated with software publishers Knowledge Adventure on the multimedia game Steven Spielberg 's Director 's Chair , which was released in 1996 .
Spielberg appears , as himself , in the game to direct the player .
Spielberg served as an uncredited executive producer on The Haunting , The Prince of Egypt , Just Like Heaven , Shrek , Road to Perdition , and Evolution .
He also teamed with Clint Eastwood for the first time in their careers , co-producing Eastwood 's Flags of Our Fathers and Letters from Iwo Jima with Robert Lorenz and Eastwood himself .
He earned his twelfth Academy Award nomination for the latter film as it was nominated for Best Picture .
Spielberg served as executive producer for Disturbia and the Transformers live action film with Brian Goldner , an employee of Hasbro .
The film was directed by Michael Bay and written by Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman , and Spielberg continued to collaborate on the sequels , Transformers : Revenge of the Fallen and Transformers : Dark of the Moon .
Other major television series Spielberg produced were Band of Brothers , Taken and The Pacific .
Writer Bruce McKenna , who penned several installments of -LRB- Band of Brothers -RRB- , was the head writer .
He developed the series with Robert Rodat and is credited as an executive producer .
Spielberg also produced The River , Smash , Under the Dome , Extant and The Whispers , as well as a TV adaptation of Minority Report .
Apart from being an ardent gamer Spielberg has had a long history of involvement in video games .
In 2005 the director signed with Electronic Arts to collaborate on three games including an action game and an award winning puzzle game for the Wii called Boom Blox -LRB- and its 2009 sequel : Boom Blox Bash Party -RRB- .
Previously , he was involved in creating the scenario for the adventure game The Dig .
In 1996 , Spielberg worked on and shot original footage for a movie-making simulation game called Steven Spielberg 's Director 's Chair .
He is the creator of the Medal of Honor series by Electronic Arts .
He is credited in the special thanks section of the 1998 video game Trespasser .
Spielberg 's DreamWorks bought the rights in 2010 , originally intending John Madden to direct .
Like Lincoln , it was to be released by Disney in the United States and Fox overseas .
Spielberg 's films often deal with several recurring themes .
Another child oriented theme in Spielberg 's films is that of loss of innocence and coming-of-age .
In Empire of the Sun , Jim , a well-groomed and spoiled English youth , loses his innocence as he suffers through World War II China .
Parents -LRB- often fathers -RRB- are reluctant , absent or ignorant .
Peter Banning in Hook starts off in the beginning of the film as a reluctant married-to-his-work parent who through the course of the film regains the respect of his children .
The notable absence of Elliott 's father in E.T. , is the most famous example of this theme .
Even Oskar Schindler , from Schindler 's List , is reluctant to have a child with his wife .
Munich depicts Avner as a man away from his wife and newborn daughter .
This theme is arguably the most autobiographical aspect of Spielberg 's films , since Spielberg himself was affected by his parents ' divorce as a child and by the absence of his father .
Little known also is Tim in Jurassic Park -LRB- early in the film , another secondary character mentions Tim and Lex 's parents ' divorce -RRB- .
The family often shown divided is often resolved in the ending as well .
Following this theme of reluctant fathers and father figures , Tim looks to Dr. Alan Grant as a father figure .
Initially , Dr. Grant is reluctant to return those paternal feelings to Tim .
However , by the end of the film , he has changed , and the kids even fall asleep with their heads on his shoulders .
In terms of casting and production itself , Spielberg has a known penchant for working with actors and production members from his previous films .
Spielberg prefers working with production members with whom he has developed an existing working relationship .
Most of the DVDs of Spielberg 's films have documentaries by Laurent Bouzereau .
One of Spielberg 's trademarks is his use of music by Williams to add to the visual impact of his scenes and to try and create a lasting picture and sound of the film in the memories of the film audience .
Aside from his principal role as a director , Spielberg has acted as a producer for a considerable number of films , including early hits for Joe Dante and Robert Zemeckis .
After meeting her , Spielberg told his co-producer Julia Phillips , `` I met a real heartbreaker last night . ''
In 2006 , Premiere listed him as the most powerful and influential figure in the motion picture industry .
The annual list is conducted by E-Poll Market Research and it gave more than 6,600 celebrities on 46 different personality attributes a score representing `` how that person is perceived as influencing the public , their peers , or both . ''
His donations include the Oscars that Bette Davis received for Dangerous -LRB- 1935 -RRB- and Jezebel -LRB- 1938 -RRB- , and Clark Gable 's Oscar for It Happened One Night -LRB- 1934 -RRB- .
Spielberg played many of LucasArts adventure games , including the first Monkey Island games .
Spielberg stated he made Indiana Jones a Boy Scout in honor of his experience in Scouting .
For his career accomplishments , service to others , and dedication to a new merit badge Spielberg was awarded the Distinguished Eagle Scout Award .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In 2008 , Spielberg was awarded the Légion d'honneur .
It included a light , two benches and a hand operated signal , and could be activated from the outside , without any effort on the part of the occupants .
A safety system was designed to take effect if the cords broke .
The design of the Otis safety elevator is somewhat similar to one type still used today .
An elevator shaft was included in the design , because Cooper was confident that a safe passenger elevator would soon be invented .
Later , Otis designed a special elevator for the building .
Sprague also developed the idea and technology for multiple elevators in a single shaft .
Some people argue that elevators began as simple rope or chain hoists -LRB- see Traction elevators below -RRB- .
An elevator is essentially a platform that is either pulled or pushed up by a mechanical means .
In a `` traction '' elevator , cars are pulled up by means of rolling steel ropes over a deeply grooved pulley , commonly called a sheave in the industry .
This can be configured so that two sets of such cascading doors operate like the center opening doors described above , allowing for a very wide elevator cab .
Therefore , DC machines powered by an AC/DC motor generator were the preferred solution .
Gearless traction machines are low-speed -LRB- low-RPM -RRB- , high-torque electric motors powered either by AC or DC .
The grooves in the drive sheave are specially designed to prevent the cables from slipping .
`` Traction '' is provided to the ropes by the grip of the grooves in the sheave , thereby the name .
As the ropes age and the traction grooves wear , some traction is lost and the ropes must be replaced and the sheave repaired or replaced .
Rope tension equalization may be achieved using a rope tension gauge , and is a simple way to extend the lifetime of the sheaves and ropes .
If the elevator cab is at the top of the hoist-way , there is a short length of hoist cable above the car and a long length of compensating cable below the car and vice versa for the counterweight .
If the compensation system uses cables , there will be an additional sheave in the pit below the elevator , to guide the cables .
An example would be the Moonlight towers in Austin , Texas , where the elevator holds only one person and equipment for maintenance .
this also means that in case of a power failure , the cab will automatically go down .
in order to keep the air inside of the cab , rubber seals are used .
due to technical limitations , these elevators have a low capacity .
The system lets them know which car to wait for , instead of everyone boarding the next car .
During the down peak period the benefit of destination control will be limited as passengers have a common destination .
However , performance enhancements can not be generalized as the benefits and limitations of the system are dependent on many factors .
Sometimes , one person enters the destination for a large group of people going to the same floor .
Also , occasionally , one person may press the floor multiple times .
Another way to prevent this issue is to treat everyone travelling from one floor to another as one group and to allocate only one car for that group .
Some elevator banks are programmed so that at least one car will always return to the lobby floor and park whenever it becomes free .
Independent service is a special service mode found on most elevators .
The elevator will remain parked on a floor with its doors open until a floor is selected and the door close button is held until the elevator starts to travel .
The access key switches will allow the car to move at reduced inspection speed with the hoistway door open .
This speed can range from anywhere up to 60 % of normal operating speed on most controllers , and is usually defined by local safety codes .
Once an alarm has been activated , the elevator will automatically go into phase one .
When the elevator is recalled , it proceeds to the recall floor and stops with its doors open .
The elevator will no longer respond to calls or move in any direction .
Located on the fire-recall floor is a fire-service key switch .
The fire-service key switch has the ability to turn fire service off , turn fire service on or to bypass fire service .
Once the elevator gets to the desired floor it will not open its doors unless the firefighter holds the door open button .
This is in case the floor is burning and the firefighter can feel the heat and knows not to open the door .
The firefighter must hold door open until the door is completely opened .
If for any reason the firefighter wishes to leave the elevator , they will use the hold position on the key switch to make sure the elevator remains at that floor .
If the firefighter wishes to return to the recall floor , they simply turn the key off and close the doors .
When power is lost in a traction elevator system , all elevators will initially come to a halt .
Buildings like hospitals and nursing homes usually size their emergency generators to accommodate this draw .
Their safety record is unsurpassed by any other vehicle system .
However , there was an incident in 2007 at a Seattle children 's hospital , where a ThyssenKrupp ISIS machine-room-less elevator free-fell until the safety brakes were engaged .
This was due to a flaw in the design where the cables were connected at one common point , and the kevlar ropes had a tendency to overheat and cause slipping -LRB- or , in this case , a free-fall -RRB- .
While it is possible -LRB- though extraordinarily unlikely -RRB- for an elevator 's cable to snap , all elevators in the modern era have been fitted with several safety devices which prevent the elevator from simply free-falling and crashing .
An elevator cab is typically borne by 2 to 6 -LRB- up to 12 or more in high rise installations -RRB- hoist cables or belts , each of which is capable on its own of supporting the full load of the elevator plus twenty-five percent more weight .
In addition , there is a device which detects whether the elevator is descending faster than its maximum designed speed ; if this happens , the device causes copper -LRB- or silicon nitride in high rise installations -RRB- brake shoes to clamp down along the vertical rails in the shaft , stopping the elevator quickly , but not so abruptly as to cause injury .
This device is called the governor , and was invented by Elisha Graves Otis .
In addition , a oil/hydraulic or spring or polyurethane or telescopic oil/hydraulic buffer or a combination -LRB- depending on the travel height and travel speed -RRB- is installed at the bottom of the shaft -LRB- or in the bottom of the cab and sometimes also in the top of the cab or shaft -RRB- to somewhat cushion any impact .
However , In Thailand , in November 2012 , a woman was killed in free falling elevator , in what was reported as the `` first legally recognised death caused by a falling lift '' .
This creates two significant hazards : being subject to an impact at the bottom when the elevator stops suddenly and being in the entrance for a potential shear if the rider is partly in the elevator .
Another solution to protect against a cylinder blowout is to install a plunger gripping device .
One commercially available is known by the marketing name `` LifeJacket '' .
This is a device which , in the event of an uncontrolled downward acceleration , nondestructively grips the plunger and stops the car .
A device known as an overspeed or rupture valve is attached to the hydraulic inlet/outlet of the cylinder and is adjusted for a maximum flow rate .
If a pipe or hose were to break -LRB- rupture -RRB- , the flow rate of the rupture valve will surpass a set limit and mechanically stop the outlet flow of hydraulic fluid , thus stopping the plunger and the car in the down direction .
The segment is then placed under increasing load to the point of failure .
The report is then analyzed to determine whether or not the entire rail is safe to use .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
See also the Elevators for urban transport section .
In order for an elevator to be legal to carry passengers in some jurisdictions it must have a solid inner door .
Freight elevators may have manually operated doors , and often have rugged interior finishes to prevent damage while loading and unloading .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Machine-room-less elevators have been available commercially since the mid 1990s , however cost and overall size prevented their adoption to the residential elevator market until around 2010 .
The former are almost universal in cab interiors with more than two stops and may be found outside the elevators as well on one or more of the floors .
If the person waits , then one will still stop going up .
Since the color convention is often undermined or overridden by systems that do not invoke it , it is usually used only in conjunction with other differentiating factors .
Sometimes directions must be inferred by the position of the indicators relative to one another .
As of 2006 , all states except Kansas , Mississippi , North Dakota , and South Dakota have adopted some version of ASME codes , though not necessarily the most recent .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- In addition , passenger elevators may be required to conform to the requirements of A17 .3 for existing elevators where referenced by the local jurisdiction .
The frequency of these tests is mandated by the local jurisdiction , which may be a town , city , state or provincial standard .
Tenants of even-numbered floors first take an escalator -LRB- or an elevator from the parking garage -RRB- to the 2nd level , where they will enter the upper deck and arrive at their floors .
For example , the 85th floor restaurants can be accessed from the 60th floor sky-lobby .
The door opens after 37 seconds from the 5th floor .
Unlike most traction elevators , the elevator car and counterweight are joined using a rail system in a continuous loop running through both the top and the bottom of the drop shaft .
Multiple elevator shafts are used to further improve passenger throughput .
When entering the cab , it appears to be any normal elevator ride .
However , once the cab begins moving , the interior lights turn off and a special blue light above the cab turns on .
This lights the entire shaft , so riders can see the moving cab through its glass ceiling as it rises and lowers through the shaft .
Neptune is the eighth and farthest known planet from the Sun in the Solar System .
It is the fourth-largest planet by diameter and the third-largest by mass .
Among the giant planets in the Solar System , Neptune is the most dense .
The planet 's distance from Earth gives it a very small apparent size , making it challenging to study with Earth-based telescopes .
The advent of Hubble Space Telescope and large ground-based telescopes with adaptive optics has recently allowed for additional detailed observations from afar .
In contrast to the hazy , relatively featureless atmosphere of Uranus , Neptune 's atmosphere has active and visible weather patterns .
Neptune has a faint and fragmented ring system -LRB- labelled `` arcs '' -RRB- , which was first detected during the 1960s and confirmed by Voyager 2 .
At his first observation in December 1612 , Neptune was almost stationary in the sky because it had just turned retrograde that day .
Because Neptune was only beginning its yearly retrograde cycle , the motion of the planet was far too slight to be detected with Galileo 's small telescope .
Subsequent observations revealed substantial deviations from the tables , leading Bouvard to hypothesise that an unknown body was perturbing the orbit through gravitational interaction .
Meanwhile , Le Verrier by letter urged Berlin Observatory astronomer Johann Gottfried Galle to search with the observatory 's refractor .
That credit belongs only to the person who succeeded both in predicting the planet 's place and in convincing astronomers to search for it . ''
Most languages today , even in countries that have no direct link to Greco-Roman culture , use some variant of the name `` Neptune '' for the planet .
In Māori , the planet is called Tangaroa , named after the Māori god of the sea .
In Nahuatl , the planet is called Tlāloccītlalli , named after the rain god Tlāloc .
In the search for extrasolar planets , Neptune has been used as a metonym : discovered bodies of similar mass are often referred to as `` Neptunes '' , just as scientists refer to various extrasolar bodies as `` Jupiters '' .
The mantle may consist of a layer of ionic water in which the water molecules break down into a soup of hydrogen and oxygen ions , and deeper down superionic water in which the oxygen crystallises but the hydrogen ions float around freely within the oxygen lattice .
Very-high-pressure experiments at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory suggest that the base of the mantle may comprise an ocean of liquid carbon with floating solid ` diamonds ' .
A trace amount of methane is also present .
Underneath , clouds of ammonia and hydrogen sulfide may be found .
There are also high-altitude cloud bands that wrap around the planet at constant latitude .
These altitudes are in the layer where weather occurs , the troposphere .
The planet is too far from the Sun for this heat to be generated by ultraviolet radiation .
A faint outward extension to the Le Verrier Ring has been named Lassell ; it is bounded at its outer edge by the Arago Ring at 57,000 km .
More typically , by tracking the motion of persistent clouds , wind speeds have been shown to vary from 20 m/s in the easterly direction to 325 m/s westward .
The general pattern of winds showed prograde rotation at high latitudes vs. retrograde rotation at lower latitudes .
At 70 ° S latitude , a high-speed jet travels at a speed of 300 m/s .
It was initially completely dark , but as Voyager 2 approached the planet , a bright core developed and can be seen in most of the highest-resolution images .
The persistence of companion clouds shows that some former dark spots may continue to exist as cyclones even though they are no longer visible as a dark feature .
The upper regions of Neptune 's troposphere reach a low temperature of 51.8 K -LRB- − 221.3 °C -RRB- .
At a depth where the atmospheric pressure equals 1 bar -LRB- 100 kPa -RRB- , the temperature is 72.00 K -LRB- − 201.15 °C -RRB- .
Deeper inside the layers of gas , the temperature rises steadily .
Neptune is the farthest planet from the Sun , yet its internal energy is sufficient to drive the fastest planetary winds seen in the Solar System .
The region between 40 and 42 AU is an example .
There do exist orbits within these empty regions where objects can survive for the age of the Solar System .
These resonances occur when Neptune 's orbital period is a precise fraction of that of the object , such as 1:2 , or 3:4 .
If , say , an object orbits the Sun once for every two Neptune orbits , it will only complete half an orbit by the time Neptune returns to its original position .
Objects in this resonance complete 2 orbits for every 3 of Neptune , and are known as plutinos because the largest of the known Kuiper belt objects , Pluto , is among them .
Neptune has a number of known trojan objects occupying both the Sun -- Neptune L4 and L5 Lagrangian points -- gravitationally stable regions leading and trailing Neptune in its orbit , respectively .
The formation of the ice giants , Neptune and Uranus , has proven difficult to model precisely .
This hypothesis of migration after formation is favoured , due to its ability to better explain the occupancy of the populations of small objects observed in the trans-Neptunian region .
It is close enough to Neptune to be locked into a synchronous rotation , and it is slowly spiralling inward because of tidal acceleration .
It will eventually be torn apart , in about 3.6 billion years , when it reaches the Roche limit .
In 1989 , Triton was the coldest object that had yet been measured in the Solar System , with estimated temperatures of 38 K -LRB- − 235 °C -RRB- .
Although the second-most-massive Neptunian moon , it is only 0.25 % the mass of Triton .
This occultation had been attributed to ring arcs , but when Voyager 2 observed Neptune in 1989 , Larissa was found to have caused it .
Five new irregular moons discovered between 2002 and 2003 were announced in 2004 .
A new moon and the smallest yet , S/2004 N 1 , was found in 2013 .
Because Neptune was the Roman god of the sea , Neptune 's moons have been named after lesser sea gods .
Its small apparent size makes it challenging to study it visually .
Combined with technological advancements , ground-based telescopes with adaptive optics are recording increasingly more detailed images of this Outer Planet .
Both the HST and AO telescopes on Earth has made many new discoveries within the Solar System since the mid-1990s , with a large increase in the number of known satellites and moons around the Outer Planets for example .
After the Voyager 2 flyby mission , the next step in scientific exploration of the Neptunian system , is considered to be a Flagship orbital mission .
However , there have been a couple of discussions to launch Neptune missions sooner .
The proposed New Horizons 2 mission -LRB- which was later scrapped -RRB- might also have done a close flyby of the Neptunian system .
A railway electrification system supplies electric power to railway trains and trams without an on-board prime mover or local fuel supply .
Some electric railways have their own dedicated generating stations and transmission lines but most purchase power from an electric utility .
They have no local emissions , an important advantage in tunnels and urban areas .
Disadvantages of electric traction include high capital costs that may be uneconomic on lightly trafficked routes ; a relative lack of flexibility since electric trains need electrified tracks or onboard supercapacitors and charging infrastructure at stations ; and a vulnerability to power interruptions .
The limited clearances available under catenaries may preclude efficient double-stack container service .
Until the mid 1980s this was only practical with the brush-type DC motor , although such DC can be supplied from an AC catenary via on-board electric power conversion .
Speed was controlled by connecting the traction motors in various series-parallel combinations , by varying the traction motors ' fields , and by inserting and removing starting resistances to limit motor current .
Because transformers -LRB- prior to the development of power electronics -RRB- can not step down DC voltages , trains were supplied with a relatively low DC voltage that the motors can use directly .
The most common DC voltages are listed in the previous section .
There has , however , been interest among railroad operators in returning to DC use at higher voltages than previously used .
DC also avoids the power factor problems of AC .
Of particular interest to railroading is that DC can supply constant power with a single ungrounded wire .
Another important consideration is that mains-frequency 3-phase AC must be carefully planned to avoid unbalanced phase loads .
Parts of the system are supplied from different phases on the assumption that the total loads of the 3 phases will even out .
At the phase break points between regions supplied from different phases , long insulated supply breaks are required to avoid them being shorted by rolling stock using more than one pantograph at a time .
A few railroads have tried 3-phase but its substantial complexity has made single-phase standard practice despite the interruption in power flow that occurs twice every cycle .
This effect makes the resistance per unit length unacceptably high compared with the use of DC .
This may be a factor favouring overhead wires and high-voltage AC , even for urban usage .
The tram picked up the current through a plough -LRB- U.S. `` plow '' -RRB- accessed through a narrow slot in the road .
The same was true with Manhattan 's former streetcar system .
The evidence of this mode of running can still be seen on the track down the slope on the northern access to the abandoned Kingsway Tramway Subway in central London , United Kingdom , where the slot between the running rails is clearly visible , and on P and Q Streets west of Wisconsin Avenue in the Georgetown neighborhood of Washington DC , where the abandoned tracks have not been paved over .
The slot can easily be confused with the similar looking slot for cable trams/cars -LRB- in some cases , the conduit slot was originally a cable slot -RRB- .
For this reason , in Washington , D.C. cars on some lines converted to overhead wire on leaving the city center , a worker in a `` plough pit '' disconnecting the plough while another raised the trolley pole -LRB- hitherto hooked down to the roof -RRB- to the overhead wire .
A similar system of changeover from conduit to overhead wire was also used on the London tramways , notably on the southern side ; a typical changeover point was at Norwood , where the conduit snaked sideways from between the running rails , to provide a park for detached shoes or ploughs .
This involves a third rail which is flush with the surface like the tops of the running rails .
The circuit is divided into segments with each segment energized in turn by sensors from the car as it passes over it , the remainder of the third rail remaining `` dead '' .
This system has also been adopted in some sections of the new tram systems in Reims , France -LRB- opened 2011 -RRB- and Angers , France -LRB- also opened 2011 -RRB- .
Proposals are in place for a number of other new services including Dubai , UAE ; Barcelona , Spain ; Florence , Italy ; Marseille , France ; Gold Coast , Australia ; Washington , D.C. , U.S.A. ; Brasília , Brazil and Tours , France .
London Underground is now upgrading its fourth rail system to 750v DC with a positive conductor rail energised to +500 v DC and a negative conductor rail energised to -250 v DC .
However , many older sections in tunnels are still energised to 630v DC .
This scheme was introduced because of the problems of return currents , intended to be carried by the earthed -LRB- grounded -RRB- running rail , flowing through the iron tunnel linings instead .
Some of these , particularly Victorian mains that predated London 's underground railways , were not constructed to carry currents and had no adequate electrical bonding between pipe segments .
The four-rail system solves the problem .
However , elastomeric rubber pads placed between the rails and chairs can now solve part of the problem by insulating the running rails from the current return should there be a leakage through the running rails .
Today , the driver does not have to change ends at termini provided with such a loop , but the time saving is not so significant as it takes almost as long to drive round the loop as it does to change ends .
Many of the original loops have been lost as lines were extended .
High-voltage AC overhead systems are not only for standard gauge national networks .
The meter gauge Rhaetian Railway -LRB- RhB -RRB- and the neighbouring Matterhorn Gotthard Bahn -LRB- MGB -RRB- operate on 11 kV at 16.7 Hz frequency .
Practice has proven that both Swiss and German 15 kV trains can operate under these lower voltages .
This allows for the trains to operate on both the Amtrak and SEPTA power systems .
The Amtrak power distribution system has a 138 kV transmission network that provides power to substations which then transform the voltage to 12 kV to feed the catenary system .
The SEPTA power distribution system uses a 2:1 ratio autotransformer system , with the catenary fed at 12 kV and a return feeder wire fed at 24 kV .
Peckham Rye to West Norwood opened in June 1912 .
Two lines opened in 1925 under the Southern Railway serving Coulsdon North and Sutton railway station .
It was announced in 1926 that all lines were to be converted to DC third rail and the last overhead electric service ran in September 1929 .
The first lines were the Burgdorf-Thun line in Switzerland -LRB- 1899 -RRB- , and the lines of the Ferrovia Alta Valtellina from Colico to Chiavenna and Tirano in Italy , which were electrified in 1901 and 1902 .
The tests were a success so , from 1932 until the 1960s , trains on the Budapest-Hegyeshalom line -LRB- towards Vienna -RRB- regularly used the same system .
Neutral Sections usually consist of an earthed section of wire which is separated from the live wires on either side by insulating material , typically ceramic beads , designed so that the pantograph will smoothly run from one section to the other .
To prevent the risk of an arc being drawn across from one section of wire to earth , when passing through the neutral section , the train must be coasting and the circuit breakers must be open .
In many cases , this is done manually by the drivers .
A further board is then provided after the neutral section to tell drivers to re-close the circuit breaker , although drivers must not do this until the rear pantograph has passed this board .
In the UK , a system known as Automatic Power Control -LRB- APC -RRB- automatically opens and closes the circuit breaker , this being achieved by using sets of permanent magnets alongside the track communicating with a detector on the train .
Modern electrification systems take AC energy from a power grid which is delivered to a locomotive and converted to a DC voltage to be used by traction motors .
Where should this conversion take place and at what voltage and current -LRB- AC or DC -RRB- should the power flow to the locomotive ?
And how does all this relate to energy-efficiency ?
Power conversion for a DC system takes place mainly in a railway substation where large , heavy , and more efficient hardware can be used as compared to an AC system where conversion takes place aboard the locomotive where space is limited and losses are significantly higher .
Also , the energy used to blow air to cool transformers , power electronics -LRB- including rectifiers -RRB- , and other conversion hardware must be accounted for .
Thus in spite of the much higher losses in the catenary , the 3 kV DC was a little more energy efficient than AC in providing energy from the USSR power grid to the terminals of the traction motors -LRB- all DC at that time -RRB- .
While both systems use energy in converting higher voltage AC from the USSR 's power grid to lower voltage DC , the conversions for the DC system all took place -LRB- at higher efficiency -RRB- in the railway substation , while most of the conversion for the AC system took place inside the locomotive -LRB- at lower efficiency -RRB- .
For more details see : Wiki : Soviet Union DC vs. AC .
Whatever the causes of the sparks effect , it is well established for numerous routes that have electrified over decades .
When converting lines to electric , the connections with other lines must be considered .
If through traffic is to have any benefit , time consuming engine switches must occur to make such connections or expensive dual mode engines must be used .
The increasing demand for container traffic which is more efficient when utilizing the double-stack car also has network effect issues with existing electrifications due to insufficient clearance of overhead electrical lines for these trains , but electrification can be built or modified to have sufficient clearance , at additional cost .
Obviously , this requires that the economics of a particular connection must be more compelling and this has prevented complete electrification of many lines .
Most countries with large rail networks do not have significant oil reserves and those that did , like the United States and Britain , have exhausted much of their reserves and have suffered declining oil output for decades .
Rail electrification is often considered an important route towards consumption pattern reform .
Partly due to inefficient generation of electricity in the USSR -LRB- only 20.8 % thermal efficiency in 1950 vs. 36.2 % in 1975 -RRB- , in 1950 diesel traction was about twice as energy efficient as electric traction -LRB- in terms of net tonne-km of freight per kg of fuel -RRB- .
Since energy-intensity is the inverse of energy-efficiency it drops as efficiency goes up .
But most of this 43 % decrease in energy-intensity also benefited diesel traction .
However , there remained a 12 -- 15 % reduction of energy-intensity that only benefited electric traction -LRB- and not diesel -RRB- .
Thus the overall efficiency of electric traction as compared to diesel more than doubled between 1950 and the mid-1970s in the Soviet Union .
Together , this makes the United States of America the second largest Hispanophone country in the world after Mexico , and with the United States having more Spanish-speakers than Colombia and Spain -LRB- but fewer first language speakers -RRB- .
A large influx of Americans soon followed , originally with the approval of Mexico 's president .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
At over 5 million , Puerto Ricans are easily the 2nd largest Hispanic group .
The uprising of the Sandinista revolution which toppled the Somoza dictatorship in 1979 caused many Nicaraguans to migrate particularly from those opposing the Sandinistas .
From 1910 to 1930 , it is estimated that over 4,000 South Americans each year emigrated to the United States ; however , there are few specific figures indicating these statistics .
They are frequently joined by relatives .
The largest concentration of Venezuelans in the United States is in South Florida , especially the suburbs of Doral and Weston .
Virtually all state and federal government agencies and large corporations use English as their internal working language , especially at the management level .
Although English is the state government 's paper working language , government business is often conducted in Spanish , particularly at the local level .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In addition , it contains many words from Nahuatl , the language spoken by the ancient Aztecs of Mexico .
Grammatical changes include the loss of the second person verb form , changes in verb endings , particularly in the preterite , and partial merging of the second and third conjugations .
Texas 's counties bordering Mexico are mostly Hispanic , and consequently , Spanish is commonly spoken in the region .
Official Spanish translations are available at WhiteHouse.gov .
The complete set of these studies ' demographic projections postulates the near-complete assimilation of a given Hispanophone immigrant cohort within two generations .
By 1690 , Charles Town was the fifth-largest city in North America , and it remained among the 10 largest cities in the United States through the 1840 census .
The population of the Charleston metropolitan area , comprising Berkeley , Charleston , and Dorchester Counties , was counted by the 2014 estimate at 727,689 -- the third-largest in the state -- and the 78th-largest metropolitan statistical area in the United States .
The old city is located on a peninsula at the point where , as Charlestonians say , `` The Ashley and the Cooper Rivers come together to form the Atlantic Ocean . ''
The entire peninsula is very low , some is landfill material , and as such , frequently floods during heavy rains , storm surges , and unusually high tides .
The city limits have expanded across the Ashley River from the peninsula , encompassing the majority of West Ashley as well as James Island and some of Johns Island .
The city limits also have expanded across the Cooper River , encompassing Daniel Island and the Cainhoy area .
Charleston has a humid subtropical climate -LRB- Köppen climate classification Cfa -RRB- , with mild winters , hot , humid summers , and significant rainfall all year long .
Fall remains relatively warm through November .
Measurable snow -LRB- ≥ 0.1 in or 0.25 cm -RRB- only occurs several times per decade at the most , with the last such event occurring December 26 , 2010 .
Dewpoint in the summer ranges from 67.8 to 71.4 °F -LRB- 20 to 22 °C -RRB- .
As of the 2013 U.S. Census , the metropolitan statistical area had a total population of 712,239 people .
Not only was this location more defensible , but it also offered access to a fine natural harbor .
Among these were free people of color , born in the West Indies of alliances and marriages between Africans and Englanders , when color lines were looser among the working class in the early colonial years , and some wealthy whites took black consorts or concubines .
Charles Town attracted a mixture of ethnic and religious groups .
French , Scottish , Irish , and Germans migrated to the developing seacoast town , representing numerous Protestant denominations .
Colonial Lowcountry landowners experimented with cash crops ranging from tea to silkworms .
With the coerced help of African slaves from the Caribbean , Eliza Lucas , daughter of plantation owner George Lucas , learned how to raise and use indigo in the Lowcountry in 1747 .
By the mid-18th century , Charles Town had become a bustling trade center , the hub of the Atlantic trade for the southern colonies .
Deer skins were used in the production of men 's fashionable and practical buckskin pantaloons , gloves , and book bindings .
As Charles Town grew , so did the community 's cultural and social opportunities , especially for the elite merchants and planters .
Benevolent societies were formed by different ethnic groups , from French Huguenots to free people of color to Germans to Jews .
When the fleet fired cannonballs , they failed to penetrate Fort Sullivan 's unfinished , yet thick , palmetto-log walls .
No local Loyalists attacked the town from the mainland side , as the British had hoped they would do .
Several Americans who escaped the carnage joined other militias , including those of Francis Marion , the `` Swamp Fox '' ; and Andrew Pickens .
The British retained control of the city until December 1782 .
After the British left , the city 's name was officially changed to Charleston in 1783 .
It was more easily grown in the upland areas , and cotton quickly became South Carolina 's major export commodity .
The Piedmont region was developed into cotton plantations , to which the sea islands and Lowcountry were already devoted .
The city also had a large class of free people of color .
Free people of color were far more likely to be of mixed racial background than slaves .
Many were educated , practiced skilled crafts , and some even owned substantial property , including slaves .
By 1820 , Charleston 's population had grown to 23,000 , maintaining its black -LRB- and mostly slave -RRB- majority .
Another 28 slaves were later hanged .
Later , the state legislature passed laws requiring individual legislative approval for manumission -LRB- the freeing of a slave -RRB- and regulating activities of free blacks and slaves .
Historian Eric Foner noted that blacks were glad to be relieved of the many regulations of slavery and to operate outside of white surveillance .
Industries slowly brought the city and its inhabitants back to a renewed vitality and jobs attracted new residents .
As the city 's commerce improved , residents worked to restore or create community institutions .
Porter Military Academy later joined with Gaud School and is now a university-preparatory school , Porter-Gaud School .
With leadership by members of the antebellum free black community , historian Melinda Meeks Hennessy described the community as `` unique '' in being able to defend themselves without provoking `` massive white retaliation '' , as occurred in numerous other areas during Reconstruction .
The Cainhoy incident was the only one statewide in which more whites were killed than blacks .
Another riot occurred in Charleston the day after the election , when a prominent Republican leader was mistakenly reported killed .
The shock was estimated to have a moment magnitude of 7.0 and a maximum Mercalli intensity of X -LRB- Extreme -RRB- .
It was felt as far away as Boston to the north , Chicago and Milwaukee to the northwest , as far west as New Orleans , as far south as Cuba , and as far east as Bermuda .
Investment in the city continued .
The deceased also included congregation members Susie Jackson , 87 ; Rev. Daniel Simmons Sr. , 74 ; Ethel Lance , 70 ; Myra Thompson , 59 ; Cynthia Hurd , 54 ; Rev. Depayne Middleton-Doctor , 49 ; Rev. Sharonda Coleman-Singleton , 45 ; and Tywanza Sanders , 26 .
The attack garnered national attention , and sparked a debate on historical racism , Confederate symbolism in Southern states , and gun violence .
Charleston is known for its unique culture , which blends traditional Southern U.S. , English , French , and West African elements .
The downtown peninsula has gained a reputation for its art , music , local cuisine , and fashion .
A variety of performing arts venues includes the historic Dock Street Theatre .
Rice is the staple in many dishes , reflecting the rice culture of the Low Country .
The traditional Charleston accent has long been noted in the state and throughout the South .
It is typically heard in wealthy white families who trace their families back generations in the city .
It has ingliding or monophthongal long mid-vowels , raises ay and aw in certain environments , and is nonrhotic .
He believed the accent was based on the English as it was spoken by the earliest settlers , therefore derived from Elizabethan England and preserved with modifications by Charleston speakers .
The rapidly disappearing `` Charleston accent '' is still noted in the local pronunciation of the city 's name .
Some elderly -LRB- and usually upper-class -RRB- Charleston natives ignore the ` r ' and elongate the first vowel , pronouncing the name as `` Chah-l-ston '' .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The Spoleto Festival is internationally recognized as America 's premier performing arts festival .
The annual Piccolo Spoleto festival takes place at the same time and features local performers and artists , with hundreds of performances throughout the city .
In turn , the music of Charleston has had an influence on that of the rest of the country .
As a result , Charleston musicians became proficient on a variety of instruments and were able to read music expertly .
These traits set Jenkins musicians apart and helped land some of them positions in big bands with Duke Ellington and Count Basie .
William `` Cat '' Anderson , Jabbo Smith , and Freddie Green are but a few of the alumni from the Jenkins Orphanage band who became professional musicians in some of the best bands of the day .
Orphanages around the country began to develop brass bands in the wake of the Jenkins Orphanage Band 's success .
As many as five bands were on tour during the 1920s .
The story was based in Charleston and featured the Gullah community .
The Heywards insisted on hiring the real Jenkins Orphanage Band to portray themselves on stage .
Only a few years later , DuBose Heyward collaborated with George and Ira Gershwin to turn his novel into the now famous opera , Porgy and Bess -LRB- so named so as to distinguish it from the play -RRB- .
Training , Fire Marshall , Operations , and Administration are the divisions of the department .
The department operates on a 24/48 schedule and had a Class 1 ISO rating until late 2008 , when ISO officially lowered it to Class 3 .
Their procedures on cracking down on drug use and gang violence in the city are used as models to other cities to do the same .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- According to the final 2005 FBI Crime Reports , Charleston crime level is worse than the national average in almost every major category .
Greenberg was credited with creating a polite police force that kept police brutality well in check , even as it developed a visible presence in community policing and a significant reduction in crime rates .
Charleston is the primary medical center for the eastern portion of the state .
MUSC is the state 's first school of medicine , the largest medical university in the state , and the sixth-oldest continually operating school of medicine in the United States .
It is the busiest passenger airport in South Carolina -LRB- IATA : CHS , ICAO : KCHS -RRB- .
Both airports are owned and operated by the Charleston County Aviation Authority .
Bridge and Meeting Street .
Heading northwest , it connects the city to North Charleston , the Charleston International Airport , Interstate 95 , and Columbia .
The Arthur Ravenel , Jr. .
Bridge and Septima Clark Expressway are part of U.S. Highway 17 , which travels east-west through the cities of Charleston and Mount Pleasant .
U.S. Highway 52 is Meeting Street and its spur is East Bay Street , which becomes Morrison Drive after leaving the east side .
The Arthur Ravenel Jr. .
They were considered two of the more dangerous bridges in America and were demolished after the Ravenel Bridge opened .
The city is also home to private universities , including the Charleston School of Law .
`` Looking for a city that would provide the charm of Spoleto , as well as its wealth of theaters , churches , and other performance spaces , they selected Charleston , South Carolina , as the ideal location .
The historic city provided a perfect fit : intimate enough that the Festival would captivate the entire city , yet cosmopolitan enough to provide an enthusiastic audience and robust infrastructure . ''
During this period , the Weapons Station was the Atlantic Fleet 's loadout base for all nuclear ballistic missile submarines .
However , the domestic trade was booming .
Many slaves were transported in the coastwise slave trade , with slave ships stopping at ports such as Charleston .
The war had shattered the prosperity of the antebellum city .
It also causes the red color of the planet Mars .
One to two percent of the human population has red hair ; the color is produced by high levels of the reddish pigment pheomelanin -LRB- which also accounts for the red color of the lips -RRB- and relatively low levels of the dark pigment eumelanin .
A different variety of dye was made from Porphyrophora hamelii -LRB- Armenian cochineal -RRB- scale insects that lived on the roots and stems of certain herbs .
Kermes is also mentioned in the Bible .
This was also the origin of the expression `` dyed in the grain . ''
But , like many colors , it also had a negative association , with heat , destruction and evil .
A prayer to god Isis said : `` Oh Isis , protect me from all things evil and red . ''
Red was used to color statues and the skin of gladiators .
In Roman mythology red is associated with the god of war , Mars .
The vexilloid of the Roman Empire had a red background with the letters SPQR in gold .
The Romans liked bright colors , and many Roman villas were decorated with vivid red murals .
It was one of the finest reds of ancient times -- the paintings have retained their brightness for more than twenty centuries .
Red was the color of the banner of the Byzantine emperors .
Together they flooded the basilica with a mystical light .
Soon stained glass windows were being added to cathedrals all across France , England and Germany .
The insects were gathered , dried , crushed , and boiled with different ingredients in a long and complicated process , which produced a brilliant scarlet .
Red played an important role in Chinese philosophy .
Each Emperor chose the color that his fortune-tellers believed would bring the most prosperity and good fortune to his reign .
Red was also a badge of rank .
Red was the color worn by the royal guards of honor , and the color of the carriages of the imperial family .
When the imperial family traveled , their servants and accompanying officials carried red and purple umbrellas .
Of an official who had talent and ambition , it was said `` he is so red he becomes purple . ''
Red was also featured in Chinese Imperial architecture .
There were guilds of dyers who specialized in red in Venice and other large Europeans cities .
It made a more vivid red than ordinary Kermes .
The finest and most expensive variety of red made from insects was the `` Kermes '' of Armenia -LRB- Armenian cochineal , also known as Persian kirmiz -RRB- , made by collecting and crushing Porphyophora hamelii , an insect which lived on the roots and stems of certain grasses .
The pigment and dye merchants of Venice imported and sold all of these products and also manufactured their own color , called Venetian red , which was considered the most expensive and finest red in Europe .
Its secret ingredient was arsenic , which brightened the color .
It worked particularly well on silk , satin and other luxury textiles .
Soon cochineal began to arrive in European ports aboard convoys of Spanish galleons .
Later it was used by Thomas Gainsborough , Seurat and J.M.W. Turner .
They were called the `` Furies of the guillotine '' .
During the Reign of Terror a statue of a woman titled liberty , painted red , was placed in the square in front of the guillotine .
As the Industrial Revolution spread across Europe , chemists and manufacturers sought new red dyes that could be used for large-scale manufacture of textiles .
The fabric was widely exported from Europe to Africa , the Middle East and America .
The hall is blood red and pale yellow , with a green billiard table in the center , and four lamps of lemon yellow , with rays of orange and green .
Everywhere it is a battle and antithesis of the most different reds and greens . ''
He wrote , `` My choice of colors is not based on scientific theory ; it is based on observation , upon feelings , upon the real nature of each experience ... I just try to find a color which corresponds to my feelings . ''
Rothko also began using the new synthetic pigments , but not always with happy results .
The Naphtol did well , but the Lithol slowly changed color when exposed to light .
Carmine lake was made from the cochineal insect from Central and South America , Kermes lake came from a different scale insect , kermes vermilio , which thrived on oak trees around the Mediterranean .
Other red lakes were made from the rose madder plant and from the brazilwood tree .
This is the principle that is used to make all of the colors on your computer screen and your television .
Violet is made on a computer screen in a similar way , but with a greater amount of blue light and less red light .
So that the maximum number of colors can be accurately reproduced on your computer screen , each color has been given a code number , or sRGB , which tells your computer the intensity of the red , green and blue components of that color .
The remaining reddened sunlight can also be scattered by cloud droplets and other relatively large particles , which give the sky above the horizon its red glow .
Today , red and red-orange laser diodes are widely available to the public in the form of extremely inexpensive laser pointers .
Portable , high-powered versions are also available for various applications .
It has a vital role in the breakdown of the sugars manufactured by chlorophyll .
When the days of autumn are bright and cool , and the nights are chilly but not freezing , the brightest colorations usually develop .
Red hair varies from a deep burgundy through burnt orange to bright copper .
-LRB- See red hair -RRB- .
Red is associated with dominance in a number of animal species .
Red can also affect the perception of dominance by others , leading to significant differences in mortality , reproductive success and parental investment between individuals displaying red and those not .
Controlled tests have demonstrated that wearing red does not increase performance or levels of testosterone during exercise , so the effect is likely to be produced by perceived rather than actual performance .
In western countries red is a symbol of martyrs and sacrifice , particularly because of its association with blood .
The Saint George 's Cross became the Flag of England in the 16th century , and now is part of the Union Flag of the United Kingdom , as well as the Flag of the Republic of Georgia .
In recent years the celebration of Saint Valentine ' s day has spread beyond Christian countries to Japan and China and other parts of the world .
Red is the color most commonly associated with joy and well being .
It is the color of celebration and ceremony .
A red carpet is often used to welcome distinguished guests .
Red is also the traditional color of seats in opera houses and theaters .
Red is the traditional color of warning and danger .
Red is the international color of stop signs and stop lights on highways and intersections .
Red also stands out more clearly against a cool natural backdrop of blue sky , green trees or gray buildings .
In Chinese cultural traditions , red is associated with weddings -LRB- where brides traditionally wear red dresses -RRB- and red paper is frequently used to wrap gifts of money or other objects .
On the more negative side , obituaries are traditionally written in red ink , and to write someone 's name in red signals either cutting them out of one 's life , or that they have died .
Red is also associated with either the feminine or the masculine -LRB- yin and yang respectively -RRB- , depending on the source .
In other parts of Africa , however , red is a color of mourning , representing death .
Major League Baseball is especially well known for red teams .
After the red scare faded , the team was known as the `` Reds '' again .
The Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim are also known for their color red , as are the St. Louis Cardinals , Arizona Diamondbacks , and the Philadelphia Phillies .
Red is one of the most common colors used on national flags .
Red is the color of the flags of several countries that once belonged to the former British Empire .
The flag of the United States bears the colors of Britain , the colors of the French tricolore include red as part of the old Paris coat of arms , and other countries ' flags , such as those of Australia , New Zealand , and Fiji , carry a small inset of the British flag in memory of their ties to that country .
Many former colonies of Spain , such as Mexico , Colombia , Ecuador , Cuba , Puerto Rico , Peru , and Venezuela , also feature red-one of the colors of the Spanish flag-on their own banners .
Navy flags are often red and yellow .
The flags of the Czech Republic and Poland use red for historic heraldic reasons -LRB- see Coat of arms of Poland and Coat of arms of the Czech Republic -RRB- & not due to Pan-Slavic connotations .
In Mein Kampf , Hitler explained that they were `` revered colors expressive of our homage to the glorious past . ''
The red also symbolized the social program of the Nazis , aimed at German workers .
The government was denounced by the more radical revolutionaries .
-LRB- Contre nous de la tyrannie , l'entendard sanglant est leve -RRB- .
This convention is relatively recent : before the 2000 presidential election , media outlets assigned red and blue to both parties , sometimes alternating the allocation for each election .
During the Cultural Revolution in China , Party ideology was enforced by the Red Guards , and the sayings of Mao Zedong were published as a small red book in hundreds of millions of copies .
The flag of the Communist Party of China became a red banner with a hammer and sickle , similar to that on the Soviet flag .
-LSB- clarification needed -RSB-
Ports and industrial centres outside London were also attacked .
Other ports including Bristol , Cardiff , Portsmouth , Plymouth , Southampton and Swansea were also bombed , as were the industrial cities of Birmingham , Belfast , Coventry , Glasgow , Manchester and Sheffield .
Birmingham and Coventry were chosen because of the Spitfire and tank factories in Birmingham and the many munitions factories in Coventry .
The bombing failed to demoralise the British into surrender or significantly damage the war economy .
The eight months of bombing never seriously hampered British production and the war industries continued to operate and expand .
Enemy industry , their seats of government , factories and communications could be destroyed , effectively taking away their means to resist .
RAF Bomber Command 's policy in particular would attempt to achieve victory through the destruction of civilian will , communications and industry .
The OKL did not oppose the strategic bombardment of enemy industries and or cities , and believed it could greatly affect the balance of power on the battlefield in Germany 's favour by disrupting production and damaging civilian morale , but they did not believe that air power alone could be decisive .
The failure to implement his vision for the new Luftwaffe was largely attributable to his immediate successors .
The Luftwaffe was not pressured into ground support operations because of pressure from the army , or because it was led by ex-army personnel .
It was instead a mission that suited the Luftwaffe 's existing approach to warfare ; a culture of joint inter-service operations , rather than independent strategic air campaigns .
This fact had important implications .
It showed the extent to which Hitler personally mistook Allied strategy for one of morale breaking instead of one of economic warfare , with the collapse of morale as an additional bonus .
Hitler was much more attracted to the political aspects of bombing .
Such principles made it much harder to integrate the air force into the overall strategy and produced in Göring a jealous and damaging defence of his `` empire '' while removing Hitler voluntarily from the systematic direction of the Luftwaffe at either the strategic or operational level .
When Hitler tried to intervene more in the running of the air force later in the war , he was faced with a political conflict of his own making between himself and Göring , which was not fully resolved until the war was almost over .
Operations were carried out every night thereafter .
Destroying RAF Fighter Command would allow the Germans to gain control of the skies over the invasion area .
The replacement of pilots and aircrew was more difficult .
Both the RAF and Luftwaffe struggled to replace manpower losses , though the Germans had larger reserves of trained aircrew .
The circumstances affected the Germans more than the British .
Operating over home territory , British flyers could fly again if they survived being shot down .
On 7 September , the Germans shifted away from the destruction of the RAF 's supporting structures .
German intelligence suggested Fighter Command was weakening , and an attack on London would force it into a final battle of annihilation while compelling the British Government to surrender .
It is argued that persisting with attacks on RAF airfields might have won air superiority for the Luftwaffe .
Others argue that the Luftwaffe made little impression on Fighter Command in the last week of August and first week of September and that the shift in strategy was not decisive .
Regardless of the ability of the Luftwaffe to win air superiority , Adolf Hitler was frustrated that it was not happening quickly enough .
And should they declare they will greatly increase their attacks on our cities , then we will erase their cities . ''
It was decided to focus on bombing Britain 's industrial cities in daylight to begin with .
The first major raid in this regard took place on 7 September .
Although there were a few large air battles fought in daylight later in the month and into October , the Luftwaffe switched its main effort to night attacks in order to reduce losses .
This became official policy on 7 October .
The air campaign soon got underway against London and other British cities .
However , the Luftwaffe faced limitations .
It had no time to gather reliable intelligence on Britain 's industries .
Moreover , OKL could not settle on an appropriate strategy .
German planners had to decide whether the Luftwaffe should deliver the weight of its attacks against a specific segment of British industry such as aircraft factories , or against a system of interrelated industries such as Britain 's import and distribution network , or even in a blow aimed at breaking the morale of the British population .
The Luftwaffe 's strategy became increasingly aimless over the winter of 1940 -- 1941 .
News reports of the Spanish Civil War , such as the bombing of Barcelona , supported the 50-casualties-per-tonne estimate .
In addition to high explosive and incendiary bombs the enemy would possibly use poison gas and even bacteriological warfare , all with a high degree of accuracy .
It expected about 90 % of evacuees to stay in private homes , and conducted an extensive survey to determine available space .
Detailed preparations for transporting them were developed .
In addition , authorities expected that the raids would be brief and during the day .
Very deeply buried shelters provided the most protection against a direct hit .
The most important existing communal shelters were the London Underground stations .
Each day orderly lines of people queued until 4 pm , when they were allowed to enter the stations .
Communal shelters never housed more than one seventh of Greater London residents , however .
By the end of 1940 significant improvements had been made in the Underground and in many other large shelters .
Entertainment included concerts , films , plays and books from local libraries .
:75,261 However , another American who visited Britain , the publisher Ralph Ingersoll , wrote soon after the Blitz eased on 15 September that :
Although the stress of the war resulted in many anxiety attacks , eating disorders , fatigue , weeping , miscarriages , and other physical and mental ailments , society did not collapse .
People left shelters when told instead of refusing to leave , although many housewives reportedly enjoyed the break from housework .
Some people even told government surveyors that they enjoyed air raids if they occurred occasionally , perhaps once a week .
Support for peace negotiations declined from 29 % in February .
The civilians of London had an enormous role to play in the protection of their city .
Only one year earlier , there had only been 6,600 full-time and 13,800 part-time firemen in the entire country .
Many unemployed were drafted into the Royal Army Pay Corps .
Hoare considered it the female branch of the ARP .
They organised the evacuation of children , established centres for those displaced by bombing , and operated canteens , salvage and recycling schemes .
These were issued in the event of bombing taking place with gas before evacuation .
Dowding accepted that as AOC , he was responsible for the day and night defence of Britain , and the blame , should he fail , would be laid at his door .
While the failure of night defence preparation was undeniable , it was not the AOC 's responsibility to accrue resources .
While it was permissible to disagree with Dowding 's operational and tactical deployment of forces , the failure of the Government and Air Ministry to allot resources was ultimately the responsibility of the civil and military institutions at large .
The attitude of the Air Ministry was in contrast to the experiences of the First World War when a few German bombers caused physical and psychological damage out of all proportion to their numbers .
Although night air defence was causing greater concern before the war , it was not at the forefront of RAF planning .
British air doctrine , since the time of Chief of the Air Staff Hugh Trenchard in the early 1920s , had stressed offence was the best means of defence .
To prevent German formations from hitting targets in Britain , RAF 's Bomber Command would destroy Luftwaffe aircraft on their own bases , aircraft in their factories and fuel reserves by attacking oil plants .
This strategy retarded the development of fighter defences in the 1930s .
Dowding agreed air defence would require some offensive action , and fighters could not defend Britain alone .
The concept was the same as the Lorenz system .
Two aerials were rotated for the two converging beams which were pointed to cross directly over the target .
The German bombers would attach themselves to either beam and fly along it until they started to pick up the signal from the other beam .
Special receivers were mounted in He 111s , with a radio mast on the bomber 's fuselage .
X-Gerät received and analysed the pulses , giving the pilot both visual and aural `` on course '' signals .
Three beams intersected the beam along the He 111 's flight path .
When the third cross-beam was reached the bomb aimer activated a third trigger , which stopped the first hand of the equipment 's clock , with the second hand continuing .
When the second hand re-aligned with the first , the bombs were released .
The single approach beam along which the bomber tracked was monitored by a ground controller .
The signals from the station were retransmitted by the bomber 's equipment .
This way the distance the bomber travelled along the beam could be precisely verified .
Although its maximum usable range was similar to the previous systems , it was not unknown for specific buildings to be hit .
Jones therefore began a search for the German beams .
A subtle form of distortion was introduced .
Up to nine special transmitters directed their signals at the beams in a manner that widened its path , negating its ability to accurately locate targets .
Confidence in the device was diminished by the time the Luftwaffe decided to launch large-scale raids .
The counter operations were carried out by British Electronic Counter Measures -LRB- ECM -RRB- units under Wing Commander Edward Addison , No. 80 Wing RAF .
The production of false radio navigation signals by re-transmitting the originals was a technique known as masking beacons -LRB- meacons -RRB- .
The receipt of the German signal by the receiver was duly passed to the transmitter , the signal to be repeated .
The action did not guarantee automatic success .
The reverse would apply only if the meacon were closer .
In general , German bombers were likely to get through to their targets without too much difficulty .
The fake fires could only begin when the bombing started over an adjacent target and its effects were brought under control .
Too early and the chances of success receded ; too late and the real conflagration at the target would exceed the diversionary fires .
These units were fed from two adjacent tanks containing oil and water .
Initially the change in strategy caught the RAF off-guard , and caused extensive damage and civilian casualties .
The fighting in the air was more intense in daylight .
On 8 September , the Luftwaffe returned .
This time 412 people were killed and 747 severely wounded .
On 9 September the OKL appeared to be backing two strategies .
Its round-the-clock bombing of London was an immediate attempt to force the British government to capitulate , but it was also striking at Britain 's vital sea communications to achieve a victory through siege .
Large air battles broke out , lasting for most of the day .
The first attack merely damaged the rail network for three days , and the second attack failed altogether .
On 15 October , the bombers returned and about 900 fires were started by the mix of 415 short tons -LRB- 376 t -RRB- of high explosive and 11 short tons -LRB- 10.0 t -RRB- of incendiaries dropped .
Five main rail lines were cut in London and rolling stock damaged .
Loge continued during October .
Over 6,000 short tons -LRB- 5,400 t -RRB- was aimed at London during the night .
Hull and Glasgow were attacked , but 800 short tons -LRB- 730 t -RRB- of bombs were spread out all over Britain .
It also took part in the bombing over Britain .
The mines ' ability to destroy entire streets earned them respect in Britain , but several fell unexploded into British hands allowing counter-measures to be developed which damaged the German anti-shipping campaign .
The London docks and railways communications had taken a heavy pounding , and much damage had been done to the railway system outside .
But the great bulk of the traffic went on ; and Londoners -- though they glanced apprehensively each morning at the list of closed stretches of line displayed at their local station , or made strange detours round back streets in the buses -- still got to work .
In late 1940 , Churchill credited the shelters :
The damage to military targets much less '' , and stated that he had seen numerous examples of untouched targets surrounded by buildings destroyed by errant bombs .
Ingersoll wrote that the difference between the failure of the German campaign against military targets versus its success in continental Europe was the RAF retaining control of the air. :79 -- 80,174
British night air defences were in a poor state .
The difference this made to the effectiveness of air defences is questionable .
Over several months , the 20,000 shells spent per raider shot down in September 1940 , was reduced to 4,087 in January 1941 and to 2,963 shells in February 1941 .
Douglas set about introducing more squadrons and dispersing the few GL sets to create a carpet effect in the southern counties .
By the height of the Blitz , they were becoming more successful .
But even in May , 67 % of the sorties were visual cat 's - eye missions .
Curiously , while 43 % of the contacts in May 1941 were by visual sightings , they accounted for 61 % of the combats .
Yet when compared with Luftwaffe daylight operations , there was a sharp decline in German losses to 1 % .
Eventually it would become a success .
From November 1940 -- February 1941 , the Luftwaffe shifted its strategy and attacked other industrial cities .
On the night of 13/14 November , 77 He 111s of Kampfgeschwader 26 -LRB- 26th Bomber Wing , or KG 26 -RRB- bombed London while 63 from KG 55 hit Birmingham .
The next night , a large force hit Coventry .
Other sources say 449 bombers and a total of 530 short tons -LRB- 480 t -RRB- of bombs were dropped .
Over 10,000 incendiaries were dropped .
Only one bomber was lost , to anti-aircraft fire , despite the RAF flying 125 night sorties .
No follow up raids were made , as OKL underestimated the British power of recovery -LRB- as Bomber Command would do over Germany from 1943 -- 1945 -RRB- .
The Germans were surprised by the success of the attack .
The concentration had been achieved by accident .
By the end of November , 1,100 bombers were available for night raids .
An average of 200 were able to strike per night .
Two heavy -LRB- 50 short tons -LRB- 45 t -RRB- of bombs -RRB- attacks were also flown .
Altogether , 130 German bombers destroyed the historical centre of London .
Not all of the Luftwaffe 's effort was made against inland cities .
On 17 January around 100 bombers dropped a high concentration of incendiaries , some 32,000 in all .
Four days later 230 tons was dropped including 60,000 incendiaries .
It hoped to destroy morale by destroying the enemy 's factories and public utilities as well as its food stocks -LRB- by attacking shipping -RRB- .
These were marked out by parachute flares .
The effectiveness of British countermeasures against Knickebein , which was designed to avoid area attacks , forced the Luftwaffe to resort to these methods .
KGr 100 increased its use of incendiaries from 13 -- 28 percent .
Use of incendiaries , which were inherently inaccurate , indicated much less care was taken to avoid civilian property close to industrial sites .
Other units ceased using parachute flares and opted for explosive target markers .
In 1941 , the Luftwaffe shifted strategy again .
He ordered attacks to be carried out on those targets which were also the target of the Kriegsmarine .
Hitler 's interest in this strategy forced Göring and Jeschonnek to review the air war against Britain in January 1941 .
Instead , he wasted aircraft of Fliegerführer Atlantik -LRB- Flying Command Atlantic -RRB- on bombing mainland Britain instead of attacks against convoys .
He was always reluctant to cooperate with Raeder .
Even so , the decision by OKL to support the strategy in Directive 23 was instigated by two considerations , both of which had little to do with wanting to destroy Britain 's sea communications in conjunction with the Kriegsmarine .
The indifference displayed by OKL to Directive 23 was perhaps best demonstrated in operational directives which diluted its effect .
From the German point of view , March 1941 saw an improvement .
X - and Y-Gerät beams were placed over false targets and switched only at the last minute .
But the Luftwaffe 's effort eased in the last 10 attacks as seven Kampfgruppen moved to Austria in preparation for the Balkans Campaign in Yugoslavia and Greece .
The defences failed to prevent widespread damage but on some occasions did prevent German bombers concentrating on their targets .
Added to the tension of the mission which exhausted and drained crews , tiredness caught up with and killed many .
In one incident on 28/29 April , Peter Stahl of KG 30 was flying on his 50th mission .
Regardless , the Luftwaffe could still inflict huge damage .
Such an event would have serious consequences on the future course of the war , should the Germans succeed .
The considerable rail network distributed to the rest of the country .
Operations against Liverpool in the Liverpool Blitz were successful .
Minister of Home Security Herbert Morrison was also worried morale was breaking , noting the defeatism expressed by civilians .
Other sources point to half of the port 's 144 berths rendered unusable , while cargo unloading capability was reduced by 75 % .
Roads and railways were blocked and ships could not leave harbour .
Around 66,000 houses were destroyed , 77,000 people made homeless , and 1,900 people killed and 1,450 seriously hurt on one night .
Operations against London up until May 1941 could also have a severe impact on morale .
The populace of the port of Hull became ` trekkers ' , people who underwent a mass exodus from cities before , during , and after attacks .
However , the attacks failed to knock out or damage railways , or port facilities for long , even in the Port of London , a target of many attacks .
On 13 March , the upper Clyde port of Clydebank near Glasgow was bombed .
Many more ports were attacked .
Plymouth was attacked five times before the end of the month while Belfast , Hull , and Cardiff were hit .
Cardiff was bombed on three nights , Portsmouth centre was devastated by five raids .
In March 1941 , two raids on Plymouth and London dehoused 148,000 people .
Still , while heavily damaged , British ports continued to support war industry and supplies from North America continued to pass through them while the Royal Navy continued to operate in Plymouth , Southampton , and Portsmouth .
On 10/11 March , 240 bombers dropped 193 tons of high explosives and 46,000 incendiaries .
Many houses and commercial centres were heavily damaged , the electrical supply was knocked out , and five oil tanks and two magazines exploded .
Nine days later , two waves of 125 and 170 bombers dropped heavy bombs , including 160 tons of high explosive and 32,000 incendiaries .
Much of the city centre was destroyed .
Damage was inflicted on the port installations , but many bombs fell on the city itself .
On 17 April 346 tons of explosives and 46,000 incendiaries were dropped from 250 bombers led by KG 26 .
By the end of the air campaign over Britain , only eight percent of the German effort against British ports was made using mines .
Sewer , rail , docklands , and electric installations were damaged .
Much damage was done .
A further attack on the Clyde , this time at Greenock , took place on 6 and 7 May .
This caused more than 2,000 fires .
Another raid was carried out on 11/12 May 1941 .
Westminster Abbey and the Law Courts were damaged , while the Chamber of the House of Commons was destroyed .
All but one railway station line was blocked for several weeks .
German air supremacy at night was also now under threat .
This was not immediately apparent .
In subsequent months a steady number of German bombers would fall to night fighters .
Improved aircraft designs were in the offing with the Bristol Beaufighter , then under development .
It would prove formidable , but its development was slow .
It was the first air victory for the airborne radar .
Losses were minimal .
In the following month , 22 German bombers were lost with 13 confirmed to have been shot down by night fighters .
On 10/11 May , London suffered severe damage , but 10 German bombers were downed .
The military effectiveness of bombing varied .
The British official history on war production noted the great impact was upon the supply of components rather than complete equipment .
In April 1941 , when the targets were British ports , rifle production fell by 25 % , filled-shell production by 4.6 % , and in smallarms production 4.5 % overall .
The attacks against Birmingham took war industries some three months to recover fully from .
The exhausted population took three weeks to overcome the effects of an attack .
The air offensive against the RAF and British industry failed to have the desired effect .
Though militarily ineffective , the Blitz caused enormous damage to Britain 's infrastructure and housing stock .
Some writers claim the Air Staff ignored a critical lesson , however : British morale did not break .
The first three directives in 1940 did not mention civilian populations or morale in any way .
The 10th directive in October 1940 mentioned morale by name .
AOC Bomber Command Arthur Harris did see German morale as a major objective .
A summary of Harris ' strategic intentions was clear :
This imagery of people in the Blitz was and is powerfully portrayed in film , radio , newspapers and magazines .
At the time it was a useful propaganda tool for home and foreign consumption .
What he saw as the myth -- serene national unity -- became `` historical truth '' .
In particular , class division was most evident .
So worried were the Government over the sudden campaign of leaflets and posters distributed by the Communist Party in Coventry and London , that the Police were sent in to seize their production facilities .
The Government , up until November 1940 , was opposed to the centralised organisation of shelter .
Home Secretary Sir John Anderson was replaced by Morrison soon afterwards , in the wake of a Cabinet reshuffle as the dying Neville Chamberlain resigned .
He recognised the right of the public to seize tube stations and authorised plans to improve their condition and expand them by tunnelling .
Still , many British citizens , who had been members of the Labour Party , itself inert over the issue , turned to the Communist Party .
Though they failed to make a large gain in influence , the membership of the Party had doubled by June 1941 .
Rumours that Jewish support was underpinning the Communist surge were frequent .
Moreover , there was also racial antagonism between the small Black , Indian and Jewish communities .
In other cities , class conflict was more evident .
Civilians left for more remote areas of the country .
However , resentment of rich self-evacuees or hostile treatment of poor ones were signs of persistence of class resentments although these factors did not appear to threaten social order .
Reception committees were completely unprepared for the condition of some of the children .
Far from displaying the nation 's unity in time of war , the scheme backfired , often aggravating class antagonism and bolstering prejudice about the urban poor .
The lack of bombing in the Phoney War contributed significantly to the return of people to the cities , but class conflict was not eased a year later when evacuation operations had to be put into effect again .
One species in particular received widespread attention -- the whooping crane .
These later laws had a low cost to society -- the species were relatively rare -- and little opposition was raised .
It also directed federal land agencies to preserve habitat on their lands .
The endangered species program was expanded by the Endangered Species Act of 1969 .
Congress responded with a completely rewritten law , the Endangered Species Act of 1973 which was signed by Nixon on December 28 , 1973 -LRB- Pub.L .
93 -- 205 -RRB- .
The staff , under Dr. Train 's leadership , incorporated dozens of new principles and ideas into the landmark legislation ; crafting a document that completely changed the direction of environmental conservation in the United States .
Dr. Bertrand is credited with writing the most challenged section of the Act , the `` takings '' clause - Section 2 .
During the listing process , economic factors can not be considered , but must be '' based solely on the best scientific and commercial data available . ''
The House committee 's statement was `` that economic considerations have no relevance to determinations regarding the status of species . ''
`` The purpose of the notice and comment requirement is to provide for meaningful public participation in the rulemaking process . ''
summarized the Ninth Circuit court in the case of Idaho Farm Bureau Federation v. Babbitt .
In practice , most designations occur several years after listing .
Between 1978 and 1986 the FWS regularly designated critical habitat .
As a result , few critical habitats were designated between 1986 and the late 1990s .
As of December , 2006 , the Reagan regulation has not yet been replaced though its use has been suspended .
Nonetheless , the agencies have generally changed course and since about 2005 have tried to designate critical habitat at or near the time of listing .
Donald Baur , in The Endangered Species Act : law , policy , and perspectives , concluded , '' ... the exemption provision is basically a nonfactor in the administration of the ESA .
For instance , the San Bruno Habitat Conservation Plan / Incidental Take Permit is good for 30 years and the Wal-Mart store -LRB- in Florida -RRB- permit expires after one year .
Because the permit is issued by a federal agency to a private party , it is a federal action-which means other federal laws can apply , such as the National Environmental Policy Act or NEPA .
In the conference report on the 1982 amendments , Congress specified that it intended the San Bruno plan to act `` as a model '' for future conservation plans developed under the incidental take exemption provision and that `` the adequacy of similar conservation plans should be measured against the San Bruno plan '' .
The policy relies on the `` enhancement of survival '' provision of Section § 1539 -LRB- a -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- -LRB- A -RRB- .
A section of that Appropriations Act directed the Secretary of the Interior to reissue within 60 days of enactment the final rule published on April 2 , 2009 , that identified the Northern Rocky Mountain population of gray wolf -LRB- Canis lupus -RRB- as a distinct population segment -LRB- DPS -RRB- and to revise the List of Endangered and Threatened Wildlife by removing most of the gray wolves in the DPS .
While no studies have shown that the Act 's negative effects , in total , exceed the positive effects , many economists believe that finding a way to reduce such perverse incentives would lead to more effective protection of endangered species .
Subsequently , lists of endangered and threatened species within their boundaries have been prepared by each state .
In engineering and applied physics on the other hand , vacuum refers to any space in which the pressure is lower than atmospheric pressure .
Other things equal , lower gas pressure means higher-quality vacuum .
Much higher-quality vacuums are possible .
Ultra-high vacuum chambers , common in chemistry , physics , and engineering , operate below one trillionth -LRB- 10 − 12 -RRB- of atmospheric pressure -LRB- 100 nPa -RRB- , and can reach around 100 particles/cm3 .
In the electromagnetism in the 19th century , vacuum was thought to be filled with a medium called aether .
Ancient Greek philosophers debated the existence of a vacuum , or void , in the context of atomism , which posited void and atom as the fundamental explanatory elements of physics .
In his Physics , book IV , Aristotle offered numerous arguments against the void : for example , that motion through a medium which offered no impediment could continue ad infinitum , there being no reason that something would come to rest anywhere in particular .
Almost two thousand years after Plato , René Descartes also proposed a geometrically based alternative theory of atomism , without the problematic nothing -- everything dichotomy of void and atom .
By the ancient definition however , directional information and magnitude were conceptually distinct .
This theory helped refine the predictions of his earlier formulated Dirac equation , and successfully predicted the existence of the positron , confirmed two years later .
This has far reaching consequences on the `` emptiness '' of space between particles .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Planets are too massive for their trajectories to be significantly affected by these forces , although their atmospheres are eroded by the solar winds .
-LSB- unreliable source ? -RSB-
However , according to Nader El-Bizri , the physicist Ibn al-Haytham -LRB- Alhazen , 965 -- 1039 -RRB- and the Mu ` tazili theologians disagreed with Aristotle and Al-Farabi , and they supported the existence of a void .
Medieval thought experiments into the idea of a vacuum considered whether a vacuum was present , if only for an instant , between two flat plates when they were rapidly separated .
There was much discussion of whether the air moved in quickly enough as the plates were separated , or , as Walter Burley postulated , whether a ` celestial agent ' prevented the vacuum arising .
Robert Boyle improved Guericke 's design and with the help of Robert Hooke further developed vacuum pump technology .
Borrowing somewhat from the pneuma of Stoic physics , aether came to be regarded as the rarefied air from which it took its name , -LRB- see Aether -LRB- mythology -RRB- -RRB- .
Early theories of light posited a ubiquitous terrestrial and celestial medium through which light propagated .
Additionally , the concept informed Isaac Newton 's explanations of both refraction and of radiant heat .
19th century experiments into this luminiferous aether attempted to detect a minute drag on the Earth 's orbit .
While the Earth does , in fact , move through a relatively dense medium in comparison to that of interstellar space , the drag is so minuscule that it could not be detected .
As the gas density decreases , the MFP increases , and when the MFP is longer than the chamber , pump , spacecraft , or other objects present , the continuum assumptions of fluid mechanics do not apply .
The MFP of air at atmospheric pressure is very short , 70 nm , but at 100 mPa -LRB- ~ 6997100000000000000 ♠ 1 × 10 − 3 Torr -RRB- the MFP of room temperature air is roughly 100 mm , which is on the order of everyday objects such as vacuum tubes .
The Crookes radiometer turns when the MFP is larger than the size of the vanes .
The SI unit of pressure is the pascal -LRB- symbol Pa -RRB- , but vacuum is often measured in torrs , named for Torricelli , an early Italian physicist -LRB- 1608 -- 1647 -RRB- .
Low vacuum is often measured in millimeters of mercury -LRB- mmHg -RRB- or pascals -LRB- Pa -RRB- below standard atmospheric pressure .
The column will rise or fall until its weight is in equilibrium with the pressure differential between the two ends of the tube .
The simplest design is a closed-end U-shaped tube , one side of which is connected to the region of interest .
An important variation is the McLeod gauge which isolates a known volume of vacuum and compresses it to multiply the height variation of the liquid column .
Other vacuum gauges can measure lower pressures , but only indirectly by measurement of other pressure-controlled properties .
This temperature is dependent on the rate at which the filament loses heat to the surrounding gas , and therefore on the thermal conductivity .
A common variant is the Pirani gauge which uses a single platinum filament as both the heated element and RTD .
Ion gauges are used in ultrahigh vacuum .
In the hot cathode version an electrically heated filament produces an electron beam .
The electrons travel through the gauge and ionize gas molecules around them .
The resulting ions are collected at a negative electrode .
Hot cathode gauges are accurate from 10 − 3 torr to 10 − 10 torr .
The principle behind cold cathode version is the same , except that electrons are produced in a discharge created by a high voltage electrical discharge .
Ionization gauge calibration is very sensitive to construction geometry , chemical composition of gases being measured , corrosion and surface deposits .
Their calibration can be invalidated by activation at atmospheric pressure or low vacuum .
Above this altitude , oxygen enrichment is necessary to prevent altitude sickness in humans that did not undergo prior acclimatization , and spacesuits are necessary to prevent ebullism above 19 km .
Most spacesuits use only 20 kPa -LRB- 150 Torr -RRB- of pure oxygen .
This pressure is high enough to prevent ebullism , but decompression sickness and gas embolisms can still occur if decompression rates are not managed .
The reduction in pressure lowers the temperature at which blood and other body fluids boil , but the elastic pressure of blood vessels ensures that this boiling point remains above the internal body temperature of 37 °C .
Although the blood will not boil , the formation of gas bubbles in bodily fluids at reduced pressures , known as ebullism , is still a concern .
Rapid boiling will cool the skin and create frost , particularly in the mouth , but this is not a significant hazard .
In ultra high vacuum systems , some very `` odd '' leakage paths and outgassing sources must be considered .
As described above , this state is impossible to achieve experimentally .
Nonetheless , it provides a good model for realizable vacuum , and agrees with a number of experimental observations as described next .
QED vacuum has interesting and complex properties .
Vacuum fluctuations are an essential and ubiquitous part of quantum field theory .
Stars , planets , and moons keep their atmospheres by gravitational attraction , and as such , atmospheres have no clearly delineated boundary : the density of atmospheric gas simply decreases with distance from the object .
Vacuum is useful in a variety of processes and devices .
Ultra-high vacuum is used in the study of atomically clean substrates , as only a very good vacuum preserves atomic-scale clean surfaces for a reasonably long time -LRB- on the order of minutes to days -RRB- .
This is the principle behind chemical vapor deposition , physical vapor deposition , and dry etching which are essential to the fabrication of semiconductors and optical coatings , and to surface science .
The reduction of convection provides the thermal insulation of thermos bottles .
The elimination of air friction is useful for flywheel energy storage and ultracentrifuges .
Vacuum induction melting uses electromagnetic induction within a vacuum .
In man-made systems , outgassing has the same effect as a leak and can limit the achievable vacuum .
This is of great concern to space missions , where an obscured telescope or solar cell can ruin an expensive mission .
The pump 's cavity is then sealed from the chamber , opened to the atmosphere , and squeezed back to a minute size .
The above explanation is merely a simple introduction to vacuum pumping , and is not representative of the entire range of pumps in use .
Many variations of the positive displacement pump have been developed , and many other pump designs rely on fundamentally different principles .
None of these pumps are universal ; each type has important performance limitations .
They all share a difficulty in pumping low molecular weight gases , especially hydrogen , helium , and neon .
The lowest pressure that can be attained in a system is also dependent on many things other than the nature of the pumps .
The choice of seals , chamber geometry , materials , and pump-down procedures will all have an impact .
And sometimes , the final pressure is not the only relevant characteristic .
Spanning over four centuries , the Han period is considered a golden age in Chinese history .
To this day , China 's majority ethnic group refers to itself as the `` Han people '' and the Chinese script is referred to as `` Han characters '' .
The emperor was at the pinnacle of Han society .
The period saw a number of limited institutional innovations .
The ultimate Han victory in these wars eventually forced the Xiongnu to accept vassal status as Han tributaries .
These campaigns expanded Han sovereignty into the Tarim Basin of Central Asia , divided the Xiongnu into two separate confederations , and helped establish the vast trade network known as the Silk Road , which reached as far as the Mediterranean world .
After 92 AD , the palace eunuchs increasingly involved themselves in court politics , engaging in violent power struggles between the various consort clans of the empresses and empress dowagers , causing the Han 's ultimate downfall .
China 's first imperial dynasty was the Qin dynasty -LRB- 221 -- 206 BC -RRB- .
Two former rebel leaders , Xiang Yu -LRB- d. 202 BC -RRB- of Chu and Liu Bang -LRB- d. 195 BC -RRB- of Han , engaged in a war to decide who would become hegemon of China , which had fissured into 18 kingdoms , each claiming allegiance to either Xiang Yu or Liu Bang .
Chang ` an was chosen as the new capital of the reunified empire under Han .
To placate his prominent commanders from the war with Chu , Emperor Gaozu enfeoffed some of them as kings .
The kingdoms were never entirely abolished and existed throughout the remainder of Western and Eastern Han .
By the end of his reign , he controlled Manchuria , Mongolia , and the Tarim Basin , subjugating over twenty states east of Samarkand .
Emperor Gaozu was troubled about the abundant Han-manufactured iron weapons traded to the Xiongnu along the northern borders , and he established a trade embargo against the group .
Chinese forces also mounted surprise attacks against Xiongnu who traded at the border markets .
Despite the tribute and a negotiation between Laoshang Chanyu -LRB- r. 174 -- 160 BC -RRB- and Emperor Wen -LRB- r. 180 -- 157 BC -RRB- to reopen border markets , many of the Chanyu 's Xiongnu subordinates chose not to obey the treaty and periodically raided Han territories south of the Great Wall for additional goods .
Emperor Wu accepted this , despite continuing Xiongnu raids .
However , a court conference the following year convinced the majority that a limited engagement at Mayi involving the assassination of the Chanyu would throw the Xiongnu realm into chaos and benefit the Han .
In 121 BC , Han forces expelled the Xiongnu from a vast territory spanning the Hexi Corridor to Lop Nur .
Zhang encountered Dayuan -LRB- Fergana -RRB- , Kangju -LRB- Sogdiana -RRB- , and Daxia -LRB- Bactria , formerly the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom -RRB- ; he also gathered information on Shendu -LRB- Indus River valley of North India -RRB- and Anxi -LRB- the Parthian Empire -RRB- .
The Han also expanded southward .
The naval conquest of Nanyue in 111 BC expanded the Han realm into what are now modern Guangdong , Guangxi , and northern Vietnam .
To pay for his military campaigns and colonial expansion , Emperor Wu nationalized several private industries .
These monopolies included salt , iron , and liquor production , as well as bronze-coin currency .
The issuing of coinage remained a central government monopoly throughout the rest of the Han dynasty .
The government monopolies were eventually repealed when a political faction known as the Reformists gained greater influence in the court .
The Modernists argued for an aggressive and expansionary foreign policy supported by revenues from heavy government intervention in the private economy .
These reforms included outlawing slavery , nationalizing land to equally distribute between households , and introducing new currencies , a change which debased the value of coinage .
This created two rival Xiongnu states : the Southern Xiongnu led by Bi , an ally of Han , and the Northern Xiongnu led by Punu , an enemy of Han .
Dou Gu -LRB- d. 88 AD -RRB- defeated the Northern Xiongnu at the Battle of Yiwulu in AD 73 , evicting them from Turpan and chasing them as far as Lake Barkol before establishing a garrison at Hami .
At the Battle of Ikh Bayan in AD 89 , Dou Xian -LRB- d. AD 92 -RRB- defeated the Northern Xiongnu chanyu who then retreated into the Altai Mountains .
The Xianbei reached their apogee under Tanshihuai -LRB- 檀石槐 -RRB- -LRB- d. AD 180 -RRB- , who consistently defeated Chinese armies .
However , Tanshihuai 's confederation disintegrated after his death .
The conflict ended with the Kushans withdrawing because of lack of supplies .
Emperor Zhang 's -LRB- r. 75 -- 88 AD -RRB- reign came to be viewed by later Eastern Han scholars as the high point of the dynastic house .
Subsequent reigns were increasingly marked by eunuch intervention in court politics and their involvement in the violent power struggles of the imperial consort clans .
This was in revenge for Dou 's purging of the clan of his natural mother -- Consort Liang -- and then concealing her identity from him .
An dismissed Deng 's clan members from office , exiled them and forced many to commit suicide .
After An 's death , his wife , Empress Dowager Yan -LRB- d. 126 AD -RRB- placed the child Marquess of Beixiang on the throne in an attempt to retain power within her family .
The regent Liang Ji -LRB- d. 159 AD -RRB- , brother of Empress Liang Na -LRB- d. 150 AD -RRB- , had the brother-in-law of Consort Deng Mengnü -LRB- later empress -RRB- -LRB- d. 165 AD -RRB- killed after Deng Mengnü resisted Liang Ji 's attempts to control her .
However the emperor permanently barred Li Ying and his associates from serving in office , marking the beginning of the Partisan Prohibitions .
He and his troops confronted Dou Wu and his retainers at the palace gate where each side shouted accusations of treason against the other .
Although the Yellow Turbans were defeated , many generals appointed during the crisis never disbanded their assembled militia forces and used these troops to amass power outside of the collapsing imperial authority .
General-in-Chief He Jin -LRB- d. 189 AD -RRB- , half-brother to Empress He -LRB- d. 189 AD -RRB- , plotted with Yuan Shao -LRB- d. 202 AD -RRB- to overthrow the eunuchs by having several generals march to the outskirts of the capital .
Yuan Shao then besieged Luoyang 's Northern Palace while his brother Yuan Shu -LRB- d. 199 AD -RRB- besieged the Southern Palace .
On September 25 both palaces were breached and approximately two thousand eunuchs were killed .
While being pursued by the Yuan brothers , Zhang committed suicide by jumping into the Yellow River .
He escorted them safely back to the capital and was made Minister of Works , taking control of Luoyang and forcing Yuan Shao to flee .
Dong Zhuo later poisoned Emperor Shao .
Each successive rank gave its holder greater pensions and legal privileges .
The highest government officials could be enfeoffed as marquesses .
By the Eastern Han period , local elites of unattached scholars , teachers , students , and government officials began to identify themselves as members of a larger , nationwide gentry class with shared values and a commitment to mainstream scholarship .
Other agricultural cultivators were of a lower status , such as tenants , wage laborers , and in rare cases slaves .
Artisans and craftsmen had a legal and socioeconomic status between that of owner-cultivator farmers and common merchants .
Unlike slaves , retainers could come and go from their master 's home as they pleased .
Medical physicians , pig breeders , and butchers had a fairly high social status , while occultist diviners , runners , and messengers had low status .
Multiple generations of extended family members did not occupy the same house , unlike families of later dynasties .
According to Confucian family norms , various family members were treated with different levels of respect and intimacy .
For example , there were different accepted time frames for mourning the death of a father versus a paternal uncle .
Under certain conditions dictated by custom , not law , both men and women were able to divorce their spouses and remarry .
The early Western Han court simultaneously accepted the philosophical teachings of Legalism , Huang-Lao Daoism , and Confucianism in making state decisions and shaping government policy .
He abolished all academic chairs or erudites -LRB- bóshì 博士 -RRB- not dealing with the Confucian Five Classics in 136 BC and encouraged nominees for office to receive a Confucian-based education at the Imperial University that he established in 124 BC .
Unlike the original ideology espoused by Confucius , or Kongzi -LRB- 551 -- 479 BC -RRB- , Han Confucianism in Emperor Wu 's reign was the creation of Dong Zhongshu -LRB- 179 -- 104 BC -RRB- .
Dong was a scholar and minor official who aggregated the ethical Confucian ideas of ritual , filial piety , and harmonious relationships with five phases and yin-yang cosmologies .
Much to the interest of the ruler , Dong 's synthesis justified the imperial system of government within the natural order of the universe .
Some important texts were created and studied by scholars .
Philosophical works written by Yang Xiong -LRB- 53 BC -- 18 AD -RRB- , Huan Tan -LRB- 43 BC -- 28 AD -RRB- , Wang Chong -LRB- 27 -- 100 AD -RRB- , and Wang Fu -LRB- 78 -- 163 AD -RRB- questioned whether human nature was innately good or evil and posed challenges to Dong 's universal order .
Various cases for rape , physical abuse and murder were prosecuted in court .
Seasonings included sugar , honey , salt and soy sauce .
Beer and wine were regularly consumed .
Families throughout Han China made ritual sacrifices of animals and food to deities , spirits , and ancestors at temples and shrines , in the belief that these items could be utilized by those in the spiritual realm .
Similar tiles have been found in the Chengdu area of Sichuan province in south-central China .
Its followers believed that the sage-philosopher Laozi -LRB- fl .
Theoretically , there were no limits to his power .
Ranked below the Three Councillors of State were the Nine Ministers , who each headed a specialized ministry .
The Minister of Ceremonies was the chief official in charge of religious rites , rituals , prayers and the maintenance of ancestral temples and altars .
The Minister of the Household was in charge of the emperor 's security within the palace grounds , external imperial parks and wherever the emperor made an outing by chariot .
The Minister of the Guards was responsible for securing and patrolling the walls , towers , and gates of the imperial palaces .
The Minister of Finance was the treasurer for the official bureaucracy and the armed forces who handled tax revenues and set standards for units of measurement .
The year of training was served in one of three branches of the armed forces : infantry , cavalry or navy .
A small professional -LRB- paid -RRB- standing army was stationed near the capital .
The Eastern Han court favored the recruitment of a volunteer army .
When central authority collapsed after 189 AD , wealthy landowners , members of the aristocracy/nobility , and regional military-governors relied upon their retainers to act as their own personal troops -LRB- buqu 部曲 -RRB- .
In 144 BC Emperor Jing abolished private minting in favor of central-government and commandery-level minting ; he also introduced a new coin .
This kept many peasants away from their farms and denied the government a significant portion of its land tax revenue .
The Han-era Chinese used bronze and iron to make a range of weapons , culinary tools , carpenters ' tools and domestic wares .
This system switched the positions of furrows and ridges between growing seasons .
Once experiments with this system yielded successful results , the government officially sponsored it and encouraged peasants to use it .
Architectural historian Robert L. Thorp points out the scarcity of Han-era archaeological remains , and claims that often unreliable Han-era literary and artistic sources are used by historians for clues about lost Han architecture .
Though Han wooden structures decayed , some Han-dynasty ruins made of brick , stone , and rammed earth remain intact .
These pillars feature artistic imitations of wooden and ceramic building components such as roof tiles , eaves , and balustrades .
Professional artisan-engineers -LRB- jiang 匠 -RRB- did not leave behind detailed records of their work .
Han scholars , who often had little or no expertise in mechanical engineering , sometimes provided insufficient information on the various technologies they described .
Nevertheless , some Han literary sources provide crucial information .
This invention is depicted in Han artwork by the 2nd century AD , yet detailed written descriptions were not offered until the 3rd century AD .
These calipers contain inscriptions of the exact day and year they were manufactured .
These tools are not mentioned in any Han literary sources .
As mentioned by Huan Tan in about 20 AD , they were used to turn gears that lifted iron trip hammers , and were used in pounding , threshing and polishing grain .
The armillary sphere , a three-dimensional representation of the movements in the celestial sphere , was invented in Han China by the 1st century BC .
To address the problem of slowed timekeeping in the pressure head of the inflow water clock , Zhang was the first in China to install an additional tank between the reservoir and inflow vessel .
These are the Book on Numbers and Computation , the Arithmetical Classic of the Gnomon and the Circular Paths of Heaven and the Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art .
One of the Han 's greatest mathematical advancements was the world 's first use of negative numbers .
Evidence found in Chinese literature , and archaeological evidence , show that cartography existed in China before the Han .
This date could be revised if the tomb of Qin Shi Huang is excavated and the account in the Records of the Grand Historian concerning a model map of the empire is proven to be true .
The Han-era Chinese sailed in a variety of ships differing from those of previous eras , such as the tower ship .
Each organ of the body was associated with a particular phase .
Illness was viewed as a sign that qi or `` vital energy '' channels leading to a certain organ had been disrupted .
Thus , Han-era physicians prescribed medicine that was believed to counteract this imbalance .
For example , since the wood phase was believed to promote the fire phase , medicinal ingredients associated with the wood phase could be used to heal an organ associated with the fire phase .
These are now known to be nutrition disorders caused by the lack of certain vitamins consumed in one 's diet .
Besides dieting , Han physicians also prescribed moxibustion , acupuncture , and calisthenics as methods of maintaining one 's health .
The Dorian invasion was followed by a poorly attested period of migrations , appropriately called the Greek Dark Ages , but by 800 BC the landscape of Archaic and Classical Greece was discernible .
While the Alexandrian empire did not survive its creator 's death intact , the cultural implications of the spread of Hellenism across much of the Middle East and Asia were to prove long lived as Greek became the lingua franca , a position it retained even in Roman times .
An important factor in maintaining Greek identity was contact with barbarian -LRB- non-Greek -RRB- peoples , which was deepened in the new cosmopolitan environment of the multi-ethnic Hellenistic kingdoms .
In the religious sphere , this was a period of profound change .
However , Greece itself had a tendency to cling to paganism and was not one of the influential centers of early Christianity : in fact , some ancient Greek religious practices remained in vogue until the end of the 4th century , with some areas such as the southeastern Peloponnese remaining pagan until well into the 10th century AD .
Of the new eastern religions introduced into the Greek world , the most successful was Christianity .
Certainly from then on , but likely earlier , the Roman and Greek cultures were virtually fused into a single Greco-Roman world .
However , it was the combination of Orthodox Christianity with a specifically Greek identity that shaped the Greeks ' notion of themselves in the empire 's twilight years .
Greeks are greatly credited for the European cultural revolution , later called , the Renaissance .
As a direct consequence of this situation , Greek-speakers came to play a hugely important role in the Ottoman trading and diplomatic establishment , as well as in the church .
Many Ottomans of Greek -LRB- or Albanian or Serb -RRB- origin were therefore to be found within the Ottoman forces which governed the provinces , from Ottoman Egypt , to Ottomans occupied Yemen and Algeria , frequently as provincial governors .
These Greeks either emigrated , particularly to their fellow Greek Orthodox protector , the Russian Empire , or simply converted to Islam , often only very superficially and whilst remaining crypto-Christian .
The most notable examples of large-scale conversion to Turkish Islam among those today defined as Greek Muslims - excluding those who had to convert as a matter of course on being recruited through the devshirme - were to be found in Crete -LRB- Cretan Turks -RRB- , Greek Macedonia -LRB- for example among the Vallahades of western Macedonia -RRB- , and among Pontic Greeks in the Pontic Alps and Armenian Highlands .
Several Ottoman sultans and princes were also of part Greek origin , with mothers who were either Greek concubines or princesses from Byzantine noble families , one famous example being sultan Selim the Grim , whose mother Gülbahar Hatun was a Pontic Greek .
-LSB- note 1 -RSB- The Greek genocide , in particular the harsh removal of Pontian Greeks from the southern shore area of the Black Sea , contemporaneous with and following the failed Greek Asia Minor Campaign , was part of this process of Turkification of the Ottoman Empire and the placement of its economy and trade , then largely in Greek hands under ethnic Turkish control .
The terms used to define Greekness have varied throughout history but were never limited or completely identified with membership to a Greek state .
On the eve of the Fall of Constantinople the Last Emperor urged his soldiers to remember that they were the descendants of Greeks and Romans .
In his `` Political Constitution '' , he addresses to the nation as `` the people descendant of the Greeks '' .
The Parian Chronicle says that Phthia was the homeland of the Hellenes and that this name was given to those previously called Greeks -LRB- Γραικοί -RRB- .
It seems that the myth was invented when the Greek tribes started to separate from each other in certain areas of Greece and it indicates their common origin .
Aristotle names ancient Hellas as an area in Epirus between Dodona and the Achelous river , the location of the great deluge of Deucalion , a land occupied by the Selloi and the `` Greeks '' who later came to be known as `` Hellenes '' .
Selloi were the priests of Dodonian Zeus and the word probably means `` sacrificers '' -LRB- compare Gothic saljan , `` present , sacrifice '' -RRB- .
There is currently no satisfactory etymology of the name Hellenes .
Some scholars assert that the name Selloi changed to Sellanes and then to Hellanes-Hellenes .
However this etymology connects the name Hellenes with the Dorians who occupied Epirus and the relation with the name Greeks given by the Romans becomes uncertain .
According to the legend it was founded after the Trojan War by the eponymous Amphictyon , brother of Hellen .
In the Hesiodic Catalogue of Women , Graecus is presented as the son of Zeus and Pandora II , sister of Hellen the patriarch of Hellenes .
Aristotle notes that the Hellenes were related with Grai/Greeks -LRB- Meteorologica I.xiv -RRB- a native name of a Dorian tribe in Epirus which was used by the Illyrians .
He also claims that the great deluge must have occurred in the region around Dodona , where the Selloi dwelt .
However , according to the Greek tradition it is more possible that the homeland of the Greeks was originally in central Greece .
Greek colonists from Graia helped to found Cumae -LRB- 900 BC -RRB- in Italy , where they were called Graeces .
When the Romans encountered them they used this name for the colonists and then for all Greeks -LRB- Graeci . -RRB-
The Germanic languages borrowed the word Greeks with an initial `` k '' sound which probably was their initial sound closest to the Latin `` g '' at the time -LRB- Goth .
Kreks -RRB- .
The area out of ancient Attica including Boeotia was called Graïke and is connected with the older deluge of Ogyges , the mythological ruler of Boeotia .
The region was originally occupied by the Minyans who were autochthonous or Proto-Greek speaking people .
In ancient Greek the name Ogygios came to mean `` from earliest days '' .
They were forced to the region that later bore the name Achaea after the Dorian invasion .
There are many controversial theories on the origin of the Achaeans .
Another theory suggests that the Peloponnesian Dorians were the Achaeans .
These theories are rejected by other scholars who , based on linguistic criteria , suggest that the Achaeans were mainland pre-Dorian Greeks .
There is also the theory that there was an Achaean ethnos that migrated from Asia minor to lower Thessaly prior to 2000 BC .
Some Hittite texts mention a nation lying to the west called Ahhiyava or Ahhiya .
Egyptian documents refer to Ekwesh , one of the groups of sea peoples who attached Egypt during the reign of Merneptah -LRB- 1213-1203 BCE -RRB- , who may have been Achaeans .
This myth is connected with a task that can never be fulfilled -LRB- Sisyphos -RRB- and the name can be derived from the PIE root * danu : `` river '' .
There is not any satisfactory theory on their origin .
Some scholars connect Danaans with the Denyen , one of the groups of the sea peoples who attacked Egypt during the reign of Ramesses III -LRB- 1187-1156 BCE -RRB- .
The same inscription mentions the Weshesh who might have been the Achaeans .
Pottery similar to that of Mycenae itself has been found in Tarsus of Cilicia and it seems that some refugees from the Aegean went there after the collapse of the Mycenean civilization .
These Cilicians seem to have been called Dananiyim , the same word as Danaoi who attacked Egypt in 1191 BC along with the Quaouash -LRB- or Weshesh -RRB- who may be Achaeans .
They were also called Danuna according to a Hittite inscription and the same name is mentioned in the Amarna letters .
Julius Pokorny reconstructs the name from the PIE root da : - : `` flow , river '' , da : - nu : `` any moving liquid , drops '' , da : navo `` people living by the river , Skyth .
nomadic people -LRB- in Rigveda water-demons , fem.Da : nu primordial goddess -RRB- , in Greek Danaoi , Egypt .
Danuna '' .
It is also possible that the name Danaans is pre-Greek .
Since its inception , Hellenism was primarily a matter of common culture and the national continuity of the Greek world is a lot more certain than its demographic .
Yet , Hellenism also embodied an ancestral dimension through aspects of Athenian literature that developed and influenced ideas of descent based on autochthony .
This revival provided a powerful impetus to the sense of cultural affinity with ancient Greece and its classical heritage .
The cultural changes undergone by the Greeks are , despite a surviving common sense of ethnicity , undeniable .
About 80 % of the population of Greece is urban , with 28 % concentrated in the city of Athens
Today more than two-thirds of the Greek population in Cyprus is urban .
There is a sizeable Greek minority of about 105,000 -LRB- disputed , sources claim higher -RRB- people , in Albania .
Where Census figures are available , they show around 3 million Greeks outside Greece and Cyprus .
Integration , intermarriage , and loss of the Greek language influence the self-identification of the Omogeneia .
Important centres of the New Greek Diaspora today are London , New York , Melbourne and Toronto .
In 2010 , the Hellenic Parliament introduced a law that enables Diaspora Greeks in Greece to vote in the elections of the Greek state .
This law was later repealed in early 2014 .
Under the Roman Empire , easier movement of people spread Greeks across the Empire and in the eastern territories , Greek became the lingua franca rather than Latin .
The modern-day Griko community of southern Italy , numbering about 60,000 , may represent a living remnant of the ancient Greek populations of Italy .
Businesses frequently comprised the extended family , and with them they brought schools teaching Greek and the Greek Orthodox Church .
About 2,000 Greeks are members of Hellenic Polytheistic Reconstructionism congregations .
Greek art has a long and varied history .
In the West , ancient Greek art was influential in shaping the Roman and later the modern western artistic heritage .
Well into the 19th century , the classical tradition derived from Greece played an important role in the art of the western world .
Novel is also represented by Alexandros Papadiamantis and Nikos Kazantzakis .
The University of Constantinople was Christian Europe 's first secular institution of higher learning since no theological subjects were taught , and considering the original meaning of the world university as a corporation of students , the world 's first university as well .
Although surnames in mainland Greece are static today , dynamic and changing patronymic usage survives in middle names where the genitive of father 's first name is commonly the middle name -LRB- this usage having been passed on to the Russians -RRB- .
In Cyprus , by contrast , surnames follow the ancient tradition of being given according to the father 's name .
Another study from 2012 included 150 dental school students from University of Athens , the result showed that light hair colour -LRB- blonde/light ash brown -RRB- was predominant in 10.7 % of the students .
36 % had medium hair colour -LRB- Light brown/Medium darkest brown -RRB- .
32 % had darkest brown and 21 % black -LRB- 15.3 off black , 6 % midnight black -RRB- .
Muslims regard the Quran as the most important miracle of Muhammad , a proof of his prophethood , and the culmination of a series of divine messages that started with the messages revealed to Adam and ended with Muhammad .
Shortly after Muhammad 's death , the Quran was compiled by his companions who wrote down and memorized parts of it .
There are , however , variant readings , with mostly minor differences in meaning .
It summarizes some , dwells at length on others and , in some cases , presents alternative accounts and interpretations of events .
It sometimes offers detailed accounts of specific historical events , and it often emphasizes the moral significance of an event over its narrative sequence .
The word qurʼān appears about 70 times in the Quran itself , assuming various meanings .
Regardless , it had become an Arabic term by Muhammad 's lifetime .
The term also has closely related synonyms that are employed throughout the Quran .
Each synonym possesses its own distinct meaning , but its use may converge with that of qurʼān in certain contexts .
The latter two terms also denote units of revelation .
The adjective of `` Quran '' has multiple transliterations including `` quranic '' , `` koranic '' , and `` qur ` anic '' , or capitalised as `` Qur ` anic '' , `` Koranic '' , and `` Quranic '' .
Other transliterations of `` Quran '' include `` al-Coran '' , `` Coran '' , `` Kuran '' , and `` al-Qurʼan '' .
Thereafter , he received revelations over a period of 23 years .
Thus a group of Muslims gradually became literate .
Most suras were in use amongst early Muslims since they are mentioned in numerous sayings by both Sunni and Shia sources , relating Muhammad 's use of the Quran as a call to Islam , the making of prayer and the manner of recitation .
There is agreement among scholars that Muhammad himself did not write down the revelation .
Medieval commentators such as Al-Tabari maintained that the term induced two meanings : first , the inability to read or write in general ; second , the inexperience or ignorance of the previous books or scriptures -LRB- but they gave priority to the first meaning -RRB- .
Muhammad 's illiteracy was taken as a sign of the genuineness of his prophethood .
Thus , a group of scribes , most importantly Zayd , collected the verses and produced a hand-written manuscript of the complete book .
The manuscript according to Zayd remained with Abu Bakr until he died .
Zayd 's reaction to the task and the difficulties in collecting the Quranic material from parchments , palm-leaf stalks , thin stones and from men who knew it by heart is recorded in earlier narratives .
In order to preserve the sanctity of the text , he ordered a committee headed by Zayd to use Abu Bakr 's copy and prepare a standard copy of the Quran .
Thus , within 20 years of Muhammad 's death , the Quran was committed to written form .
That text became the model from which copies were made and promulgated throughout the urban centers of the Muslim world , and other versions are believed to have been destroyed .
The present form of the Quran text is accepted by Muslim scholars to be the original version compiled by Abu Bakr .
According to the tests carried out by Oxford University Radiocarbon Accelerator Unit , `` with a probability of more than 95 % , the parchment was from between 568 and 645 '' .
This is possibly the earliest extant exemplar of the Quran , but as the tests allow a range of possible dates , it can not be said with certainty which of the existing versions is the oldest .
Respect for the written text of the Quran is an important element of religious faith by many Muslims , and the Quran is treated with reverence .
The concept of inimitability originates in the Quran where in five different verses opponents are challenged to produce something like the Quran : `` If men and sprites banded together to produce the like of this Quran they would never produce its like not though they backed one another . ''
So the suggestion is that if there are doubts concerning the divine authorship of the Quran , come forward and create something like it .
From the ninth century , numerous works appeared which studied the Quran and examined its style and content .
Others argue that the Quran contains noble ideas , has inner meanings , maintained its freshness through the ages and has caused great transformations in individual level and in the history .
Some scholars state that the Quran contains scientific information that agrees with modern science .
The doctrine of miraculousness of the Quran is further emphasized by Muhammad 's illiteracy since the unlettered prophet could not have been suspected of composing the Quran .
However , a sura classified as Medinan may contain Meccan verses in it and vice versa .
Sura titles are derived from a name or quality discussed in the text , or from the first letters or words of the sura .
The sura arrangement is thus not connected to the sequence of revelation .
There are , however , still 114 occurrences of the Bismillah in the Quran , due to its presence in Quran 27:30 as the opening of Solomon 's letter to the Queen of Sheba .
In addition to and independent of the division into suras , there are various ways of dividing the Quran into parts of approximately equal length for convenience in reading .
Some of these parts are known by names -- which are the first few words by which the juzʼ starts .
The Quranic content is concerned with basic Islamic beliefs including the existence of God and the resurrection .
There is a reference to the afterlife on most pages of the Quran and belief in the afterlife is often referred to in conjunction with belief in God as in the common expression : `` Believe in God and the last day '' .
Some suras indicate the closeness of the event and warn people to be prepared for the imminent day .
Be respectful to your Lord .
The earthquake of the Hour is a mighty thing . ''
`` Nothing is said to you that was not said to the messengers before you , that your lord has at his Command forgiveness as well as a most Grievous Penalty . ''
The revelation does not come directly from God to the prophets .
The ethico-legal concepts and exhortations dealing with righteous conduct are linked to a profound awareness of God , thereby emphasizing the importance of faith , accountability , and the belief in each human 's ultimate encounter with God .
People are invited to perform acts of charity , especially for the needy .
Believers who `` spend of their wealth by night and by day , in secret and in public '' are promised that they `` shall have their reward with their Lord ; on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve '' .
It also affirms family life by legislating on matters of marriage , divorce , and inheritance .
The Quran is one of the fundamental sources of Islamic law -LRB- sharia -RRB- .
As for the manner in which the prayer is to be conducted , the Quran refers to prostration .
Charity , according to the Quran , is a means of self-purification .
.
Also , such a proof can not rely on an argument from authority , citing verse 5:104 .
Lastly , both assertions and rejections require a proof , according to verse 4:174 .
Ismail al-Faruqi and Taha Jabir Alalwani are of the view that any reawakening of the Muslim civilization must start with the Quran ; however , the biggest obstacle on this route is the `` centuries old heritage of tafseer -LRB- exegesis -RRB- and other classical disciplines '' which inhibit a `` universal , epidemiological and systematic conception '' of the Quran 's message .
One of Salam 's core beliefs was that there is no contradiction between Islam and the discoveries that science allows humanity to make about nature and the universe .
Salam also held the opinion that the Quran and the Islamic spirit of study and rational reflection was the source of extraordinary civilizational development .
The effectiveness of such a form is evident for instance in Sura 81 , and there can be no doubt that these passages impressed the conscience of the hearers .
The Quranic text seems to have no beginning , middle , or end , its nonlinear structure being akin to a web or net .
A text is self-referential when it speaks about itself and makes reference to itself .
According to Stefan Wild , the Quran demonstrates this metatextuality by explaining , classifying , interpreting and justifying the words to be transmitted .
, or in the frequent appearance of the `` Say '' tags , when Muhammad is commanded to speak -LRB- e.g. , `` Say : ` God 's guidance is the true guidance ' '' , `` Say : ` Would you then dispute with us concerning God ? ' '' -RRB-
.
According to Wild the Quran is highly self-referential .
Exegesis in those days was confined to the explanation of literary aspects of the verse , the background of its revelation and , occasionally , interpretation of one verse with the help of the other .
If the verse was about a historical event , then sometimes a few traditions -LRB- hadith -RRB- of Muhammad were narrated to make its meaning clear .
Other scholars , however , maintain that no abrogation has taken place in the Quran .
They indicate possibilities as much as they demonstrate the insights of each writer .
The mountain crumbles and Moses faints at the sight of God 's manifestation upon the mountain .
In that state of annihilation from himself , Moses was granted the unveiling of the realities .
From the 11th century onwards several other works appear , including commentaries by Qushayri -LRB- d. 1074 -RRB- , Daylami -LRB- d. 1193 -RRB- , Shirazi -LRB- d. 1209 -RRB- and Suhrawardi -LRB- d. 1234 -RRB- .
These works include material from Sulami 's books plus the author 's contributions .
Rumi makes heavy use of the Quran in his poetry , a feature that is sometimes omitted in translations of Rumi 's work .
A large number of Quranic passages can be found in Mathnawi , which some consider a kind of Sufi interpretation of the Quran .
Rumi 's book is not exceptional for containing citations from and elaboration on the Quran , however , Rumi does mention Quran more frequently .
Simnani -LRB- d. 1336 -RRB- wrote two influential works of esoteric exegesis on the Quran .
He reconciled notions of God 's manifestation through and in the physical world with the sentiments of Sunni Islam .
His work ruh al-Bayan -LRB- the Spirit of Elucidation -RRB- is a voluminous exegesis .
Written in Arabic , it combines the author 's own ideas with those of his predecessors -LRB- notably Ibn Arabi and Ghazali -RRB- , all woven together in Hafiz , a Persian poetry form .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The manuscripts of all three books have survived and have been published several times .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In 1734 , George Sale produced the first scholarly translation of the Quran into English ; another was produced by Richard Bell in 1937 , and yet another by Arthur John Arberry in 1955 .
All these translators were non-Muslims .
There have been numerous translations by Muslims .
The first Quranic manuscripts lacked these marks , therefore several recitations remain acceptable .
The variation in readings of the text permitted by the nature of the defective vocalization led to an increase in the number of readings during the 10th century .
Ibn Mujahid did not explain why he chose seven readers , rather than six or ten , but this may be related to a prophetic tradition -LRB- Muhammad 's saying -RRB- reporting that the Quran had been revealed in seven `` ahruf '' -LRB- meaning seven letters or modes -RRB- .
Today , the most popular readings are those transmitted by Ḥafṣ -LRB- d. 796 -RRB- and Warsh -LRB- d. 812 -RRB- which are according to two of Ibn Mujahid 's reciters , Aasim ibn Abi al-Najud -LRB- Kufa , d. 745 -RRB- and Nafi ` al-Madani -LRB- Medina , d. 785 -RRB- , respectively .
This edition has become the standard for modern printings of the Quran .
The earliest manuscripts were written in Ḥijāzī-type script .
The Hijazi style manuscripts nevertheless confirm that transmission of the Quran in writing began at an early stage .
Toward the end of the ninth century , new scripts began to appear in copies of the Quran and replace earlier scripts .
The reason for discontinuation in the use of the earlier style was that it took too long to produce and the demand for copies was increasing .
Copyists would therefore chose simpler writing styles .
Naskh was in very widespread use .
Nastaʻlīq style was also rarely used in Persian world .
In the beginning , the Quran did not have vocalization markings .
This was in response to widespread demand , unpopularity of printing methods and for aesthetic reasons .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The Quran recounts stories of many of the people and events recounted in Jewish and Christian sacred books -LRB- Tanakh , Bible -RRB- and devotional literature -LRB- Apocrypha , Midrash -RRB- , although it differs in many details .
Adam , Enoch , Noah , Eber , Shelah , Abraham , Lot , Ishmael , Isaac , Jacob , Joseph , Job , Jethro , David , Solomon , Elijah , Elisha , Jonah , Aaron , Moses , Zechariah , John the Baptist and Jesus are mentioned in the Quran as prophets of God -LRB- see Prophets of Islam -RRB- .
The verses in question here refer to the human qualities of coming , going , sitting , satisfaction , anger and sorrow , which are apparently attributed to God .
Although this unacceptable ta ` wil has gained considerable acceptance , it is incorrect and can not be applied to the Quranic verses .
The correct interpretation is that reality a verse refers to .
It is found in all verses , the decisive and the ambiguous alike ; it is not a sort of a meaning of the word ; it is a fact that is too sublime for words .
God has dressed them with words to bring them a bit nearer to our minds ; in this respect they are like proverbs that are used to create a picture in the mind , and thus help the hearer to clearly grasp the intended idea .
The Quran most likely existed in scattered written form during Muhammad 's lifetime .
Early commentaries and Islamic historical sources support the above-mentioned understanding of the Quran 's early development .
Although most variant readings of the text of the Quran have ceased to be transmitted , some still are .
There has been no critical text produced on which a scholarly reconstruction of the Quranic text could be based .
Historically , controversy over the Quran 's content has rarely become an issue , although debates continue on the subject .
Sahih al-Bukhari narrates Muhammad describing the revelations as , `` Sometimes it is -LRB- revealed -RRB- like the ringing of a bell '' and Aisha reported , `` I saw the Prophet being inspired Divinely on a very cold day and noticed the sweat dropping from his forehead -LRB- as the Inspiration was over -RRB- . ''
Muhammad 's first revelation , according to the Quran , was accompanied with a vision .
The agent of revelation is mentioned as the `` one mighty in power '' , the one who `` grew clear to view when he was on the uppermost horizon .
Welch additionally states that it remains uncertain whether these experiences occurred before or after Muhammad 's initial claim of prophethood .
Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei says that according to the popular explanation among the later exegetes , ta ` wil indicates the particular meaning a verse is directed towards .
The meaning of revelation -LRB- tanzil -RRB- , as opposed to ta ` wil , is clear in its accordance to the obvious meaning of the words as they were revealed .
Rather , it is concerned with certain truths and realities that transcend the comprehension of the common run of men ; yet it is from these truths and realities that the principles of doctrine and the practical injunctions of the Quran issue forth .
Interpretation is not the meaning of the verse -- rather it transpires through that meaning , in a special sort of transpiration .
Therefore , so far as this verse is concerned , the knowledge of the Quran 's interpretation is reserved for God .
While some nations are widely considered to be great powers , there is no definitive list of them .
Before the era of groups like the United Nations , participants of such meetings were not officially named , but were decided based on their great power status .
These were conferences which settled important questions based on major historical events .
At the same time , other states were emerging and expanding in power , largely through the process of industrialization .
These countries seeking to attain great power status were : Italy after the Risorgimento , Japan after the Meiji Restoration , and the United States after its civil war .
By the dawn of the 20th century , the balance of world power had changed substantially since the Congress of Vienna .
It formed in 1900 and consisted of the five Congress powers plus Italy , Japan , and the United States , representing the great powers at the beginning of 20th century .
Shifts of international power have most notably occurred through major conflicts .
In the aftermath of World War I the German Empire was defeated , the Austria-Hungarian empire was divided into new , less powerful states and the Russian Empire fell to a revolution .
The Big Four were leading architects of the Treaty of Versailles which was signed by Germany ; the Treaty of St. Germain , with Austria ; the Treaty of Neuilly , with Bulgaria ; the Treaty of Trianon , with Hungary ; and the Treaty of Sèvres , with the Ottoman Empire .
-LSB- nb 1 -RSB- During World War II , the United States , United Kingdom , and Soviet Union controlled Allied policy and emerged as the `` Big Three '' .
The Republic of China and the Big Three were referred as a `` trusteeship of the powerful '' and were recognized as the Allied `` Big Four '' in Declaration by United Nations in 1942 .
Since the end of the World Wars , the term `` great power '' has been joined by a number of other power classifications .
Regional powers are those whose influence is generally confined to their region of the world .
France and the United Kingdom maintained technologically advanced armed forces with power projection capabilities and maintain large defence budgets to this day .
Yet , as the Cold War continued , authorities began to question if France and the United Kingdom could retain their long-held statuses as great powers .
China , with the world 's largest population , has slowly risen to great power status , with large growth in economic and military power in the post-war period .
Baron highlights that since World War Two no other great power has been able to achieve parity or near parity with the United States , with the exception of the Soviet Union for a brief time .
However , there is no unanimous agreement among authorities as to the current status of these powers or what precisely defines a great power .
Germany has been a member together with the five permanent Security Council members in the P5 +1 grouping of world powers .
This is most notable in areas where the European Union has exclusive competence -LRB- i.e. economic affairs -RRB- .
The European Union is a supranational union and not a sovereign state , and has limited scope in the areas of foreign affairs and defence policy .
Referring to great power relations pre-1960 , Joshua Baron highlights that starting from around the 16th century and the rise of several European great powers , military conflicts and confrontations was the defining characteristic of diplomacy and relations between such powers .
The listed total area changed to 9,629,091 km2 -LRB- 3,717,813 sq mi -RRB- in 1997 -LRB- Great Lakes area and coastal waters added -RRB- , to 9,631,418 km2 -LRB- 3,718,711 sq mi -RRB- in 2004 , to 9,631,420 km2 -LRB- 3,718,710 sq mi -RRB- in 2006 , and to 9,826,630 km2 -LRB- 3,794,080 sq mi -RRB- in 2007 -LRB- territorial waters added -RRB- .
These source consider only the 50 states and the Federal District , and exclude overseas territories .
China and the United States are smaller than Russia and Canada in total area , but are larger than Brazil .
Both these territories are also claimed by India , so are not counted ; and -LRB- 2 -RRB- How US calculates its own surface area .
Since the initial publishing of the World Factbook , the CIA has updated the total area of United States a number of times .
Before their general conversion to farmland , the Great Plains were noted for their extensive grasslands , from tallgrass prairie in the eastern plains to shortgrass steppe in the western High Plains .
The Great Plains come to an abrupt end at the Rocky Mountains .
The Rocky Mountains generally contain fairly mild slopes and wider peaks compared to some of the other great mountain ranges , with a few exceptions -LRB- such as the Teton Mountains in Wyoming and the Sawatch Range in Colorado -RRB- .
The Rocky Mountains contain some of the most spectacular , and well known scenery in the world .
In addition , instead of being one generally continuous and solid mountain range , it is broken up into a number of smaller , intermittent mountain ranges , forming a large series of basins and valleys .
The Southwest is predominantly a low-lying desert region .
It is accentuated in such national parks as Grand Canyon , Arches , Mesa Verde National Park and Bryce Canyon , among others .
Other smaller Intermontane areas include the Columbia Plateau covering eastern Washington , western Idaho and northeast Oregon and the Snake River Plain in Southern Idaho .
The Atlantic coast of the United States is low , with minor exceptions .
It owes its present-day altitude either to renewed elevations along the earlier lines or to the survival of the most resistant rocks as residual mountains .
The oblique trend of this coast would be even more pronounced but for a comparatively modern crustal movement , causing a depression in the northeast resulting in an encroachment of the sea upon the land .
Additionally , the southeastern section has undergone an elevation resulting in the advance of the land upon the sea .
In between these mountain systems lie the Intermontaine Plateaus .
Heavy forests cover the northwest coast , but elsewhere trees are found only on the higher ranges below the Alpine region .
The upper Mississippi and some of the Ohio basin is the semi-arid prairie region , with trees originally only along the watercourses .
The uplands towards the Appalachians were included in the great eastern forested area , while the western part of the plains has so dry a climate that its native plant life is scanty , and in the south it is practically barren .
Due to its large size and wide range of geographic features , the United States contains examples of nearly every global climate .
The mountains of the west receive abundant precipitation and very heavy snowfall .
Deadly and destructive hurricanes occur almost every year along the Atlantic seaboard and the Gulf of Mexico .
Occasional severe flooding is experienced .
Localized flooding can , however , occur anywhere , and mudslides from heavy rain can cause problems in any mountainous area , particularly the Southwest .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The American Northwest sees the highest concentration of active volcanoes in the United States , in Washington , Oregon and northern California along the Cascade Mountains .
In 1979 , Sony and Philips set up a joint task force of engineers to design a new digital audio disc .
After this , in 1974 the leap to storing digital audio on an optical disc was easily made .
A year later , in September 1977 , Sony showed the press a 30 cm disc that could play 60 minutes of digital audio -LRB- 44,100 Hz sampling rate and 16-bit resolution -RRB- using MFM modulation .
In September 1978 , the company demonstrated an optical digital audio disc with a 150-minute playing time , 44,056 Hz sampling rate , 16-bit linear resolution , and cross-interleaved error correction code -- specifications similar to those later settled upon for the standard Compact Disc format in 1980 .
After a year of experimentation and discussion , the task force produced the Red Book CD-DA standard .
The Japanese launch was followed in March 1983 by the introduction of CD players and discs to Europe and North America -LRB- where CBS Records released sixteen titles -RRB- .
This event is often seen as the `` Big Bang '' of the digital audio revolution .
The new audio disc was enthusiastically received , especially in the early-adopting classical music and audiophile communities , and its handling quality received particular praise .
As the price of players gradually came down , and with the introduction of the portable Walkman the CD began to gain popularity in the larger popular and rock music markets .
Recordable CDs were a new alternative to tape for recording music and copying music albums without defects introduced in compression used in other digital recording methods .
Other newer video formats such as DVD and Blu-ray use the same physical geometry as CD , and most DVD and Blu-ray players are backward compatible with audio CD .
For example , between 2000 - 2008 , despite overall growth in music sales and one anomalous year of increase , major-label CD sales declined overall by 20 % , although independent and DIY music sales may be tracking better according to figures released 30 March 2009 , and CDs still continue to sell greatly .
A screw forces the liquefied plastic into the mold cavity .
The mold closes with a metal stamper in contact with the disc surface .
The plastic is allowed to cool and harden .
This method produces the clear plastic blank part of the disc .
After testing , it is used to make a die by pressing it against a metal disc .
The die then goes into a press , and the physical image is transferred to the blank CD , leaving a final positive image on the disc .
Edge protection lacquer is applied before the disc is finished .
The disc can then be printed and packed .
When 8-track tapes , cassette tapes , and CDs were introduced , each was marketed at a higher price than the format they succeeded , even though the cost to produce the media was reduced .
This continued from vinyl to CDs but was broken when Apple marketed MP3s for $ 0.99 , and albums for $ 9.99 .
The incremental cost , though , to produce an MP3 is very small .
Over time , the dye 's physical characteristics may change causing read errors and data loss until the reading device can not recover with error correction methods .
However , testing has demonstrated such degradation of some discs in as little as 18 months under normal storage conditions .
Original CD-RW drives can only write to original ReWritable CDs .
High Speed CD-RW drives can typically write to both original ReWritable CDs and High Speed ReWritable CDs .
Both types of CD-RW discs can be read in most CD drives .
This swing arm allows the laser to read information from the centre to the edge of a disc , without having to interrupt the spinning of the disc itself .
The pits and lands themselves do not directly represent the zeros and ones of binary data .
There must be at least two and no more than ten zeros between each one , which is defined by the length of the pit .
CDs are susceptible to damage during handling and from environmental exposure .
Pits are much closer to the label side of a disc , enabling defects and contaminants on the clear side to be out of focus during playback .
The edges of CDs are sometimes incompletely sealed , allowing gases and liquids to corrode the metal reflective layer and to interfere with the focus of the laser on the pits .
Standard CDs are available in two sizes .
This is a myth according to Kees Immink , as the code format had not yet been decided in May 1980 .
The adoption of EFM one month later would have allowed a playing time of 97 minutes for 120 mm diameter or 74 minutes for a disc as small as 100 mm .
The 120 mm diameter has been adopted by subsequent formats , including Super Audio CD , DVD , HD DVD , and Blu-ray Disc .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Monaural audio has no existing standard on a Red Book CD ; thus , mono source material is usually presented as two identical channels in a standard Red Book stereo track -LRB- i.e. , mirrored mono -RRB- ; an MP3 CD , however , can have audio file formats with mono sound .
Compact Disc + Graphics is a special audio compact disc that contains graphics data in addition to the audio data on the disc .
These six bits store the graphics information .
They are intended to play on CD-i players , Photo CD players and any computer with the suitable software irrespective of the operating system .
This format is not to be confused with Kodak Picture CD , which is a consumer product in CD-ROM format .
One major drawback to these copy-protected discs is that most will not play on either computer CD-ROM drives or some standalone CD players that use CD-ROM mechanisms .
Numerous copy-protection systems have been countered by readily available , often free , software .
A voltage or current applied to one pair of the transistor 's terminals changes the current through another pair of terminals .
The transistor is the fundamental building block of modern electronic devices , and is ubiquitous in modern electronic systems .
The triode , however , was a fragile device that consumed a lot of power .
Lilienfeld also filed identical patents in the United States in 1926 and 1928 .
However , Lilienfeld did not publish any research articles about his devices nor did his patents cite any specific examples of a working prototype .
Because the production of high-quality semiconductor materials was still decades away , Lilienfeld 's solid-state amplifier ideas would not have found practical use in the 1920s and 1930s , even if such a device had been built .
In 1934 , German inventor Oskar Heil patented a similar device .
According to Lillian Hoddeson and Vicki Daitch , authors of a biography of John Bardeen , Shockley had proposed that Bell Labs ' first patent for a transistor should be based on the field-effect and that he be named as the inventor .
Having unearthed Lilienfeld 's patents that went into obscurity years earlier , lawyers at Bell Labs advised against Shockley 's proposal because the idea of a field-effect transistor that used an electric field as a `` grid '' was not new .
Instead , what Bardeen , Brattain , and Shockley invented in 1947 was the first point-contact transistor .
In acknowledgement of this accomplishment , Shockley , Bardeen , and Brattain were jointly awarded the 1956 Nobel Prize in Physics `` for their researches on semiconductors and their discovery of the transistor effect . ''
Mataré had previous experience in developing crystal rectifiers from silicon and germanium in the German radar effort during World War II .
Using this knowledge , he began researching the phenomenon of `` interference '' in 1947 .
By June 1948 , witnessing currents flowing through point-contacts , Mataré produced consistent results using samples of germanium produced by Welker , similar to what Bardeen and Brattain had accomplished earlier in December 1947 .
The essential usefulness of a transistor comes from its ability to use a small signal applied between one pair of its terminals to control a much larger signal at another pair of terminals .
In a grounded-emitter transistor circuit , such as the light-switch circuit shown , as the base voltage rises , the emitter and collector currents rise exponentially .
In the example light-switch circuit shown , the resistor is chosen to provide enough base current to ensure the transistor will be saturated .
This construction produces two p -- n junctions : a base -- emitter junction and a base -- collector junction , separated by a thin region of semiconductor known as the base region -LRB- two junction diodes wired together without sharing an intervening semiconducting region will not make a transistor -RRB- .
They are useful in amplifiers because the currents at the emitter and collector are controllable by a relatively small base current .
In an n -- p -- n transistor operating in the active region , the emitter -- base junction is forward biased -LRB- electrons and holes recombine at the junction -RRB- , and electrons are injected into the base region .
Because the base is narrow , most of these electrons will diffuse into the reverse-biased -LRB- electrons and holes are formed at , and move away from the junction -RRB- base -- collector junction and be swept into the collector ; perhaps one-hundredth of the electrons will recombine in the base , which is the dominant mechanism in the base current .
By controlling the number of electrons that can leave the base , the number of electrons entering the collector can be controlled .
In a FET , the drain-to-source current flows via a conducting channel that connects the source region to the drain region .
Functionally , this makes the n-channel JFET the solid-state equivalent of the vacuum tube triode which , similarly , forms a diode between its grid and cathode .
Nearly all JFETs are depletion-mode because the diode junctions would forward bias and conduct if they were enhancement-mode devices ; most IGFETs are enhancement-mode types .
With early devices this indicated the case type .
Suffixes may be used , with a letter -LRB- e.g. `` C '' often means high hFE , such as in : BC549C -RRB- or other codes may follow to show gain -LRB- e.g. BC327-25 -RRB- or voltage rating -LRB- e.g. BUK854-800A -RRB- .
The more common prefixes are :
Manufacturers of devices may have their own proprietary numbering system , for example CK722 .
The current increases exponentially as the junction forward voltage is increased .
The values given in the table are typical for a current of 1 mA -LRB- the same values apply to semiconductor diodes -RRB- .
For a typical silicon junction the change is − 2.1 mV / °C .
In some circuits special compensating elements -LRB- sensistors -RRB- must be used to compensate for such changes .
HEMTs based on gallium nitride and aluminium gallium nitride -LRB- AlGaN/GaN HEMTs -RRB- provide a still higher electron mobility and are being developed for various applications .
Transistors come in many different semiconductor packages -LRB- see image -RRB- .
Because they are smaller and have shorter interconnections , SMDs have better high-frequency characteristics but lower power rating .
Pre-modern cultures have not been thought of creating a sense of distinct individuality , though .
It was only through these intermediaries that the general masses had access to the divine .
The development of Eastern powers was of note , with China and India becoming more powerful .
In the Eurasian theater , the European Union and Russian Federation were two forces recently developed .
In the west , the European kingdoms and movements were in a movement of reformation and expansion .
Russia reached the Pacific coast in 1647 and consolidated its control over the Russian Far East in the 19th century .
In particular , small-scale industries grew up , often specializing in paper , silk , cotton , and porcelain goods .
For the most part , however , relatively small urban centers with markets proliferated around the country .
Town markets mainly traded food , with some necessary manufactures such as pins or oil .
Foreign trade and other contacts with the outside world , particularly Japan , increased considerably .
The Mancus adopted the Confucian norms of traditional Chinese government in their rule of China proper .
Schoppa , the editor of The Columbia Guide to Modern Chinese History argues , `` A date around 1780 as the beginning of modern China is thus closer to what we know today as historical ` reality ' .
It also allows us to have a better baseline to understand the precipitous decline of the Chinese polity in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries . ''
In some parts of the country , particularly smaller regions , daimyo and samurai were more or less identical , since daimyo might be trained as samurai , and samurai might act as local lords .
Otherwise , the largely inflexible nature of this social stratification system unleashed disruptive forces over time .
This often led to numerous confrontations between noble but impoverished samurai and well-to-do peasants , ranging from simple local disturbances to much bigger rebellions .
None , however , proved compelling enough to seriously challenge the established order until the arrival of foreign powers .
During this period , the Empire was marked by a highly centralized administration connecting the different regions .
All the significant monuments of the Mughals , their most visible legacy , date to this period which was characterised by the expansion of Persian cultural influence in the Indian subcontinent , with brilliant literary , artistic , and architectural results .
However , their rivalry cooled in 1824 when an Anglo-Dutch treaty demarcated their respective interests in Southeast Asia .
From the 1850s onwards , the pace of colonization shifted to a significantly higher gear .
Colonial rule had a profound effect on Southeast Asia .
Early modern European history is usually seen to span from the start of the 15th century , through the Age of Reason and the Age of Enlightenment in the 17th and 18th centuries , until the beginning of the Industrial Revolution in the late 18th century .
In 1654 the Ukrainian leader , Bohdan Khmelnytsky , offered to place Ukraine under the protection of the Russian Tsar , Aleksey I. Aleksey 's acceptance of this offer led to another Russo-Polish War -LRB- 1654 -- 1667 -RRB- .
Finally , Ukraine was split along the river Dnieper , leaving the western part -LRB- or Right-bank Ukraine -RRB- under Polish rule and eastern part -LRB- Left-bank Ukraine and Kiev -RRB- under Russian .
Later , in 1670 -- 71 the Don Cossacks led by Stenka Razin initiated a major uprising in the Volga region , but the Tsar 's troops were successful in defeating the rebels .
In the east , the rapid Russian exploration and colonisation of the huge territories of Siberia was led mostly by Cossacks hunting for valuable furs and ivory .
Russian explorers pushed eastward primarily along the Siberian river routes , and by the mid-17th century there were Russian settlements in the Eastern Siberia , on the Chukchi Peninsula , along the Amur River , and on the Pacific coast .
In 1648 the Bering Strait between Asia and North America was passed for the first time by Fedot Popov and Semyon Dezhnyov .
Developing during the Enlightenment era , Renaissance humanism as an intellectual movement spread across Europe .
They self-consciously imitated classical Latin and deprecated the use of medieval Latin .
By analogy with the perceived decline of Latin , they applied the principle of ad fontes , or back to the sources , across broad areas of learning .
The opposing two sides were , the Ancients -LRB- Anciens -RRB- who constrain choice of subjects to those drawn from the literature of Antiquity and the Moderns -LRB- Modernes -RRB- , who supported the merits of the authors of the century of Louis XIV .
This period saw a fundamental transformation in scientific ideas across physics , astronomy , and biology , in institutions supporting scientific investigation , and in the more widely held picture of the universe .
In the following century , France would be governed at one point or another as a republic , constitutional monarchy , and two different empires .
Unlike the Spanish , the Portuguese did not divide their colonial territory in America .
From a technological and a social point of view there is no clean break between the two .
Major innovations during the period occurred in the chemical , electrical , petroleum , and steel industries .
Specific advancements included the introduction of oil fired steam turbine and internal combustion driven steel ships , the development of the airplane , the practical commercialization of the automobile , mass production of consumer goods , the perfection of canning , mechanical refrigeration and other food preservation techniques , and the invention of the telephone .
It is the extensive organization of an economy for the purpose of manufacturing .
Industrialization also introduces a form of philosophical change , where people obtain a different attitude towards their perception of nature .
In 1854 , Benjamin Silliman , a science professor at Yale University in New Haven , was the first to fractionate petroleum by distillation .
These discoveries rapidly spread around the world .
Also toward the end of the second industrial revolution , Nikola Tesla made many contributions in the field of electricity and magnetism in the late 19th and early 20th centuries .
While the immediate political effects of the revolutions were reversed , the long-term reverberations of the events were far-reaching .
Peter the Great 's reforms brought considerable Western European cultural influences to Russia .
Catherine II -LRB- the Great -RRB- , who ruled in 1762 -- 96 , extended Russian political control over the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth and incorporated most of its territories into Russia during the Partitions of Poland , pushing the Russian frontier westward into Central Europe .
In the south , after successful Russo-Turkish Wars against the Ottoman Empire , Catherine advanced Russia 's boundary to the Black Sea , defeating the Crimean khanate .
Of note during this time was the Anglo-Zulu War , which was fought in 1879 between the British Empire and the Zulu Empire .
The ensuing period is called the Restoration , following French usage , and is characterized by a sharp conservative reaction and the re-establishment of the Roman Catholic Church as a power in French politics .
It also marked the downfall of Napoleon III and the end of the Second French Empire , which was replaced by the Third Republic .
With the colonial claim came the underlying assumption that the European power that exerted control would use its mandate to offer protection and provide welfare for its colonial peoples , however , this principle remained more theory than practice .
Germany , Italy , and Spain established a small number of colonies at various points throughout the continent , which included German East Africa -LRB- Tanganyika -RRB- and German Southwest Africa for Germany , Eritrea and Libya for Italy , and the Canary Islands and Rio de Oro in northwestern Africa for Spain .
Finally , for King Leopold -LRB- ruled from 1865 -- 1909 -RRB- , there was the large `` piece of that great African cake '' known as the Congo , which , unfortunately for the native Congolese , became his personal fiefdom to do with as he pleased in Central Africa .
By 1914 , almost the entire continent was under European control .
Liberia , which was settled by freed American slaves in the 1820s , and Abyssinia -LRB- Ethiopia -RRB- in eastern Africa were the last remaining independent African states .
-LRB- John Merriman , A History of Modern Europe , Volume Two : From the French Revolution to the Present , Third Edition -LRB- New York : W. W. Norton & Company , 2010 -RRB- , pp. 819 -- 859 -RRB- .
Much research has focused on the issues of discontinuity versus continuity with the previous Tokugawa Period .
They avoided the elite , and focused not on political events but on social forces and attitudes .
They rejected both Marxism and modernization theory as alien and confining .
They stressed the importance of popular energies in the development of modern Japan .
They enlarged history by using the methods of social history .
It was not until the beginning of the Meiji Era that the Japanese government began taking modernization seriously .
Japan expanded its military production base by opening arsenals in various locations .
The hyobusho -LRB- war office -RRB- was replaced with a War Department and a Naval Department .
The samurai class suffered great disappointment the following years .
The French government contributed greatly to the training of Japanese officers .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Northern leaders agreed that victory would require more than the end of fighting .
It was followed by a reaction that left the blacks in a second class status legally , politically , socially and economically until the 1960s .
An example is the company of John D. Rockefeller , who was an important figure in shaping the new oil industry .
The creation of a modern industrial economy took place .
The law forbade every contract , scheme , deal , or conspiracy to restrain trade , though the phrase `` restraint of trade '' remained subjective .
By the beginning of the 20th century , per capita income and industrial production in the United States exceeded that of any other country except Britain .
Long hours and hazardous working conditions led many workers to attempt to form labor unions despite strong opposition from industrialists and the courts .
It ordered Standard to break up into 34 independent companies with different boards of directors .
The collection of heuristic prescriptions for quantum mechanics were the first corrections to classical mechanics .
The fields of geology , astronomy and psychology also made strides and gained new insights .
In medicine , there were advances in medical theory and treatments .
There were attempts to incorporate democracy , republicanism , and industrialism into Chinese philosophy , notably by Sun Yat-Sen -LRB- Sūn yì xiān , in one Mandarin form of the name -RRB- at the beginning of the 20th century .
For liberal humanists such as Rousseau and Kant , the universal law of reason guided the way toward total emancipation from any kind of tyranny .
On this view , such rights do not facilitate emancipation of life , but rather deny it .
In the 20th century , the notion that human beings are rationally autonomous was challenged by the concept that humans were driven by unconscious irrational desires .
The major theatres of operations were Southern Manchuria , specifically the area around the Liaodong Peninsula and Mukden , and the seas around Korea , Japan , and the Yellow Sea .
These victories , as time transpired , would dramatically transform the distribution of power in East Asia , resulting in a reassessment of Japan 's recent entry onto the world stage .
The embarrassing string of defeats increased Russian popular dissatisfaction with the inefficient and corrupt Tsarist government .
The Liberal government was unable to proceed with all of its radical programme without the support of the House of Lords , which was largely Conservative .
The causes of World War I included many factors , including the conflicts and antagonisms of the four decades leading up to the war .
Militarism , alliances , imperialism , and nationalism played major roles in the conflict .
However , the crisis did not exist in a void ; it came after a long series of diplomatic clashes between the Great Powers over European and colonial issues in the decade prior to 1914 which had left tensions high .
The diplomatic clashes can be traced to changes in the balance of power in Europe since 1870 .
The railway became a source of international disputes during the years immediately preceding World War I. Although it has been argued that they were resolved in 1914 before the war began , it has also been argued that the railroad was a cause of the First World War .
Notably , more people died of the worldwide influenza outbreak at the end of the war and shortly after than died in the hostilities .
The unsanitary conditions engendered by the war , severe overcrowding in barracks , wartime propaganda interfering with public health warnings , and migration of so many soldiers around the world helped the outbreak become a pandemic .
The huge conglomeration of territories and peoples formerly ruled by the Sultan of the Ottoman Empire was divided into several new nations .
Parts of the Ottoman Empire on the Arabian Peninsula became parts of what are today Saudi Arabia and Yemen .
This suspicion was bolstered by the German Foreign Ministry 's sponsorship of Lenin 's return to Petrograd .
There was an instituted mandatory conscription of the rural peasantry into the Red Army .
At the start of the war , three-fourths of the Red Army officer corps was composed of former Tsarist officers .
By its end , 83 % of all Red Army divisional and corps commanders were ex-Tsarist soldiers .
Many foreign armies warred against the Red Army , notably the Allied Forces , yet many volunteer foreigners fought in both sides of the Russian Civil War .
Other nationalist and regional political groups also participated in the war , including the Ukrainian nationalist Green Army , the Ukrainian anarchist Black Army and Black Guards , and warlords such as Ungern von Sternberg .
The last enclave of the White Forces was the Ayano-Maysky District on the Pacific coast .
But for political expediency , the Soviet leadership initiated a dual policy of support for both Sun and the newly established Chinese Communist Party -LRB- CCP -RRB- .
In North America , especially the first half of this period , people experienced considerable prosperity in the Roaring Twenties .
` Normalcy ' returned to politics , jazz music blossomed , the flapper redefined modern womanhood , Art Deco peaked .
The spirit of the Roaring Twenties was marked by a general feeling of discontinuity associated with modernity , a break with traditions .
Everything seemed to be feasible through modern technology .
New technologies , especially automobiles , movies and radio proliferated ` modernity ' to a large part of the population .
The 1920s saw the general favor of practicality , in architecture as well as in daily life .
The 1920s was further distinguished by several inventions and discoveries , extensive industrial growth and the rise in consumer demand and aspirations , and significant changes in lifestyle .
Europe spent these years rebuilding and coming to terms with the vast human cost of the conflict .
The economy of the United States became increasingly intertwined with that of Europe .
By the middle of the decade , economic development soared in Europe , and the Roaring Twenties broke out in Germany , Britain and France , the second half of the decade becoming known as the `` Golden Twenties '' .
In France and francophone Canada , they were also called the `` années folles '' -LRB- `` Crazy Years '' -RRB- .
Cities all around the world were hit hard , especially those dependent on heavy industry .
Facing plummeting demand with few alternate sources of jobs , areas dependent on primary sector industries suffered the most .
The Great Depression ended at different times in different countries with the effect lasting into the next era .
The majority of countries set up relief programs , and most underwent some sort of political upheaval , pushing them to the left or right .
In Asia , Japan became an ever more assertive power , especially with regards to China .
The incident highlighted French and British weakness , exemplified by their reluctance to alienate Italy and lose her as their ally .
The limited actions taken by the Western powers pushed Mussolini 's Italy towards alliance with Hitler 's Germany anyway .
The Abyssinian war showed Hitler how weak the League was and encouraged the remilitarization of the Rhineland in flagrant disregard of the Treaty of Versailles .
This was the first in a series of provocative acts culminating in the invasion of Poland in September 1939 and the beginning of the Second World War .
Few Chinese had any illusions about Japanese designs on China .
The League of Nations , established at the end of World War I , was unable to act in the face of the Japanese defiance .
The Japanese were faced with the option of either withdrawing from China and losing face or seizing and securing new sources of raw materials in the resource-rich , European-controlled colonies of South East Asia -- specifically British Malaya and the Dutch East Indies -LRB- modern-day Indonesia -RRB- .
China also joined the Allies , as eventually did most of the rest of the world .
China was in turmoil at the time , and attacked Japanese armies through guerilla-type warfare .
By the beginning of 1942 , the major combatants were aligned as follows : the British Commonwealth , the United States , and the Soviet Union were fighting Germany and Italy ; and the British Commonwealth , China , and the United States were fighting Japan .
From then through August 1945 , battles raged across all of Europe , in the North Atlantic Ocean , across North Africa , throughout Southeast Asia , throughout China , across the Pacific Ocean and in the air over Japan .
Several differing views exist regarding whether it was intended to occur from the war 's beginning , or if the plans for it came about later .
These two rivals would later face off in the Cold War .
The former colonies of the European powers began their road to independence .
Still , advancing technology and medicine has had a great impact even in the Global South .
Many countries were prompted to align themselves with the nations that would later form either NATO or the Warsaw Pact , though other movements would also emerge .
There were also periods of reduced tension as both sides sought détente .
Direct military attacks on adversaries were deterred by the potential for mutual assured destruction using deliverable nuclear weapons .
In the Cold War era , the Generation of Love and the rise of computers changed society in very different , complex ways , including higher social and local mobility .
This was further fueled by Cuban and United States intervention which led to a political polarization .
The launch of Sputnik 1 ushered a new era of political , scientific and technological achievements that became known as the Space Age .
The Space Age was characterized by rapid development of new technology in a close race mostly between the United States and the Soviet Union .
Since then and with the end of the space race due to the dissolution of the Soviet Union , public attention has largely moved to other areas .
Puerto Rico has elections on the United States presidential primary or caucus of the Democratic Party and the Republican Party to select delegates to the respective parties ' national conventions although presidential electors are not granted on the Electoral College .
As American citizens , Puerto Ricans can vote in U.S. presidential elections , provided they reside in one of the 50 states or the District of Columbia and not in Puerto Rico itself .
Most Puerto Rico residents do not pay federal income tax but do pay federal payroll taxes -LRB- Social Security and Medicare -RRB- .
However , federal employees , those who do business with the federal government , Puerto Rico -- based corporations that intend to send funds to the U.S. and others do pay federal income taxes .
The island 's ultimate status has not been determined as of 2012 -LSB- update -RSB- , its residents do not have voting representation in their federal government .
Puerto Rico has limited representation in the U.S. Congress in the form of a Resident Commissioner , a delegate with limited no voting rights .
In addition , all people born in Puerto Rico become citizens of the U.S. at birth -LRB- under provisions of the Jones -- Shafroth Act in 1917 -RRB- , but citizens residing in Puerto Rico can not vote for president nor for full members of either house of Congress .
Statehood would grant island residents full voting rights at the Federal level .
It would have provided for a federally sanctioned self-determination process for the people of Puerto Rico .
This act would provide for referendums to be held in Puerto Rico to determine the island 's ultimate political status .
It had also been introduced in 2007 .
The 2012 referendum was by far the most successful referendum for statehood advocates and support for statehood has risen in each successive popular referendum .
If abstentions are considered , the result of the referendum is much closer to 44 percent for statehood , a number that falls under the 50 percent majority mark .
Shortly after the results were published Puerto Rico-born U.S. Congressman José Enrique Serrano commented `` I was particularly impressed with the outcome of the ` status ' referendum in Puerto Rico .
A majority of those voting signaled the desire to change the current territorial status .
In a second question an even larger majority asked to become a state .
This is an earthquake in Puerto Rican politics .
It will demand the attention of Congress , and a definitive answer to the Puerto Rican request for change .
This is a history-making moment where voters asked to move forward . ''
Pierluisi urged Obama to begin legislation in favor of the statehood of Puerto Rico , in light of its win in the referendum .
Fortuño urged him to move the process forward .
García Padilla asked him to reject the results because of their ambiguity .
Former White House director of Hispanic media stated , `` Now it is time for Congress to act and the administration will work with them on that effort , so that the people of Puerto Rico can determine their own future . ''
On February 12 , 2014 , Senator Martin Heinrich introduced a bill in the US Senate .
Washington , D.C. is often mentioned as a candidate for statehood .
Although he noted potential conflicts of interest , and the need for a `` municipal legislature for local purposes , '' Madison did not address the district 's role in national voting .
Legal scholars disagree on whether a simple act of Congress can admit the District as a state , due to its status as the seat of government of the United States , which Article I , Section 8 of the Constitution requires to be under the exclusive jurisdiction of Congress ; depending on the interpretation of this text , admission of the full District as a state may require a Constitutional amendment , which is much more difficult to enact .
So the constitutional requirement for a federal district can be satisfied by reducing its size to the small central core of government buildings and monuments , giving the rest of the territory to the new state .
President Bill Clinton 's presidential limousine had the `` Taxation without representation '' license plate late in his term , while President George W. Bush had the vehicle 's plates changed shortly after beginning his term in office .
Two years later in 1980 , local citizens passed an initiative calling for a constitutional convention for a new state .
Also , the Northern Mariana Islands and American Samoa , an unorganized , unincorporated territory , could both attempt to gain statehood .
Some proposals call for the Virgin Islands to be admitted with Puerto Rico as one state -LRB- often known as the proposed `` Commonwealth of Prusvi '' , for Puerto Rico/U .
S. Virgin Islands , or as `` Puerto Virgo '' -RRB- , and for the amalgamation of U.S. territories or former territories in the Pacific Ocean , in the manner of the `` Greater Hawaii '' concept of the 1960s .
Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands would be admitted as one state , along with Palau , the Federated States of Micronesia , and the Marshall Islands -LRB- although these latter three entities are now separate sovereign nations , which have Compact of Free Association relationships with the United States -RRB- .
Such a state would have a population of 412,381 -LRB- slightly lower than Wyoming 's population -RRB- and a land area of 911.82 square miles -LRB- 2,361.6 km2 -RRB- -LRB- slightly smaller than Rhode Island -RRB- .
American Samoa could possibly be part of such a state , increasing the population to 467,900 and the area to 988.65 square miles -LRB- 2,560.6 km2 -RRB- .
Supporters of this movement include Filipinos who believe that the quality of life in the Philippines would be higher and that there would be less poverty there if the Philippines were an American state or territory .
Supporters also include Filipinos that had fought as members of the United States Armed Forces in various wars during the Commonwealth period .
The phrase is usually used in local political debates , in polemic writing or in private conversations .
It is rarely used by politicians themselves in a public context , although at certain times in Canadian history political parties have used other similarly loaded imagery .
The implication has historical basis and dates to the breakup of British America during the American Revolution .
The first invasion was during the Revolution , under the assumption that French-speaking Canadians ' presumed hostility towards British colonial rule combined with the Franco-American alliance would make them natural allies to the American cause ; the Continental Army successfully recruited two Canadian regiments for the invasion .
That invasion 's failure forced the members of those regiments into exile , and they settled mostly in upstate New York .
The Articles of Confederation , written during the Revolution , included a provision for Canada to join the United States , should they ever decide to do so , without needing to seek U.S. permission as other states would .
In the Quebec general election , 1989 , the political party Parti 51 ran 11 candidates on a platform of Quebec seceding from Canada to join the United States -LRB- with its leader , André Perron , claiming Quebec could not survive as an independent nation -RRB- .
However , the U.S. never acted on these proposals from some U.S. politicians ; some of which were never delivered or considered seriously .
A pro-independence movement in Cuba was supported by the U.S. , and Cuban guerrilla leaders wanted annexation to the United States , but Cuban revolutionary leader José Martí called for Cuban nationhood .
After the U.S. won , Spain relinquished claim of sovereignty over territories , including Cuba .
The U.S. administered Cuba as a protectorate until 1902 .
All these trusteeships were slowly returned to Japanese rule .
On February 5 , 2010 , the party applied to register a logo with the Electoral Commission .
The logo -- a US flag with 51 stars -- was rejected by the Electoral Commission on the grounds that it was likely to cause confusion or mislead electors .
Albania has often been called the 51st state for its perceived strongly pro-American positions , mainly because of the United States ' policies towards it .
Even in Michigan , he would n't be as welcome . ''
In addition to Albania , Kosovo which is predominately Albanian is seen as a 51st state due to the heavily presence and influence of the United States .
One of the actual reasons behind US interest in Greenland could be the vast natural resources of the island .
A quote referring to Poland as `` the 51st state '' has been attributed to James Pavitt , then Central Intelligence Agency Deputy Director for Operations , especially in connection to extraordinary rendition .
This party was one of several Sicilian separatist movements active after the downfall of Italian Fascism .
However , note the important international technical journal , the IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation .
In Italian a tent pole is known as l'antenna centrale , and the pole with the wire was simply called l'antenna .
Until then wireless radiating transmitting and receiving elements were known simply as aerials or terminals .
It is typically connected to the inner conductor of a coaxial transmission line -LRB- or a matching network -RRB- ; the shield of the transmission line is connected to ground .
Since monopole antennas rely on a conductive ground , a so-called grounding structure may be employed to provide a better ground contact to the earth or which itself acts as a ground plane to perform that function regardless of -LRB- or in absence of -RRB- an actual contact with the earth .
This can be accomplished in many different ways leading to a plethora of antenna designs .
The increased power in the desired direction is at the expense of that in the undesired directions .
These elements are often identical .
The dipole antennas composing it are all considered `` active elements '' since they are all electrically connected together -LRB- and to the transmission line -RRB- .
The Yagi antenna has similar looking parasitic dipole elements but which act differently due to their somewhat different lengths .
There may be a number of so-called `` directors '' in front of the active element in the direction of propagation , and usually a single -LRB- but possibly more -RRB- `` reflector '' on the opposite side of the active element .
For reception , a long Beverage antenna can have significant directivity .
With a vertical antenna a loading coil at the base of the antenna may be employed to cancel the reactive component of impedance ; small loop antennas are tuned with parallel capacitors for this purpose .
One side of the feedline from the receiver or transmitter is connected to the rod , and the other side to the ground plane , which may be the Earth .
The ground waves used for broadcasting at low frequencies must be vertically polarized , so large vertical monopole antennas are used for broadcasting in the MF , LF , and VLF bands .
Resonant antennas usually use a linear conductor -LRB- or element -RRB- , or pair of such elements , each of which is about a quarter of the wavelength in length -LRB- an odd multiple of quarter wavelengths will also be resonant -RRB- .
Fortunately at higher frequencies -LRB- UHF , microwaves -RRB- trading off performance to obtain a smaller physical size is usually not required .
If the conductor is 1⁄4 of a wavelength long , current from the feed point will undergo 90 degree phase change by the time it reaches the end of the conductor , reflect through 180 degrees , and then another 90 degrees as it travels back .
The current in the element thus adds to the current being created from the source at that instant .
This process creates a standing wave in the conductor , with the maximum current at the feed .
The monopole antenna is essentially one half of the half-wave dipole , a single 1⁄4 - wavelength element with the other side connected to ground or an equivalent ground plane -LRB- or counterpoise -RRB- .
Thus , an antenna element is also resonant when its length is 3⁄4 of a wavelength .
This allows some flexibility of design in terms of antenna lengths and feed points .
This is the ideal situation , because it produces the maximum output for the minimum input , producing the highest possible efficiency .
They are particularly common on radar systems , where the same antenna is used for both broadcast and reception , or for radio and television broadcasts , where the antenna is working with a single frequency .
A half-wave dipole has an effective area of 0.13 2 .
If more performance is needed , one can not simply make the antenna larger .
Although this would intercept more energy from the signal , due to the considerations above , it would decrease the output significantly due to it moving away from the resonant length .
Electrically this forms a single 1⁄2 - wavelength element .
Any varying electrical current , like the standing wave in the element , will radiate a signal .
In this case , aside from resistive losses in the element , the rebroadcast signal will be significantly similar to the original signal in both magnitude and shape .
If this element is placed so its signal reaches the main dipole in-phase , it will reinforce the original signal , and increase the current in the dipole .
The end closer to the source is referred to as the front .
Near the rear is a single active element , typically a half-wave dipole or folded dipole .
However , this also makes it increasingly sensitive to changes in frequency ; if the signal frequency changes , not only does the active element receive less energy directly , but all of the passive elements adding to that signal also decrease their output as well and their signals no longer reach the active element in-phase .
For this reason , reflectors often take the form of wire meshes or rows of passive elements , which makes them lighter and less subject to wind .
In some cases the physical length of the antenna can be `` trimmed '' to obtain a pure resistance .
Instead , it is often desired to have an antenna whose impedance does not vary so greatly over a certain bandwidth .
Making the element using a tube of a diameter perhaps 1/50 of its length , however , results in a reactance at this altered frequency which is not so great , and a much less serious mismatch which will only modestly damage the antenna 's net performance .
On the other hand , amateur radio antennas need to operate over several bands which are widely separated from each other .
Most of the transmitter 's power will flow into the resonant element while the others present a high -LRB- reactive -RRB- impedance and draw little current from the same voltage .
A popular solution uses so-called traps consisting of parallel resonant circuits which are strategically placed in breaks along each antenna element .
When used at one particular frequency band the trap presents a very high impedance -LRB- parallel resonance -RRB- effectively truncating the element at that length , making it a proper resonant antenna .
Gain is a parameter which measures the degree of directivity of the antenna 's radiation pattern .
This dimensionless ratio is usually expressed logarithmically in decibels , these units are called `` decibels-isotropic '' -LRB- dBi -RRB-
An example of a low-gain antenna is the whip antenna found on portable radios and cordless phones .
It can be shown that its effective area averaged over all directions must be equal to λ2 / 4π , the wavelength squared divided by 4π .
The axis through the main lobe is called the `` principal axis '' or `` boresight axis '' .
A SWR of 1:1 is ideal .
A SWR of 1.5:1 is considered to be marginally acceptable in low power applications where power loss is more critical , although an SWR as high as 6:1 may still be usable with the right equipment .
In order to radiate 100 W of power , one would need to use a transmitter capable of supplying 125 W to the antenna .
If an SWR meter reads 150 W of incident power and 50 W of reflected power , that means that 100 W have actually been absorbed by the antenna -LRB- ignoring transmission line losses -RRB- .
Fortunately the loss resistance of antenna conductors such as aluminum rods can be calculated and the efficiency of an antenna using such materials predicted .
If an rms current I is delivered to the terminals of an antenna , then a power of I2Rr will be radiated and a power of I2Rloss will be lost as heat .
The power that an antenna will deliver to a receiver -LRB- with a proper impedance match -RRB- is reduced by the same amount .
In some receiving applications , the very inefficient antennas may have little impact on performance .
Consequently , an antenna with a 20 dB loss -LRB- due to inefficiency -RRB- would have little impact on system noise performance .
This is likewise true for a receiving antenna at very high -LRB- especially microwave -RRB- frequencies , where the point is to receive a signal which is strong compared to the receiver 's noise temperature .
However , in the case of a directional antenna used for receiving signals with the intention of rejecting interference from different directions , one is no longer concerned with the antenna efficiency , as discussed above .
An antenna 's linear polarization is generally along the direction -LRB- as viewed from the receiving location -RRB- of the antenna 's currents when such a direction can be defined .
For instance , a vertical whip antenna or Wi-Fi antenna vertically oriented will transmit and receive in the vertical polarization .
Even when the antenna system has a vertical orientation , such as an array of horizontal dipole antennas , the polarization is in the horizontal direction corresponding to the current flow .
Two special cases are linear polarization -LRB- the ellipse collapses into a line -RRB- as we have discussed above , and circular polarization -LRB- in which the two axes of the ellipse are equal -RRB- .
In circular polarization , the electric field -LRB- and magnetic field -RRB- of the radio wave rotates at the radio frequency circularly around the axis of propagation .
Circular or elliptically polarized radio waves are designated as right-handed or left-handed using the `` thumb in the direction of the propagation '' rule .
Note that for circular polarization , optical researchers use the opposite right hand rule from the one used by radio engineers .
In some cases this is done in a more extreme manner , not simply to cancel a small amount of residual reactance , but to resonate an antenna whose resonance frequency is quite different from the intended frequency of operation .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
So an additional problem beyond canceling the unwanted reactance is of matching the remaining resistive impedance to the characteristic impedance of the transmission line .
Matching networks using discrete inductors and capacitors will have losses associated with those components , and will have power restrictions when used for transmitting .
This makes them inefficient as transmitting antennas .
The antenna 's height above the ground , as well as the electrical properties -LRB- permittivity and conductivity -RRB- of the ground , can then be important .
The phase of reflection of electromagnetic waves depends on the polarization of the incident wave .
On the other hand , the vertical component of the wave 's electric field is reflected at grazing angles of incidence approximately in phase .
The dielectric constant and conductivity -LRB- or simply the complex dielectric constant -RRB- is dependent on the soil type and is a function of frequency .
However it is often assumed that there is an advantage in an antenna having a high Q .
After all , Q is short for `` quality factor '' and a low Q typically signifies excessive loss -LRB- due to unwanted resistance -RRB- in a resonant L-C circuit .
However this understanding does not apply to resonant antennas where the resistance involved is the radiation resistance , a desired quantity which removes energy from the resonant element in order to radiate it -LRB- the purpose of an antenna , after all ! -RRB-
.
These two antennas will perform equivalently at the resonant frequency , but the second antenna will perform over a bandwidth 3 times as wide as the `` hi-Q '' antenna consisting of a thin conductor .
This is the major factor that sets the size of antennas at 1 MHz and lower frequencies .
If the element has a length-to-diameter ratio of 1000 , it will have an inherent resistance of about 63 ohms .
Using the appropriate transmission wire or balun , we match that resistance to ensure minimum signal loss .
Now consider the case when the antenna is fed a signal with a wavelength of 1.25 m ; in this case the reflected current would arrive at the feed out-of-phase with the signal , causing the net current to drop while the voltage remains the same .
Electrically this appears to be a very high impedance .
In order to efficiently send the signal into the transmission line , it is important that the transmission line has the same impedance as the elements , otherwise some of the signal will be reflected back into the antenna .
An important measure of this basic concept is the standing wave ratio , which measures the magnitude of the reflected signal .
It can , for instance , bring the wave to a focus or alter the wave front in other ways , generally in order to maximize the directivity of the antenna system .
This can be quite a significant effect when the antenna is within a wavelength or two of the ground .
At lower heights , the effect on the antenna 's impedance is very sensitive to the exact distance from the ground , as this affects the phase of the reflected wave relative to the currents in the antenna .
Changing the antenna 's height by a quarter wavelength , then changes the phase of the reflection by 180 ° , with a completely different effect on the antenna 's impedance .
There is almost no relative phase shift .
If the signal is polarized horizontally , the two signals subtract and the received signal is largely cancelled .
With vertical polarization there is always a maximum for θ = 0 , horizontal propagation -LRB- left pattern -RRB- .
For horizontal polarization , there is cancellation at that angle .
Note that the above formulae and these plots assume the ground as a perfect conductor .
These plots of the radiation pattern correspond to a distance between the antenna and its image of 2.5 λ .
In digital terrestrial television such reflections are less problematic , due to robustness of binary transmissions and error correction .
If those elements were widely separated and driven in a certain amplitude and phase , then each would act independently as that element is known to .
Note that this now is a near field phenomenon which could not be properly accounted for using the Friis transmission equation for instance .
This is a consequence of Lorentz reciprocity .
For best reception the receiving antennas for these signals are likewise vertically polarized .
They interact with the magnetic field of the radio wave instead of the electric field as other antennas do , and so are relatively insensitive to nearby electrical noise .
For example , the `` receiving pattern '' -LRB- sensitivity as a function of direction -RRB- of an antenna when used for reception is identical to the radiation pattern of the antenna when it is driven and functions as a radiator .
A later terrestrial adaptation took place with retention of the delicate , avascular sexual stage , the gametophyte , within the tissues of the vascular sporophyte .
This occurred by spore germination within sporangia rather than spore release , as in non-seed plants .
The result for the ancestors of angiosperms was enclosing them in a case , the seed .
The first seed bearing plants , like the ginkgo , and conifers -LRB- such as pines and firs -RRB- , did not produce flowers .
The pollen grains -LRB- males -RRB- of Ginkgo and cycads produce a pair of flagellated , mobile sperm cells that `` swim '' down the developing pollen tube to the female and her eggs .
Some older fossils , such as the upper Triassic Sanmiguelia , have been suggested .
Based on current evidence , some propose that the ancestors of the angiosperms diverged from an unknown group of gymnosperms in the Triassic period -LRB- 245 -- 202 million years ago -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
However , one study has suggested that the early-middle Jurassic plant Schmeissneria , traditionally considered a type of ginkgo , may be the earliest known angiosperm , or at least a close relative .
Oleanane , a secondary metabolite produced by many flowering plants , has been found in Permian deposits of that age together with fossils of gigantopterids .
The radiation of herbaceous angiosperms occurred much later .
Such a relationship , with a hypothetical wasp carrying pollen from one plant to another much the way fig wasps do today , could result in the development of a high degree of specialization in both the plant -LRB- s -RRB- and their partners .
Ceratophyllum seems to group with the eudicots rather than with the monocots .
This included flowering plants possessing seeds enclosed in capsules , distinguished from his Gymnospermae , or flowering plants with achenial or schizo-carpic fruits , the whole fruit or each of its pieces being here regarded as a seed and naked .
These names are not linked to any rank .
The Reveal system treated flowering plants as subdivision Magnoliophytina -LRB- Frohne & U. Jensen ex Reveal , Phytologia 79 : 70 1996 -RRB- , but later split it to Magnoliopsida , Liliopsida , and Rosopsida .
The Takhtajan system and Cronquist system treat this group at the rank of division , leading to the name Magnoliophyta -LRB- from the family name Magnoliaceae -RRB- .
The Dahlgren system and Thorne system -LRB- 1992 -RRB- treat this group at the rank of class , leading to the name Magnoliopsida .
Updates incorporating more recent research were published as APG II in 2003 and as APG III in 2009 .
The number of families in APG -LRB- 1998 -RRB- was 462 .
The soft phloem becomes crushed , but the hard wood persists and forms the bulk of the stem and branches of the woody perennial .
The floral apparatus may arise terminally on a shoot or from the axil of a leaf -LRB- where the petiole attaches to the stem -RRB- .
Occasionally , as in violets , a flower arises singly in the axil of an ordinary foliage-leaf .
The inner series -LRB- corolla of petals -RRB- is , in general , white or brightly colored , and is more delicate in structure .
It functions to attract insect or bird pollinators .
Attraction is effected by color , scent , and nectar , which may be secreted in some part of the flower .
The generative cell divides by mitosis to produce two haploid -LRB- n -RRB- sperm cells .
As the pollen tube grows , it makes its way from the stigma , down the style and into the ovary .
The synergid that the cells were released into degenerates and one sperm makes its way to fertilize the egg cell , producing a diploid -LRB- 2n -RRB- zygote .
The second sperm cell fuses with both central cell nuclei , producing a triploid -LRB- 3n -RRB- cell .
The ovary now will develop into fruit and the ovule will develop into seed .
If the fruit is dehiscent and the seed is exposed , in general , the seed-coat is well developed , and must discharge the functions otherwise executed by the fruit .
The Nizam 's dominions became a princely state during the British Raj , and remained so for 150 years , with the city serving as its capital .
The Nizami influence can still be seen in the culture of the Hyderabadi Muslims .
The city continued as the capital of Hyderabad State after it was brought into the Indian Union in 1948 , and became the capital of Andhra Pradesh after the States Reorganisation Act , 1956 .
Since 1956 , Rashtrapati Nilayam in the city has been the winter office of the President of India .
In 2014 , the newly formed state of Telangana split from Andhra Pradesh and the city became joint capital of the two states , a transitional arrangement scheduled to end by 2025 .
Golconda fort is another major landmark .
However , industrialisation throughout the 20th century attracted major Indian manufacturing , research and financial institutions , including Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited , the National Geophysical Research Institute and the Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology .
Special economic zones dedicated to information technology have encouraged companies from across India and around the world to set up operations and the emergence of pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries in the 1990s led to the area 's naming as India 's `` Genome Valley '' .
She converted to Islam and adopted the title Hyder Mahal .
The city was renamed Hyderabad in her honour .
According to another source , the city was named after Haidar , the son of Quli Qutb Shah .
During this period , Alauddin Khilji took the Koh-i-Noor diamond , which is said to have been mined from the Kollur Mines of Golkonda , to Delhi .
The Bahmani kings ruled the region until 1518 and were the first independent Muslim rulers of the Deccan .
During his rule , he had the Charminar and Mecca Masjid built in the city .
On 21 September 1687 , the Golkonda Sultanate came under the rule of the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb after a year-long siege of the Golkonda fort .
Subsequent rulers retained the title Nizam ul-Mulk and were referred to as Asif Jahi Nizams , or Nizams of Hyderabad .
The death of Asif Jah I in 1748 resulted in a period of political unrest as his sons , backed by opportunistic neighbouring states and colonial foreign forces , contended for the throne .
The accession of Asif Jah II , who reigned from 1762 to 1803 , ended the instability .
In 1768 he signed the treaty of Masulipatnam , surrendering the coastal region to the East India Company in return for a fixed annual rent .
After India gained independence , the Nizam declared his intention to remain independent rather than become part of the Indian Union .
The Hyderabad State Congress , with the support of the Indian National Congress and the Communist Party of India , began agitating against Nizam VII in 1948 .
In his 1955 report Thoughts on Linguistic States , B. R. Ambedkar , then chairman of the Drafting Committee of the Indian Constitution , proposed designating the city of Hyderabad as the second capital of India because of its amenities and strategic central location .
Since 1956 , the Rashtrapati Nilayam in Hyderabad has been the second official residence and business office of the President of India ; the President stays once a year in winter and conducts official business particularly relating to Southern India .
Several protests , known collectively as the Telangana movement , attempted to invalidate the merger and demanded the creation of a new Telangana state .
Major actions took place in 1969 and 1972 , and a third began in 2010 .
The city suffered several explosions : one at Dilsukhnagar in 2002 claimed two lives ; terrorist bombs in May and August 2007 caused communal tension and riots ; and two bombs exploded in February 2013 .
On 3 October 2013 the Union Cabinet approved the proposal , and in February 2014 both houses of Parliament passed the Telangana Bill .
The city has numerous lakes referred to as sagar , meaning `` sea '' .
As of 1996 , the city had 140 lakes and 834 water tanks -LRB- ponds -RRB- .
Hyderabad 's lakes and the sloping terrain of its low-lying hills provide habitat for an assortment of flora and fauna .
The forest region in and around the city encompasses areas of ecological and biological importance , which are preserved in the form of national parks , zoos , mini-zoos and a wildlife sanctuary .
Organisations engaged in environmental and wildlife preservation include the Telangana Forest Department , Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education , the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics -LRB- ICRISAT -RRB- , the Animal Welfare Board of India , the Blue Cross of Hyderabad and the University of Hyderabad .
Each ward is represented by a corporator , elected by popular vote .
The corporators elect the Mayor , who is the titular head of GHMC ; executive powers rest with the Municipal Commissioner , appointed by the state government .
The GHMC carries out the city 's infrastructural work such as building and maintenance of roads and drains , town planning including construction regulation , maintenance of municipal markets and parks , solid waste management , the issuing of birth and death certificates , the issuing of trade licences , collection of property tax , and community welfare services such as mother and child healthcare , and pre-school and non-formal education .
:3 In the 2016 municipal election , the Telangana Rashtra Samithi formed the majority and the present Mayor is Bonthu Ram Mohan .
The government-owned India Post has five head post offices and many sub-post offices in Hyderabad , which are complemented by private courier services .
Rapid urbanisation and increased economic activity has also led to increased industrial waste , air , noise and water pollution , which is regulated by the Telangana Pollution Control Board -LRB- TPCB -RRB- .
This shortage is further exacerbated by inadequately treated effluent discharged from industrial treatment plants polluting the water sources of the city .
The city also has about 4,000 individual clinics and 500 medical diagnostic centres .
Hyderabad also has outpatient and inpatient facilities that use Unani , homeopathic and Ayurvedic treatments .
At the same 2011 census , the Hyderabad Urban Agglomeration had a population of 7,749,334 , making it the sixth most populous urban agglomeration in the country .
The population of the Hyderabad urban agglomeration has since been estimated by electoral officials to be 9.1 million as of early 2013 but is expected to exceed 10 million by the end of the year .
Among children aged 0 -- 6 years , 373,794 are boys and 352,022 are girls -- a ratio of 942 per 1000 .
The socio-economic strata consist of 20 % upper class , 50 % middle class and 30 % working class .
A third of the slums have basic service connections , and the remainder depend on general public services provided by the government .
About 3.72 % of the slum children aged 5 -- 14 do not go to school and 3.17 % work as child labour , of whom 64 % are boys and 36 % are girls .
The largest employers of child labour are street shops and construction sites .
Most of the city 's parks and recreational centres , such as Sanjeevaiah Park , Indira Park , Lumbini Park , NTR Gardens , the Buddha statue and Tankbund Park are located here .
The northern end contains industrial areas such as Sanathnagar , Moosapet , Balanagar , Patancheru and Chanda Nagar .
The northeast end is dotted with residential areas .
The Charminar , Mecca Masjid , Charkaman and Qutb Shahi tombs are other existing structures of this period .
Most of the historical bazaars that still exist were constructed on the street north of Charminar towards Golconda fort .
During Mir Osman Ali Khan 's rule , European styles , along with Indo-Islamic , became prominent .
These styles are reflected in the Falaknuma Palace and many civic monuments such as the Hyderabad High Court , Osmania Hospital , Osmania University , the State Central Library , City College , the Telangana Legislature , the State Archaeology Museum , Jubilee Hall , and Hyderabad and Kachiguda railway stations .
Its per capita annual income in 2011 was 44300 -LRB- US$ 660 -RRB- .
The service industry remains dominant in the city , and 90 % of the employed workforce is engaged in this sector .
The growth of the financial services sector has helped Hyderabad evolve from a traditional manufacturing city to a cosmopolitan industrial service centre .
Since the 1990s , the growth of information technology -LRB- IT -RRB- , IT-enabled services -LRB- ITES -RRB- , insurance and financial institutions has expanded the service sector , and these primary economic activities have boosted the ancillary sectors of trade and commerce , transport , storage , communication , real estate and retail .
Hyderabad is a global centre of information technology , for which it is known as Cyberabad -LRB- Cyber City -RRB- .
The development of HITEC City , a township with extensive technological infrastructure , prompted multinational companies to establish facilities in Hyderabad .
The city and its suburbs contain the highest number of special economic zones of any Indian city .
Those involved in the informal economy constitute a major portion of urban poor. :71
In the past , Qutb Shahi rulers and Nizams attracted artists , architects and men of letters from different parts of the world through patronage .
The reign of the Nizams saw many literary reforms and the introduction of Urdu as a language of court , administration and education .
These courtesans were revered as the epitome of etiquette and culture , and were appointed to teach singing , poetry and classical dance to many children of the aristocracy .
This gave rise to certain styles of court music , dance and poetry .
Films in the local Hyderabadi dialect are also produced and have been gaining popularity since 2005 .
The city has also hosted international film festivals such as the International Children 's Film Festival and the Hyderabad International Film Festival .
Although not a centre for handicrafts itself , the patronage of the arts by the Mughals and Nizams attracted artisans from the region to Hyderabad .
Examples of Hyderabad 's arts and crafts are housed in various museums including the Salar Jung Museum -LRB- housing `` one of the largest one-man-collections in the world '' -RRB- , the AP State Archaeology Museum , the Nizam Museum , the City Museum and the Birla Science Museum .
Many coffee table magazines , professional magazines and research journals are also regularly published .
The available channels in Hyderabad include All India Radio , Radio Mirchi , Radio City , Red FM and Big FM .
Satellite TV channels are accessible via cable subscription , direct-broadcast satellite services or internet-based television .
Hyderabad 's first dial-up internet access became available in the early 1990s and was limited to software development companies .
In 2015 , high-speed public WiFi was introduced in parts of the city .
After completing secondary education , students enroll in schools or junior colleges with a higher secondary facility .
Admission to professional graduation colleges in Hyderabad , many of which are affiliated with either Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University Hyderabad -LRB- JNTUH -RRB- or Osmania University -LRB- OU -RRB- , is through the Engineering Agricultural and Medical Common Entrance Test -LRB- EAM-CET -RRB- .
Hyderabad is also home to a number of centres specialising in particular fields such as biomedical sciences , biotechnology and pharmaceuticals , such as the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research -LRB- NIPER -RRB- and National Institute of Nutrition -LRB- NIN -RRB- .
Institutes in Hyderabad include the National Institute of Rural Development , the Indian School of Business , the Institute of Public Enterprise , the Administrative Staff College of India and the Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy .
The National Institute of Design , Hyderabad -LRB- NID-H -RRB- , will offer undergraduate and postgraduate courses from 2015 .
Hyderabad has hosted many international cricket matches , including matches in the 1987 and the 1996 ICC Cricket World Cups .
The Hyderabad cricket team represents the city in the Ranji Trophy -- a first-class cricket tournament among India 's states and cities .
Hyderabad is also home to the Indian Premier League franchise Sunrisers Hyderabad .
A previous franchise was the Deccan Chargers , which won the 2009 Indian Premier League held in South Africa .
Intercity rail services also operate from Hyderabad ; the main , and largest , station is Secunderabad Railway Station , which serves as Indian Railways ' South Central Railway zone headquarters and a hub for both buses and MMTS light rail services connecting Secunderabad and Hyderabad .
Other major railway stations in Hyderabad are Hyderabad Deccan Station , Kachiguda Railway Station , Begumpet Railway Station , Malkajgiri Railway Station and Lingampally Railway Station .
The Hyderabad Metro , a new rapid transit system , is to be added to the existing public transport infrastructure and is scheduled to operate three lines by 2015 .
The remaining 8 % include buses , goods vehicles and taxis .
Situated on Santa Monica Bay , it is bordered on three sides by the city of Los Angeles -- Pacific Palisades to the north , Brentwood on the northeast , Sawtelle on the east , Mar Vista on the southeast , and Venice on the south .
Santa Monica is well known for its affluent single-family neighborhoods but also has many neighborhoods consisting primarily of condominiums and apartments .
There are two different versions of the naming of the city .
Another version says that it was named by Juan Crespí on account of a pair of springs , the Kuruvungna Springs -LRB- Serra Springs -RRB- , that were reminiscent of the tears that Saint Monica shed over her son 's early impiety .
RAND eventually acquired a 15-acre -LRB- 61,000 m ² -RRB- campus centrally located between the Civic Center and the pier entrance .
Bergamot Station is a city-owned art gallery compound that includes the Santa Monica Museum of Art .
The city is also home to the California Heritage Museum and the Angels Attic dollhouse and toy museum .
Other annual events include the Business and Consumer Expo , Sustainable Quality Awards , Santa Monica Cares Health and Wellness Festival , and the State of the City .
Overcast skies are common during June mornings , but usually the strong sun burns the fog off by noon .
In the late winter/early summer , daily fog is a phenomenon too .
It happens suddenly and it may last some hours or past sunset time .
Nonetheless , it will sometimes stay cloudy and cool all day during June , even as other parts of the Los Angeles area enjoy sunny skies and warmer temperatures .
At times , the sun can be shining east of 20th Street , while the beach area is overcast .
Santa Monica is one of the most environmentally activist municipalities in the nation .
The average household size was 1.87 .
There are 47,863 housing units at an average density of 5,794.0 per square mile -LRB- 2,237.3 / km ² -RRB- .
The racial makeup of the city is 78.29 % White , 7.25 % Asian , 3.78 % African American , 0.47 % Native American , 0.10 % Pacific Islander , 5.97 % from other races , and 4.13 % from two or more races .
13.44 % of the population are Hispanic or Latino of any race .
51.2 % of all households are made up of individuals and 10.6 % have someone living alone who is 65 years of age or older .
Many SMC graduates transfer to the University of California system .
The Frederick S. Pardee RAND Graduate School , associated with the RAND Corporation , is the U.S. 's largest producer of public policy PhDs .
Local bicycle advocacy organizations include Santa Monica Spoke , a local chapter of the Los Angeles County Bicycle Coalition .
Santa Monica is thought to be one of the leaders for bicycle infrastructure and programming in Los Angeles County .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The Santa Monica Freeway between Santa Monica and downtown Los Angeles has the distinction of being one of the busiest highways in all of North America .
In Santa Monica , there is a road sign designating this route as the Christopher Columbus Transcontinental Highway .
Santa Monica is also the western -LRB- Pacific -RRB- terminus of historic U.S. Route 66 .
Close to the eastern boundary of Santa Monica , Sepulveda Boulevard reaches from Long Beach at the south , to the northern end of the San Fernando Valley .
Just east of Santa Monica is Interstate 405 , the `` San Diego Freeway '' , a major north-south route in Los Angeles County and Orange County , California .
Historical aspects of the Expo line route are noteworthy .
The line was built in 1875 as the steam-powered Los Angeles and Independence Railroad to bring mining ore to ships in Santa Monica harbor and as a passenger excursion train to the beach .
The clothing store was believed to be a local hang out for Santa Monica gang members .
The dead included two men from Northern California who had merely been visiting the store 's owner , their cousin , to see if they could open a similar store in their area .
Police say the incident was in retaliation for a shooting committed by the Santa Monica 13 gang days before the Juarez brothers were gunned down .
Hundreds of movies have been shot or set in part within the city of Santa Monica .
The comedy It 's a Mad , Mad , Mad , Mad World -LRB- 1963 -RRB- included several scenes shot in Santa Monica , including those along the California Incline , which led to the movie 's treasure spot , `` The Big W '' .
Henry Jaglom 's indie Someone to Love -LRB- 1987 -RRB- , the last film in which Orson Welles appeared , takes place in Santa Monica 's venerable Mayfair Theatre .
Heathers -LRB- 1989 -RRB- used Santa Monica 's John Adams Middle School for many exterior shots .
Other films that show significant exterior shots of Santa Monica include Fletch -LRB- 1985 -RRB- , Species -LRB- 1995 -RRB- , Get Shorty -LRB- 1995 -RRB- , and Ocean 's Eleven -LRB- 2001 -RRB- .
Richard Rossi 's biopic Aimee Semple McPherson opens and closes at the beach in Santa Monica .
Iron Man features the Santa Monica pier and surrounding communities as Tony Stark tests his experimental flight suit .
Washington University in St. Louis -LRB- Wash. .
U. , or WUSTL -RRB- is a private research university located in St. Louis , Missouri , United States .
Washington University 's undergraduate program is ranked 15th by U.S. News and World Report .
The institution had no backing of a religious organization , single wealthy patron , or earmarked government support .
During the three years following its inception , the university bore three different names .
He favored a nonsectarian university .
Naming the University after the nation 's first president , only seven years before the American Civil War and during a time of bitter national division , was no coincidence .
During this time of conflict , Americans universally admired George Washington as the father of the United States and a symbol of national unity .
Owing to limited financial resources , Washington University initially used public buildings .
At first the university paid for the evening classes , but as their popularity grew , their funding was transferred to the St. Louis Public Schools .
Eventually the board secured funds for the construction of Academic Hall and a half dozen other buildings .
By 1882 , Washington University had expanded to numerous departments , which were housed in various buildings across St. Louis .
The delay allowed the university to construct ten buildings instead of the seven originally planned .
This original cluster of buildings set a precedent for the development of the Danforth Campus ; Cope & Stewardson 's original plan and its choice of building materials have , with few exceptions , guided the construction and expansion of the Danforth Campus to the present day .
Washington University has been selected by the Commission on Presidential Debates to host more presidential and vice-presidential debates than any other institution in history .
More than 90 % of incoming freshmen whose high schools ranked were ranked in the top 10 % of their high school classes .
In addition , the Olin Business School 's undergraduate program is among the top 4 in the country .
Washington University 's North Campus and West Campus principally house administrative functions that are not student focused .
Several University administrative departments are located at the North Campus location , including offices for Quadrangle Housing , Accounting and Treasury Services , Parking and Transportation Services , Army ROTC , and Network Technology Services .
The ground level still remains a retail space .
The upper floors house consolidated capital gifts , portions of alumni and development , and information systems offices from across the Danforth and Medical School campuses .
There is also a music rehearsal room on the second floor .
The school 's academic programs include BSBA , MBA , Professional MBA -LRB- PMBA -RRB- , Executive MBA -LRB- EMBA -RRB- , MS in Finance , MS in Supply Chain Management , MS in Customer Analytics , Master of Accounting , Global Master of Finance Dual Degree program , and Doctorate programs , as well as non-degree executive education .
Students may also take elective courses from other disciplines at Washington University , including law and many other fields .
In particular , its Clinical Education Program is currently ranked 4th in the nation .
The building combines traditional architecture , a five-story open-stacks library , an integration of indoor and outdoor spaces , and the latest wireless and other technologies .
The School pioneered bedside teaching and led in the transformation of empirical knowledge into scientific medicine .
It is currently ranked first among Master of Social Work programs in the United States .
The school was the first in the country to have a building for the purpose of social work education , and it is also a founding member of the Association of Schools and Programs of Public Health .
The new building , adjacent to Brown and Goldfarb Halls , targets LEED Gold certification and will add approximately 105,000 square feet , more than doubling the school 's teaching , research , and program space .
Many of the faculty have training in both social work and public health .
Also in the complex is the 3,000 sq ft -LRB- 300 m2 -RRB- Newman Money Museum .
Known for its interdisciplinarity and departmental collaboration , many of Washington University 's research centers and institutes are collaborative efforts between many areas on campus .
Governmental agencies and non-profit foundations such as the NIH , United States Department of Defense , National Science Foundation , and NASA provide the majority of research grant funding , with Washington University being one of the top recipients in NIH grants from year-to-year .
Known as SU for short , the Student Union sponsors large-scale campus programs including WILD -LRB- a semesterly concert in the quad -RRB- and free copies of the New York Times , USA Today , and the St. Louis Post-Dispatch through The Collegiate Readership Program ; it also contributes to the Assembly Series , a weekly lecture series produced by the University , and funds the campus television station , WUTV , and the radio station , KWUR .
KWUR was named best radio station in St. Louis of 2003 by the Riverfront Times despite the fact that its signal reaches only a few blocks beyond the boundaries of the campus .
The Congress of the South 40 -LRB- CS40 -RRB- is a Residential Life and Events Programming Board , which operates outside of the SU sphere .
CS40 's funding comes from the Housing Activities Fee of each student living on the South 40 .
The Mosaic Whispers , founded in 1991 , is the oldest co-ed group on campus .
They have produced 9 albums and have appeared on a number of compilation albums , including Ben Folds ' Ben Folds Presents : University A Cappella !
They have recorded seven albums and toured extensively .
After Dark is a co-ed a cappella group founded in 2001 .
It has released three albums and has won several Contemporary A Capella Recording -LRB- CARA -RRB- awards .
The Ghost Lights , founded in 2010 , is the campus 's newest and only Broadway , Movies , and Television soundtrack group .
They have performed multiple philanthropic concerts in the greater St. Louis area and were honored in November 2010 with the opportunity to perform for Nobel Laureate Douglass North at his birthday celebration .
It is the location of all the freshman buildings as well as several upperclassman buildings , which are set up in the traditional residential college system .
The South 40 is organized as a pedestrian-friendly environment wherein residences surround a central recreational lawn known as the Swamp .
Bear 's Den -LRB- the largest dining hall on campus -RRB- , the Habif Health and Wellness Center -LRB- Student Health Services -RRB- , the Residential Life Office , University Police Headquarters , various student-owned businesses -LRB- e.g. the laundry service , Wash U Wash -RRB- , and the baseball , softball , and intramural fields are also located on the South 40 .
Sororities at Washington University do not have houses by their own accord .
Like the South 40 , the residences around the Village also surround a recreational lawn .
The university 's student newspaper , Student Life , is available for students .
A variety of other publications also serve the university community , ranging from in-house academic journals to glossy alumni magazines to WUnderground , campus ' student-run satirical newspaper .
The 2000 Division III Central Region winner of the National Association of Collegiate Directors of Athletics/Continental Airlines Athletics Director of the Year award , Schael has helped orchestrate the Bears athletics transformation into one of the top departments in Division III .
Though it is not the only U.S. government agency specializing in HUMINT , CIA serves as the national manager for coordination and deconfliction of HUMINT activities across the entire intelligence community .
It can , for example , exert foreign political influence through its tactical divisions , such as the Special Activities Division .
The name reflects its role as the coordinator of human intelligence activities among other elements of the wider U.S. intelligence community with their own HUMINT operations .
The facility works in partnership with the National Intelligence University , and includes the Sherman Kent School for Intelligence Analysis , the Directorate of Analysis ' component of the university .
Details of the overall United States intelligence budget are classified .
According to the 2013 mass surveillance disclosures , the CIA 's fiscal 2013 budget is $ 14.7 billion , 28 % of the total and almost 50 % more than the budget of the National Security Agency .
There were numerous previous attempts to obtain general information about the budget .
While the preceding agencies both collect and analyze information , some like the U.S. State Department 's Bureau of Intelligence and Research are purely analytical agencies .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
There is a special communications marking that signals that intelligence-related messages can be shared with these four countries .
An indication of the United States ' close operational cooperation is the creation of a new message distribution label within the main U.S. military communications network .
The division lasted only a few months .
The first public mention of the `` Central Intelligence Agency '' appeared on a command-restructuring proposal presented by Jim Forrestal and Arthur Radford to the U.S. Senate Military Affairs Committee at the end of 1945 .
Despite opposition from the military establishment , the United States Department of State and the Federal Bureau of Investigation -LRB- FBI -RRB- , Truman established the National Intelligence Authority in January 1946 , which was the direct predecessor of the CIA .
Its operational extension was known as the Central Intelligence Group -LRB- CIG -RRB-
It also exempted the CIA from having to disclose its `` organization , functions , officials , titles , salaries , or numbers of personnel employed . ''
At the outset of the Korean War the CIA still only had a few thousand employees , a thousand of whom worked in analysis .
The CIA still lacked its own intelligence gathering abilities .
-LSB- clarification needed -RSB-
The CIA had different demands placed on it by the different bodies overseeing it .
Thus the two areas of responsibility for the CIA were covert action and covert intelligence .
This task fell to the 228 overseas personnel covering Germany , Austria , Switzerland , Poland , Czechoslovakia , and Hungary .
To this end , the Office of Policy Coordination was created inside the new CIA .
The early track record of the CIA was poor , with the agency unable to provide sufficient intelligence about the Soviet takeovers of Romania and Czechoslovakia , the Soviet blockade of Berlin , and the Soviet atomic bomb project .
Through him the CIA coordinated hundreds of airdrops inside the iron curtain , all compromised by Philby .
The CIA would reuse the tactic of dropping plant agents behind enemy lines by parachute again on China , and North Korea .
This too would be fruitless .
A popular alternative definition of chronic pain , involving no arbitrarily fixed durations , is `` pain that extends beyond the expected period of healing '' .
Visceral pain is diffuse , difficult to locate and often referred to a distant , usually superficial , structure .
Examples include sprains and broken bones .
Examples of injuries that produce superficial somatic pain include minor wounds and minor -LRB- first degree -RRB- burns .
Some amputees experience continuous pain that varies in intensity or quality ; others experience several bouts a day , or it may occur only once every week or two .
It is often described as shooting , crushing , burning or cramping .
Onset may be immediate or may not occur until years after the disabling injury .
The characteristics of breakthrough cancer pain vary from person to person and according to the cause .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Most people with congenital insensitivity to pain have one of five hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies -LRB- which includes familial dysautonomia and congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis -RRB- .
These conditions feature decreased sensitivity to pain together with other neurological abnormalities , particularly of the autonomic nervous system .
Descartes 's work , along with Avicenna 's , prefigured the 19th-century development of specificity theory .
By the mid-1890s , specificity was backed mostly by physiologists and physicians , and the intensive theory was mostly backed by psychologists .
Another 20th-century theory was gate control theory , introduced by Ronald Melzack and Patrick Wall in the 1965 Science article `` Pain Mechanisms : A New Theory '' .
Cognitive activities `` may affect both sensory and affective experience or they may modify primarily the affective-motivational dimension .
-LRB- p. 435 -RRB-
The `` specificity '' -LRB- whether it responds to thermal , chemical or mechanical features of its environment -RRB- of a nociceptor is determined by which ion channels it expresses at its peripheral end .
This is followed by a duller pain , often described as burning , carried by the C fibers .
Melzack and Casey 's 1968 picture of the dimensions of pain is as influential today as ever , firmly framing theory and guiding research in the functional neuroanatomy and psychology of pain .
He describes the alternative as a simple , mental raising of a `` red flag '' .
Those pains which mean certain death when ignored will become the most powerfully felt .
The result is often glitches in animals , including supernormal stimuli .
Such glitches help explain pains which are not , or at least no longer directly adaptive -LRB- e.g. perhaps some forms of toothache , or injury to fingernails -RRB- .
A change in condition that deviates from baseline such as moaning with movement or when manipulating a body part , and limited range of motion are also potential pain indicators .
For instance , the way in which one experiences and responds to pain is related to sociocultural characteristics , such as gender , ethnicity , and age .
Depression may also keep the older adult from reporting they are in pain .
Decline in self-care activities -LRB- dressing , grooming , walking , etc. -RRB- may also be indicators that the older adult is experiencing pain .
They may not want others to see them as weak , or may feel there is something impolite or shameful in complaining about pain , or they may feel the pain is deserved punishment for past transgressions .
They may feel certain pain treatment is against their religion .
Gender can also be a factor in reporting pain .
Sexual differences can be the result of social and cultural expectations , with women expected to be emotional and show pain and men stoic , keeping pain to themselves .
Philosophers and scientists have responded to this difficulty in a variety of ways .
In his interactions with scientists and other veterinarians , he was regularly asked to `` prove '' that animals are conscious , and to provide `` scientifically acceptable '' grounds for claiming that they feel pain .
Carbone writes that the view that animals feel pain differently is now a minority view .
Academic reviews of the topic are more equivocal , noting that although the argument that animals have at least simple conscious thoughts and feelings has strong support , some critics continue to question how reliably animal mental states can be determined .
Well-known DBMSs include MySQL , PostgreSQL , Microsoft SQL Server , Oracle , Sybase , SAP HANA , and IBM DB2 .
A database is not generally portable across different DBMSs , but different DBMS can interoperate by using standards such as SQL and ODBC or JDBC to allow a single application to work with more than one DBMS .
-LSB- disputed -- discuss -RSB- Sometimes a DBMS is loosely referred to as a ` database ' .
Formally , a `` database '' refers to a set of related data and the way it is organized .
Physically , database servers are dedicated computers that hold the actual databases and run only the DBMS and related software .
RAID is used for recovery of data if any of the disks fail .
DBMSs are found at the heart of most database applications .
from databases before the inception of Structured Query Language -LRB- SQL -RRB- .
The data recovered was disparate , redundant and disorderly , since there was no proper method to fetch it and arrange it in a concrete structure .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
General-purpose DBMSs aim to meet the needs of as many applications as possible , which adds to the complexity .
However , a general-purpose DBMS is not always the optimal solution : in some cases a general-purpose DBMS may introduce unnecessary overhead .
Therefore , there are many examples of systems that use special-purpose databases .
The relational model employs sets of ledger-style tables , each used for a different type of entity .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
IMS was generally similar in concept to CODASYL , but used a strict hierarchy for its model of data navigation instead of CODASYL 's network model .
IMS is classified -LSB- by whom ? -RSB-
IDMS and Cincom Systems ' TOTAL database are classified as network databases .
IMS remains in use as of 2014 -LSB- update -RSB- .
In this paper , he described a new system for storing and working with large databases .
Records would be created in these optional tables only if the address or phone numbers were actually provided .
Linking the information back together is the key to this system .
For instance , if the login name of a user is unique , addresses and phone numbers for that user would be recorded with the login name as its key .
They started a project known as INGRES using funding that had already been allocated for a geographical database project and student programmers to produce code .
The 1980s ushered in the age of desktop computing .
The new computers empowered their users with spreadsheets like Lotus 1-2-3 and database software like dBASE .
dBASE was one of the top selling software titles in the 1980s and early 1990s .
Programmers and designers began to treat the data in their databases as objects .
That is to say that if a person 's data were in a database , that person 's attributes , such as their address , phone number , and age , were now considered to belong to that person instead of being extraneous data .
This allows for relations between data to be relations to objects and their attributes and not to individual fields .
XML database management systems include commercial software MarkLogic and Oracle Berkeley DB XML , and a free use software Clusterpoint Distributed XML/JSON Database .
A common approach to this is to develop an entity-relationship model , often with the aid of drawing tools .
Another popular approach is the Unified Modeling Language .
, or `` if a product is sold with two different forms of packaging , are those the same product or different products ? ''
, or `` if a plane flies from New York to Dubai via Frankfurt , is that one flight or two -LRB- or maybe even three -RRB- ? ''
.
Having produced a conceptual data model that users are happy with , the next stage is to translate this into a schema that implements the relevant data structures within the database .
-LRB- The terms data model and database model are often used interchangeably , but in this article we use data model for the design of a specific database , and database model for the modelling notation used to express that design . -RRB-
This is often called physical database design .
For example , a financial department of a company needs the payment details of all employees as part of the company 's expenses , but does not need details about employees that are the interest of the human resources department .
Thus different departments need different views of the company 's database .
In principle every level , and even every external view , can be presented by a different data model .
In practice usually a given DBMS uses the same data model for both the external and the conceptual levels -LRB- e.g. , relational model -RRB- .
The internal level , which is hidden inside the DBMS and depends on its implementation , requires a different level of detail and uses its own types of data structure types .
It comprises the internal -LRB- physical -RRB- level in the database architecture .
It also contains all the information needed -LRB- e.g. , metadata , `` data about the data '' , and internal data structures -RRB- to reconstruct the conceptual level and external level from the internal level when needed .
Data typically reside in the storage in structures that look completely different from the way the data look in the conceptual and external levels , but in ways that attempt to optimize -LRB- the best possible -RRB- these levels ' reconstruction when needed by users and programs , as well as for computing additional types of needed information from the data -LRB- e.g. , when querying the database -RRB- .
This may be managed directly on an individual basis , or by the assignment of individuals and privileges to groups , or -LRB- in the most elaborate models -RRB- through the assignment of individuals and groups to roles which are then granted entitlements .
For example , an employee database can contain all the data about an individual employee , but one group of users may be authorized to view only payroll data , while others are allowed access to only work history and medical data .
However , in some situations it is desirable to move , migrate a database from one DBMS to another .
The migration involves the database 's transformation from one DBMS type to another .
It may be desired that also some aspects of the architecture internal level are maintained .
A complex or large database migration may be a complicated and costly -LRB- one-time -RRB- project by itself , which should be factored into the decision to migrate .
This in spite of the fact that tools may exist to help migration between specific DBMSs .
The Tucson MSA forms part of the larger Tucson-Nogales combined statistical area -LRB- CSA -RRB- , with a total population of 980,263 as of the 2010 Census .
Tucson is the 33rd largest city and the 59th largest metropolitan area in the United States .
These people constructed irrigation canals and grew corn , beans , and other crops while gathering wild plants and hunting .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
A separate Convento settlement was founded downstream along the Santa Cruz River , near the base of what is now `` A '' mountain .
During the Spanish period of the presidio , attacks such as the Second Battle of Tucson were repeatedly mounted by Apaches .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Brazelton held up two stages in the summer of 1878 near Point of Mountain Station approximately 17 mi -LRB- 27 km -RRB- northwest of Tucson .
John Clum , of Tombstone , Arizona fame was one of the passengers .
Brazelton had been suspected of highway robbery not only in the Tucson area , but also in the Prescott region and Silver City , New Mexico area as well .
Brazelton 's crimes prompted John J. Valentine , Sr. of Wells , Fargo & Co. to send special agent and future Pima County sheriff Bob Paul to investigate .
Fort Lowell , then east of Tucson , was established to help protect settlers from Apache attacks .
The coroner 's jury concluded that Spence , Stilwell , Frederick Bode , and Florentino `` Indian Charlie '' Cruz were the prime suspects in the assassination of Morgan Earp .
They found Stilwell lying in wait for Virgil in the Tucson station and killed him on the tracks .
After killing Stilwell , Wyatt deputized others and rode on a vendetta , killing three more cowboys over the next few days before leaving the state .
It is also the largest city in the area of the Gadsden Purchase .
Downtown is divided into the Presidio District , the Barrio Viejo , and the Congress Street Arts and Entertainment District .
Some authorities include the 4th Avenue shopping district , which is set just northeast of the rest of downtown and connected by an underpass beneath the UPRR tracks .
Local retail business in Central Tucson is densely concentrated along Fourth Avenue and the Main Gate Square on University Boulevard near the UA campus .
The street was called `` The Speedway , '' from 1904 to about 1906 before the word `` The '' was taken out .
South Tucson has a colorful , dynamic history .
Moving past the Tucson Mountains , travelers find themselves in the area commonly referred to as `` west of '' Tucson or `` Old West Tucson '' .
Because of the three-color paint scheme often used , the shape of the A can be vague and indistinguishable from the rest of the peak .
The top of Sentinel Peak , which is accessible by road , offers an outstanding scenic view of the city looking eastward .
A parking lot located near the summit of Sentinel Peak was formerly a popular place to watch sunsets or view the city lights at night .
This community includes among the area 's most expensive homes , sometimes multimillion-dollar estates .
The area includes urban and suburban development near the Rincon Mountains .
Tucson 's `` Restaurant Row '' is also located on the east side , along with a significant corporate and financial presence .
The first phases of Williams Centre , a mixed-use , master-planned development on Broadway near Craycroft Road , were opened in 1987 .
Near the intersection of Craycroft and Ft. Lowell Roads are the remnants of the Historic Fort Lowell .
This area has become one of Tucson 's iconic neighborhoods .
Their woodwork , plaster treatment and sense of proportion drew on their Dutch heritage and New Mexican experience .
Other artists and academics throughout the middle of the 20th century , including : Win Ellis , Jack Maul , Madame Cheruy , Giorgio Belloli , Charels Bode , Veronica Hughart , Edward and Rosamond Spicer , Hazel Larson Archer and Ruth Brown , renovated adobes , built homes and lived in the area .
This rural pocket in the middle of the city is listed on the National Register of Historic Places .
Southeast Tucson continues to experience rapid residential development .
The area is considered to be south of Golf Links Road .
It begins with clouds building up from the south in the early afternoon followed by intense thunderstorms and rainfall , which can cause flash floods .
The evening sky at this time of year is often pierced with dramatic lightning strikes .
Large areas of the city do not have storm sewers , so monsoon rains flood the main thoroughfares , usually for no longer than a few hours .
A few underpasses in Tucson have `` feet of water '' scales painted on their supports to discourage fording by automobiles during a rainstorm .
Despite all warnings and precautions , however , three Tucson drivers have drowned between 2004 and 2010 .
Winters in Tucson are mild relative to other parts of the United States .
Although rare , snow has been known to fall in Tucson , usually a light dusting that melts within a day .
There are an average of 150.1 days annually with highs of 90 °F -LRB- 32 °C -RRB- or higher and an average of 26.4 days with lows reaching or below the freezing mark .
Average annual precipitation is 11.15 in -LRB- 283 mm -RRB- .
There is an average of 49 days with measurable precipitation .
The most precipitation in one month was 7.56 in -LRB- 192 mm -RRB- in July 1984 .
The most precipitation in 24 hours was 4.16 in -LRB- 106 mm -RRB- on October 1 , 1983 .
Annual snowfall averages 0.7 in -LRB- 1.8 cm -RRB- .
The most snow in one year was 7.2 in -LRB- 18 cm -RRB- in 1987 .
The most snow in one month was 6.0 in -LRB- 15 cm -RRB- in January 1898 and March 1922 .
At the airport , where records have been kept since 1930 , the record maximum temperature was 117 °F -LRB- 47 °C -RRB- on June 26 , 1990 , and the record minimum temperature was 16 °F -LRB- − 9 °C -RRB- on January 4 , 1949 .
There is an average of 145.0 days annually with highs of 90 °F -LRB- 32 °C -RRB- or higher and an average of 16.9 days with lows reaching or below the freezing mark .
Measurable precipitation falls on an average of 53 days .
Snow at the airport averages only 1.1 in -LRB- 2.8 cm -RRB- annually .
There were 209,609 housing units at an average density of 1,076.7 per square mile -LRB- 415.7 / km ² -RRB- .
The racial makeup of the city was 69.7 % White -LRB- down from 94.8 % in 1970 -RRB- , 5.0 % Black or African-American , 2.7 % Native American , 2.9 % Asian , 0.2 % Pacific Islander , 16.9 % from other races , and 3.8 % from two or more races .
Hispanic or Latino of any race were 41.6 % of the population .
Davis-Monthan Air Force Base , located on the southeastern edge of the city , also provides many jobs for Tucson residents .
The City of Tucson , Pima County , the State of Arizona , and the private sector have all made commitments to create a growing , healthy economy -LSB- citation needed -RSB- with advanced technology industry sectors as its foundation .
In addition to readings and lectures , it features a science fair , varied entertainment , food , and exhibitors ranging from local retailers and publishers to regional and national nonprofit organizations .
All stages are within easy walking distance .
KXCI 91.3-FM , Arizona 's only community radio station , is a major partner , broadcasting from the Plaza Stage throughout the weekend .
In addition , there are numerous workshops , events for children , sing-alongs , and a popular singer/songwriter contest .
Musicians typically play 30-minute sets , supported by professional audio staff volunteers .
A variety of food and crafts are available at the festival , as well as local micro-brews .
All proceeds from sales go to fund future festivals .
While at its heart the Fiesta is a sporting event , it includes what is billed as `` the world 's largest non-mechanized parade '' .
The exception to this is Presidio High -LRB- a non-public charter school -RRB- , which does n't get either .
Western wear is seen throughout the city as corporate dress codes are cast aside during the Fiesta .
The Fiesta de los Vaqueros marks the beginning of the rodeo season in the United States .
The city is particularly active in publishing and presenting contemporary innovative poetry in various ways .
Tucson is commonly known as `` The Old Pueblo '' .
This in turn transformed into the current form of `` The Old Pueblo '' .
The University of Arizona Wildcats sports teams , most notably the men 's basketball and women 's softball teams have strong local interest .
Both men and women 's swim teams recently -LSB- when ? -RSB-
won the NCAA National Championships .
They served as the AAA affiliate of the San Diego Padres .
Previously , the Tucson Sidewinders , a triple-A affiliate of the Arizona Diamondbacks , won the Pacific Coast League championship and unofficial AAA championship in 2006 .
The Sidewinders played in Tucson Electric Park and were in the Pacific Conference South of the PCL .
Tracks include Tucson Raceway Park and Rillito Downs .
Rillito Downs is an in-town destination on weekends in January and February each year .
The racetrack is threatened by development .
Tucson hosts the largest perimeter cycling event in the United States .
The city is known for its winter cycling opportunities .
Both road and mountain biking are popular in and around Tucson with trail areas including Starr Pass and Fantasy Island .
The United States Postal Service operates post offices in Tucson .
The Tucson Main Post Office is located at 1501 South Cherrybell Stravenue .
In other words , on election day the whole city votes on all the council races up for that year .
Tucson is known for being a trailblazer in voluntary partial publicly financed campaigns .
In return , candidates receive matching funds from the city at a 1:1 ratio of public money to private donations .
The only other limitation is that candidates may not exceed 75 % of the limit by the date of the primary .
TucsonSentinel.com is a nonprofit independent online news organization .
Tucson Lifestyle Magazine , Lovin ' Life News , DesertLeaf , and Zócalo Magazine are monthly publications covering arts , architecture , decor , fashion , entertainment , business , history , and other events .
The New Vision is the newspaper for the Roman Catholic Diocese of Tucson , and the Arizona Jewish Post is the newspaper of the Jewish Federation of Southern Arizona .
The Tucson metro area is served by many local television stations and is the 68th largest designated market area -LRB- DMA -RRB- in the U.S. with 433,310 homes -LRB- 0.39 % of the total U.S. -RRB- .
Federal , state , and even local utility credits and incentives have also enticed residents to equip homes with solar systems .
Davis-Monthan AFB has a 3.3 Megawatt -LRB- MW -RRB- ground-mounted solar photovoltaic -LRB- PV -RRB- array and a 2.7 MW rooftop-mounted PV array , both of which are located in the Base Housing area .
The base will soon have the largest solar-generating capacity in the United States Department of Defense after awarding a contract on September 10 , 2010 , to SunEdison to construct a 14.5 MW PV field on the northwestern side of the base .
Perhaps the biggest sustainability problem in Tucson , with its high desert climate , is potable water supply .
Energy consumption and availability is another sustainability issue .
Additional study is scheduled to determine the amount of water that is lost through evaporation from the open areas , especially during the summer .
Ten-minute headway passenger service began July 25 , 2014 .
Tucson was awarded a gold rating for bicycle-friendliness by the League of American Bicyclists in 2006 .
In between the late 3rd century to early years of the 4th century , the state became the first Christian nation .
The official date of state adoption of Christianity is 301 AD .
In 1918 , after the Russian Revolution , all non-Russian countries declared their independence from the Russian empire , leading to the establishment of the First Republic of Armenia .
In 1936 , the Transcaucasian state was dissolved , transforming its constituent states , including the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic , into full Union republics .
The exonym Armenia is attested in the Old Persian Behistun Inscription -LRB- 515 BC -RRB- as Armina -LRB- -RRB- .
Several bronze-era states flourished in the area of Greater Armenia , including the Hittite Empire -LRB- at the height of its power -RRB- , Mitanni -LRB- South-Western historical Armenia -RRB- , and Hayasa-Azzi -LRB- 1500 -- 1200 BC -RRB- .
The Nairi people -LRB- 12th to 9th centuries BC -RRB- and the Kingdom of Urartu -LRB- 1000 -- 600 BC -RRB- successively established their sovereignty over the Armenian Highland .
Each of the aforementioned nations and tribes participated in the ethnogenesis of the Armenian people .
Throughout its history , the kingdom of Armenia enjoyed both periods of independence and periods of autonomy subject to contemporary empires .
Soon , the other Armenian states fell under Byzantine control as well .
The Seljuk Empire soon started to collapse .
From the early 16th century , both Western Armenia and Eastern Armenia fell under Iranian Safavid rule .
While Western Armenia still remained under Ottoman rule , the Armenians were granted considerable autonomy within their own enclaves and lived in relative harmony with other groups in the empire -LRB- including the ruling Turks -RRB- .
The Armenians living in the empire hoped that the Committee of Union and Progress would change their second-class status .
Driven forward by military escorts , the deportees were deprived of food and water and subjected to periodic robbery , rape , and massacre .
There was local Armenian resistance in the region , developed against the activities of the Ottoman Empire .
The Armenian Genocide is acknowledged to have been one of the first modern genocides .
The International Association of Genocide Scholars places the death toll at `` more than a million '' .
As a result , the Dashnaktsutyun government of Eastern Armenia declared its independence on 28 May as the First Republic of Armenia under the leadership of Aram Manukian .
At the end of the war , the victorious powers sought to divide up the Ottoman Empire .
The treaty forced Armenia to disarm most of its military forces , cede all former Ottoman territory granted to it by the Treaty of Sèvres , and to give up all the `` Wilsonian Armenia '' granted to it at the Sèvres treaty .
With this annexation , the Treaty of Alexandropol was superseded by the Turkish-Soviet Treaty of Kars .
Armenians enjoyed a period of relative stability under Soviet rule .
The situation was difficult for the church , which struggled under Soviet rule .
Soon , life in Soviet Armenia began to see rapid improvement .
This occurred after mass demonstrations took place on the tragic event 's fiftieth anniversary in 1965 .
During the Gorbachev era of the 1980s , with the reforms of Glasnost and Perestroika , Armenians began to demand better environmental care for their country , opposing the pollution that Soviet-built factories brought .
The Armenians of Karabakh demanded unification with Soviet Armenia .
Peaceful protests in Yerevan supporting the Karabakh Armenians were met with anti-Armenian pogroms in the Azerbaijani city of Sumgait .
Gorbachev 's inability to alleviate any of Armenia 's problems created disillusionment among the Armenians and fed a growing hunger for independence .
Clashes soon broke out between the NAA and Soviet Internal Security Forces -LRB- MVD -RRB- troops based in Yerevan when Armenians decided to commemorate the establishment of the 1918 First Republic of Armenia .
The status of Karabakh has yet to be determined .
Tensions were running high between Armenians and Azerbaijanis during the final years of the Soviet Union .
Despite this , for most of the 20th century and early 21st century , relations remain tense and there are no formal diplomatic relations between the two countries due to Turkey 's refusal to establish them for numerous reasons .
In Armenia it passed through the required by legislation approval of the Constitutional Court and was sent to the parliament for the final ratification .
The President had made multiple public announcements , both in Armenia and abroad , that as the leader of the political majority of Armenia he assured the ratification of the protocols if Turkey also ratified them .
Due to its position between two unfriendly neighbours , Armenia has close security ties with Russia .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Despite this , Armenia has also been looking toward Euro-Atlantic structures in recent years .
It maintains good relations with the United States especially through its Armenian diaspora .
Several Armenian officials have also expressed the desire for their country to eventually become an EU member state , some -LSB- who ? -RSB-
It is also an observer member of the Eurasian Economic Community and the Non-Aligned Movement .
The Commander-in-Chief of the military is the President of Armenia , Serzh Sargsyan .
Armenia has engaged in a peacekeeping mission in Kosovo as part of non-NATO KFOR troops under Greek command .
Within each province are communities -LRB- hamaynkner , singular hamaynk -RRB- .
Settlements are classified as either towns -LRB- kaghakner , singular kaghak -RRB- or villages -LRB- gyugher , singular gyugh -RRB- .
The capital , Yerevan , also has the status of a community .
The republic had developed a modern industrial sector , supplying machine tools , textiles , and other manufactured goods to sister republics in exchange for raw materials and energy .
Agriculture accounted for less than 20 % of both net material product and total employment before the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
Like other newly independent states of the former Soviet Union , Armenia 's economy suffers from the breakdown of former Soviet trading patterns .
Soviet investment in and support of Armenian industry has virtually disappeared , so that few major enterprises are still able to function .
The conflict with Azerbaijan over Nagorno-Karabakh has not been resolved .
The closure of Azerbaijani and Turkish borders has devastated the economy , because Armenia depends on outside supplies of energy and most raw materials .
Land routes through Georgia and Iran are inadequate or unreliable .
This steady economic progress has earned Armenia increasing support from international institutions .
These loans are targeted at reducing the budget deficit and stabilizing the currency ; developing private businesses ; energy ; agriculture ; food processing ; transportation ; the health and education sectors ; and ongoing rehabilitation in the earthquake zone .
But one of the main sources of foreign direct investments remains the Armenian diaspora , which finances major parts of the reconstruction of infrastructure and other public projects .
Being a growing democratic state , Armenia also hopes to get more financial aid from the Western World .
Continued progress will depend on the ability of the government to strengthen its macroeconomic management , including increasing revenue collection , improving the investment climate , and making strides against corruption .
In the 1988 -- 89 school year , 301 students per 10,000 population were in specialized secondary or higher education , a figure slightly lower than the Soviet average .
In 1989 some 58 % of Armenians over age fifteen had completed their secondary education , and 14 % had a higher education .
In the 1990 -- 91 school year , the estimated 1,307 primary and secondary schools were attended by 608,800 students .
Another seventy specialized secondary institutions had 45,900 students , and 68,400 students were enrolled in a total of ten postsecondary institutions that included universities .
The great doctor played the same role in Armenian Medical Science as Hippocrates in Western , Galen in Roman , Ibn Sīnā in Arabic medicine .
Nowadays the YSMU is a Medical Institution corresponding to international requirements , trains medical staff for not only Armenia and neighbor countries , i.e. Iran , Syria , Lebanon , Georgia , but also many other leading countries all over the world .
The institution owes its existence to the combined efforts of the Government of Armenia , the Armenian General Benevolent Union , U.S. Agency for International Development , and the University of California .
The extension programs and the library at AUA form a new focal point for English-language intellectual life in the city .
Artists such as Sayat Nova are famous due to their influence in the development of Armenian folk music .
The Armenian Genocide caused widespread emigration that led to the settlement of Armenians in various countries in the world .
Armenians kept to their traditions and certain diasporans rose to fame with their music .
Armenian gold smithery enjoys a long tradition , populating one corner of the market with a selection of gold items .
It houses paintings by many European masters as well .
Moreover , many private galleries are in operation , with many more opening every year , featuring rotating exhibitions and sales .
A wide array of sports are played in Armenia , the most popular among them being wrestling , weightlifting , judo , association football , chess , and boxing .
Armenia 's mountainous terrain provides great opportunities for the practice of sports like skiing and climbing .
As part of the Soviet Union , Armenia was very successful , winning plenty of medals and helping the USSR win the medal standings at the Olympics on numerous occasions .
To highlight the level of success of Armenians in the Olympics , Shahinyan was quoted as saying :
Football is also popular in Armenia .
Armenia competed internationally as part of the USSR national football team until the Armenian national football team was formed in 1992 after the split of the Soviet Union .
The national team is controlled by the Football Federation of Armenia .
The Armenian Premier League is the highest level football competition in Armenia , and has been dominated by FC Pyunik in recent seasons .
Armenian cuisine is as ancient as the history of Armenia , a combination of different tastes and aromas .
The food often has quite a distinct aroma .
Bacteria inhabit soil , water , acidic hot springs , radioactive waste , and the deep portions of Earth 's crust .
They are also known to have flourished in manned spacecraft .
There are approximately 5 × 1030 bacteria on Earth , forming a biomass which exceeds that of all plants and animals .
Bacteria are vital in recycling nutrients , with many of the stages in nutrient cycles dependent on these organisms , such as the fixation of nitrogen from the atmosphere and putrefaction .
According to one of the researchers , `` You can find microbes everywhere -- they 're extremely adaptable to conditions , and survive wherever they are . ''
In industry , bacteria are important in sewage treatment and the breakdown of oil spills , the production of cheese and yogurt through fermentation , and the recovery of gold , palladium , copper and other metals in the mining sector , as well as in biotechnology , and the manufacture of antibiotics and other chemicals .
In 2008 , fossils of macroorganisms were discovered and named as the Francevillian biota .
Bacteria were also involved in the second great evolutionary divergence , that of the archaea and eukaryotes .
Here , eukaryotes resulted from the entering of ancient bacteria into endosymbiotic associations with the ancestors of eukaryotic cells , which were themselves possibly related to the Archaea .
This involved the engulfment by proto-eukaryotic cells of alphaproteobacterial symbionts to form either mitochondria or hydrogenosomes , which are still found in all known Eukarya -LRB- sometimes in highly reduced form , e.g. in ancient `` amitochondrial '' protozoa -RRB- .
This led to the formation of chloroplasts in algae and plants .
There are also some algae that originated from even later endosymbiotic events .
Here , eukaryotes engulfed a eukaryotic algae that developed into a `` second-generation '' plastid .
This is known as secondary endosymbiosis .
bacillus , from Latin baculus , stick -RRB- .
Elongation is associated with swimming .
A small number of species even have tetrahedral or cuboidal shapes .
The large surface area to volume ratio of this morphology may give these bacteria an advantage in nutrient-poor environments .
Bacteria can also be elongated to form filaments , for example the Actinobacteria .
In natural environments , such as soil or the surfaces of plants , the majority of bacteria are bound to surfaces in biofilms .
Even more complex morphological changes are sometimes possible .
These subcellular levels of organization have been called `` bacterial hyperstructures '' .
Other proteins import nutrients across the cell membrane , or expel undesired molecules from the cytoplasm .
The nucleoid contains the chromosome with its associated proteins and RNA .
Bacterial ribosomes have a sedimentation rate of 70S -LRB- measured in Svedberg units -RRB- : their subunits have rates of 30S and 50S .
Some antibiotics bind specifically to 70S ribosomes and inhibit bacterial protein synthesis .
Those antibiotics kill bacteria without affecting the larger 80S ribosomes of eukaryotic cells and without harming the host .
Intracellular membranes called chromatophores are also found in membranes of phototrophic bacteria .
An early idea was that bacteria might contain membrane folds termed mesosomes , but these were later shown to be artifacts produced by the chemicals used to prepare the cells for electron microscopy .
Inclusions are considered to be nonliving components of the cell that do not possess metabolic activity and are not bounded by membranes .
Volutin granules are cytoplasmic inclusions of complexed inorganic polyphosphate .
These granules are called metachromatic granules due to their displaying the metachromatic effect ; they appear red or blue when stained with the blue dyes methylene blue or toluidine blue .
Gas vacuoles , which are freely permeable to gas , are membrane-bound vesicles present in some species of Cyanobacteria .
Microcompartments are widespread , membrane-bound organelles that are made of a protein shell that surrounds and encloses various enzymes .
Carboxysomes are bacterial microcompartments that contain enzymes involved in carbon fixation .
Magnetosomes are bacterial microcompartments , present in magnetotactic bacteria , that contain magnetic crystals .
In most bacteria , a cell wall is present on the outside of the cell membrane .
The cell wall of bacteria is also distinct from that of Archaea , which do not contain peptidoglycan .
In contrast , gram-negative bacteria have a relatively thin cell wall consisting of a few layers of peptidoglycan surrounded by a second lipid membrane containing lipopolysaccharides and lipoproteins .
Most bacteria have the gram-negative cell wall , and only the Firmicutes and Actinobacteria have the alternative gram-positive arrangement .
These two groups were previously known as the low G+C and high G+C Gram-positive bacteria , respectively .
If the bacterial cell wall is entirely removed , it is called a protoplast , whereas if it is partially removed , it is called a spheroplast .
β-Lactam antibiotics , such as penicillin , inhibit the formation of peptidoglycan cross-links in the bacterial cell wall .
Acid-fast bacteria , such as Mycobacteria , are resistant to decolorization by acids during staining procedures .
L-form bacteria are strains of bacteria that lack cell walls .
They are distributed over the surface of the cell , and resemble fine hairs when seen under the electron microscope .
Pili -LRB- sing .
They can also generate movement where they are called type IV pili -LRB- see movement , below -RRB- .
It is implicated as responsible for the heat resistance of the endospore .
According to scientist Dr. Steinn Sigurdsson , `` There are viable bacterial spores that have been found that are 40 million years old on Earth -- and we know they 're very hardened to radiation . ''
Bacteria exhibit an extremely wide variety of metabolic types .
Chemotrophic organisms use the respective electron donors for energy conservation -LRB- by aerobic/anaerobic respiration or fermentation -RRB- and biosynthetic reactions -LRB- e.g. , carbon dioxide fixation -RRB- , whereas phototrophic organisms use them only for biosynthetic purposes .
This reaction releases energy that can be used to synthesise ATP and drive metabolism .
In aerobic organisms , oxygen is used as the electron acceptor .
This leads to the ecologically important processes of denitrification , sulfate reduction , and acetogenesis , respectively .
Lithotrophic bacteria can use inorganic compounds as a source of energy .
Most lithotrophic organisms are autotrophic , whereas organotrophic organisms are heterotrophic .
The Planctomycetes are the exception -LRB- as they are in possessing membranes around their nuclear material -RRB- .
Unlike in multicellular organisms , increases in cell size -LRB- cell growth -RRB- and reproduction by cell division are tightly linked in unicellular organisms .
Some bacteria , while still reproducing asexually , form more complex reproductive structures that help disperse the newly formed daughter cells .
Examples include fruiting body formation by Myxobacteria and aerial hyphae formation by Streptomyces , or budding .
Budding involves a cell forming a protrusion that breaks away and produces a daughter cell .
Growth in stirred liquid media occurs as an even cell suspension , making the cultures easy to divide and transfer , although isolating single bacteria from liquid media is difficult .
This nutrient limitation has led the evolution of different growth strategies -LRB- see r/K selection theory -RRB- .
Other organisms have adaptations to harsh environments , such as the production of multiple antibiotics by Streptomyces that inhibit the growth of competing microorganisms .
These relationships can be essential for growth of a particular organism or group of organisms -LRB- syntrophy -RRB- .
When a population of bacteria first enter a high-nutrient environment that allows growth , the cells need to adapt to their new environment .
The lag phase has high biosynthesis rates , as proteins necessary for rapid growth are produced .
The second phase of growth is the log phase , also known as the logarithmic or exponential phase .
The rate at which cells grow during this phase is known as the growth rate -LRB- k -RRB- , and the time it takes the cells to double is known as the generation time -LRB- g -RRB- .
During log phase , nutrients are metabolised at maximum speed until one of the nutrients is depleted and starts limiting growth .
The cells reduce their metabolic activity and consume non-essential cellular proteins .
The stationary phase is a transition from rapid growth to a stress response state and there is increased expression of genes involved in DNA repair , antioxidant metabolism and nutrient transport .
The genes in bacterial genomes are usually a single continuous stretch of DNA and although several different types of introns do exist in bacteria , these are much rarer than in eukaryotes .
Mutations come from errors made during the replication of DNA or from exposure to mutagens .
Mutation rates vary widely among different species of bacteria and even among different clones of a single species of bacteria .
Plasmid-mediated transfer of host bacterial DNA also appears to be an accidental process rather than a bacterial adaptation .
In Bacillus subtilis , about 40 genes are required for the development of competence .
The development of competence in nature is usually associated with stressful environmental conditions , and seems to be an adaptation for facilitating repair of DNA damage in recipient cells .
Gene transfer is particularly important in antibiotic resistance as it allows the rapid transfer of resistance genes between different pathogens .
Bacteria resist phage infection through restriction modification systems that degrade foreign DNA , and a system that uses CRISPR sequences to retain fragments of the genomes of phage that the bacteria have come into contact with in the past , which allows them to block virus replication through a form of RNA interference .
This motor drives the motion of the filament , which acts as a propeller .
Bacteria can be classified on the basis of cell structure , cellular metabolism or on differences in cell components , such as DNA , fatty acids , pigments , antigens and quinones .
Classification of bacteria is determined by publication in the International Journal of Systematic Bacteriology , and Bergey 's Manual of Systematic Bacteriology .
The International Committee on Systematic Bacteriology -LRB- ICSB -RRB- maintains international rules for the naming of bacteria and taxonomic categories and for the ranking of them in the International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria .
However , due to the relatively recent introduction of molecular systematics and a rapid increase in the number of genome sequences that are available , bacterial classification remains a changing and expanding field .
For example , a few biologists argue that the Archaea and Eukaryotes evolved from Gram-positive bacteria .
By combining morphology and Gram-staining , most bacteria can be classified as belonging to one of four groups -LRB- Gram-positive cocci , Gram-positive bacilli , Gram-negative cocci and Gram-negative bacilli -RRB- .
Other organisms may need to be identified by their growth in special media , or by other techniques , such as serology .
Following present classification , there are a little less than 9,300 known species of prokaryotes , which includes bacteria and archaea ; but attempts to estimate the true number of bacterial diversity have ranged from 107 to 109 total species -- and even these diverse estimates may be off by many orders of magnitude .
These include organisms such as Myxococcus xanthus , which forms swarms of cells that kill and digest any bacteria they encounter .
The bacteria in this association are unable to consume the organic acids as this reaction produces hydrogen that accumulates in their surroundings .
Only the intimate association with the hydrogen-consuming Archaea keeps the hydrogen concentration low enough to allow the bacteria to grow .
Many other bacteria are found as symbionts in humans and other organisms .
Bacterial diseases are also important in agriculture , with bacteria causing leaf spot , fire blight and wilts in plants , as well as Johne 's disease , mastitis , salmonella and anthrax in farm animals .
Some organisms , such as Staphylococcus or Streptococcus , can cause skin infections , pneumonia , meningitis and even overwhelming sepsis , a systemic inflammatory response producing shock , massive vasodilation and death .
Other organisms invariably cause disease in humans , such as the Rickettsia , which are obligate intracellular parasites able to grow and reproduce only within the cells of other organisms .
Chlamydia , another phylum of obligate intracellular parasites , contains species that can cause pneumonia , or urinary tract infection and may be involved in coronary heart disease .
Finally , some species , such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa , Burkholderia cenocepacia , and Mycobacterium avium , are opportunistic pathogens and cause disease mainly in people suffering from immunosuppression or cystic fibrosis .
There are many types of antibiotics and each class inhibits a process that is different in the pathogen from that found in the host .
An example of how antibiotics produce selective toxicity are chloramphenicol and puromycin , which inhibit the bacterial ribosome , but not the structurally different eukaryotic ribosome .
Surgical and dental instruments are also sterilized to prevent contamination by bacteria .
Disinfectants such as bleach are used to kill bacteria or other pathogens on surfaces to prevent contamination and further reduce the risk of infection .
Fertilizer was added to some of the beaches in Prince William Sound in an attempt to promote the growth of these naturally occurring bacteria after the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill .
These efforts were effective on beaches that were not too thickly covered in oil .
In the chemical industry , bacteria are most important in the production of enantiomerically pure chemicals for use as pharmaceuticals or agrichemicals .
By making mutations in bacterial DNA and examining the resulting phenotypes , scientists can determine the function of genes , enzymes and metabolic pathways in bacteria , then apply this knowledge to more complex organisms .
This aim of understanding the biochemistry of a cell reaches its most complex expression in the synthesis of huge amounts of enzyme kinetic and gene expression data into mathematical models of entire organisms .
This is achievable in some well-studied bacteria , with models of Escherichia coli metabolism now being produced and tested .
This understanding of bacterial metabolism and genetics allows the use of biotechnology to bioengineer bacteria for the production of therapeutic proteins , such as insulin , growth factors , or antibodies .
He then published his observations in a series of letters to the Royal Society of London .
Bacteria were Leeuwenhoek 's most remarkable microscopic discovery .
Only then were his by-then-largely-forgotten observations of bacteria -- as opposed to his famous `` animalcules '' -LRB- spermatozoa -RRB- -- taken seriously .
Though it was known in the nineteenth century that bacteria are the cause of many diseases , no effective antibacterial treatments were available .
However , the term printed wiring board has fallen into disuse .
The term PCB is used informally both for bare and assembled boards .
Pre-printed non-reproducing grids on the mylar assisted in layout .
The assemblers often mount components on panels rather than single PCBs because this is efficient .
Thus a manufacturing panel can consist of a grouping of individual PCBs or of arrays , depending on what must be delivered .
The individual PCBs can then be broken apart along this line of weakness .
In additive methods the pattern is electroplated onto a bare substrate using a complex process .
When the mask is stripped , the PCB is finished .
Semi-additive is the most common process : The unpatterned board has a thin layer of copper already on it .
A reverse mask is then applied .
Tin-lead or other surface platings are then applied .
Some single-sided boards which have plated-through holes are made in this way .
Splash etching uses a motor-driven paddle to splash boards with etchant ; the process has become commercially obsolete since it is not as fast as spray etching .
Adjustment of the nozzle pattern , flow rate , temperature , and etchant composition gives predictable control of etching rates and high production rates .
This results in an inseparable one piece product .
It is then drilled , plated , and etched again to get traces on top and bottom layers .
Drill bits must also remain sharp so as not to mar or tear the traces .
The drilling is performed by automated drilling machines with placement controlled by a drill tape or drill file .
The drill file describes the location and size of each drilled hole .
These holes electrically connect the conducting layers of the PCB .
Before the holes can be plated through , this smear must be removed by a chemical de-smear process , or by plasma-etch .
Matte solder is usually fused to provide a better bonding surface or stripped to bare copper .
One of these lead-free compounds is SN100CL , made up of 99.3 % tin , 0.7 % copper , 0.05 % nickel , and a nominal of 60ppm germanium .
Another coating consideration is rapid diffusion of coating metal into Tin solder .
Tin-Lead or solder plating also grows whiskers , only reduced by the percentage Tin replaced .
Reflow to melt solder or tin plate to relieve surface stress lowers whisker incidence .
Dry film solder mask is similar to the dry film used to image the PWB for plating or etching .
After being laminated to the PWB surface it is imaged and develop as LPI .
Solder resist also provides protection from the environment .
A short is a connection between two points that should not be connected .
For high-volume production a fixture or a rigid needle adapter is used to make contact with copper lands on the board .
Building the adapter is a significant fixed cost and is only economical for high-volume or high-value production .
For further comparison , see the SMT page .
Another technique for applying a conformal coating is for plastic to be sputtered onto the PCB in a vacuum chamber .
Improper handling techniques might transmit an accumulated static charge through the board , damaging or destroying components .
Even bare boards are sometimes static sensitive .
Boards may be single-sided , with an unplated component side , or more compact double-sided boards , with components soldered on both sides .
Components became much smaller and component placement on both sides of the board became more common than with through-hole mounting , allowing much smaller PCB assemblies with much higher circuit densities .
Components can be supplied mounted on carrier tapes .
Some wire-ended components , such as 1N4148 small-signal switch diodes , are actually significantly cheaper than SMD equivalents .
In radio-frequency and fast switching circuits the inductance and capacitance of the printed circuit board conductors become significant circuit elements , usually undesired ; but they can be used as a deliberate part of the circuit design , obviating the need for additional discrete components .
There are quite a few different dielectrics that can be chosen to provide different insulating values depending on the requirements of the circuit .
Woven reinforcements are cheaper , but the high dielectric constant of glass may not be favorable for many higher-frequency applications .
As the reinforcement and copper confine the board along the plane , virtually all volume expansion projects to the thickness and stresses the plated-through holes .
Both the resin and the reinforcement may absorb water ; water may be also soaked by capillary forces through voids in the materials and along the reinforcement .
Polyimides and cyanate esters , on the other side , suffer from high water absorption .
Absorbed water can lead to significant degradation of key parameters ; it impairs tracking resistance , breakdown voltage , and dielectric parameters .
Careful baking of the substrates may be required .
IPC 2152 is a standard for determining current-carrying capacity of printed circuit board traces .
The components were either soldered together with jumper wire , or they were connected to other components by thin nickel ribbon welded at right angles onto the component leads .
Perforations or holes in the cards allowed component leads to project through to the next interconnection layer .
Additionally , components located in the interior are difficult to replace .
Some versions of cordwood construction used soldered single-sided PCBs as the interconnection method -LRB- as pictured -RRB- , allowing the use of normal-leaded components .
Development of the methods used in modern printed circuit boards started early in the 20th century .
During World War II , the development of the anti-aircraft proximity fuse required an electronic circuit that could withstand being fired from a gun , and could be produced in quantity .
The technique proved viable , and the resulting patent on the process , which was classified by the U.S. Army , was assigned to Globe Union .
Originally , every electronic component had wire leads , and the PCB had holes drilled for each wire of each component .
The components ' leads were then passed through the holes and soldered to the PCB trace .
With the development of board lamination and etching techniques , this concept evolved into the standard printed circuit board fabrication process in use today .
Soldering could be done automatically by passing the board over a ripple , or wave , of molten solder in a wave-soldering machine .
Most stadium occupancies are near capacity .
The 22 inaugural members of the new Premier League were Arsenal , Aston Villa , Blackburn Rovers , Chelsea , Coventry City , Crystal Palace , Everton , Ipswich Town , Leeds United , Liverpool , Manchester City , Manchester United , Middlesbrough , Norwich City , Nottingham Forest , Oldham Athletic , Queens Park Rangers , Sheffield United , Sheffield Wednesday , Southampton , Tottenham Hotspur , and Wimbledon .
The years following 2009 marked a shift in the structure of the `` Big Four '' with Tottenham Hotspur and Manchester City both breaking into the top four .
The Premier League responded by announcing their intention to resist such a reduction .
No points are awarded for a loss .
If still equal , teams are deemed to occupy the same position .
The three lowest placed teams are relegated into the Football League Championship , and the top two teams from the Championship , together with the winner of play-offs involving the third to sixth placed Championship clubs , are promoted in their place .
A further place in the UEFA Europa League is also available via the Fair Play initiative .
Television has played a major role in the history of the Premier League .
The income from overseas rights is divided equally between the twenty clubs .
It sold the rights itself on a territory-by-territory basis .
Sky and Setanta paid a total of # 1.7 billion , a two-thirds increase which took many commentators by surprise as it had been widely assumed that the value of the rights had levelled off following many years of rapid growth .
Setanta also hold rights to a live 3 pm match solely for Irish viewers .
The BBC has retained the rights to show highlights for the same three seasons -LRB- on Match of the Day -RRB- for # 171.6 million , a 63 per cent increase on the # 105 million it paid for the previous three-year period .
Sky and BT have agreed to jointly pay # 84.3 million for delayed television rights to 242 games -LRB- that is the right to broadcast them in full on television and over the internet -RRB- in most cases for a period of 50 hours after 10 pm on matchday .
Overseas television rights fetched # 625 million , nearly double the previous contract .
There has been an increasing gulf between the Premier League and the Football League .
Since its split with the Football League , many established clubs in the Premier League have managed to distance themselves from their counterparts in lower leagues .
Further relegations down the footballing ladder have ensued for several clubs unable to cope with the gap .
Since the formation of the Premier League , football grounds in England have seen constant improvements to capacity and facilities , with some clubs moving to new-build stadiums .
Their influence varies from club-to-club and is related to the ownership of the club and the relationship of the manager with fans .
Prior to the start of the first Premier League season Alan Shearer became the first British player to command a transfer fee of more than # 3 million .
Ryan Giggs of Manchester United holds the record for scoring goals in consecutive seasons , having scored in the first 21 seasons of the league .
It was during this period that Rome 's control expanded from the city 's immediate surroundings to hegemony over the entire Mediterranean world .
During the first two centuries of its existence , the Roman Republic expanded through a combination of conquest and alliance , from central Italy to the entire Italian peninsula .
By the following century , it included North Africa , Spain , and what is now southern France .
Two centuries after that , towards the end of the 1st century BC , it included the rest of modern France , Greece , and much of the eastern Mediterranean .
By this time , internal tensions led to a series of civil wars , culminating with the assassination of Julius Caesar , which led to the transition from republic to empire .
The exact date of transition can be a matter of interpretation .
As Roman society was very hierarchical by modern standards , the evolution of the Roman government was heavily influenced by the struggle between the patricians , Rome 's land-holding aristocracy , who traced their ancestry to the founding of Rome , and the plebeians , the far more numerous citizen-commoners .
The exact causes and motivations for Rome 's military conflicts and expansions during the republic are subject to wide debate .
In its early history , as Rome successfully defended itself against foreign threats in central and then northern Italy , neighboring city-states sought the protection a Roman alliance would bring .
It was also less able to defend itself against its non-Roman enemies , which made attack by these enemies more likely .
It was , therefore , more likely to seek an alliance of protection with Rome .
In contrast , Roman expansion into Spain and Gaul occurred as a mix of alliance-seeking and military occupation .
In contrast to the west , the Greek east had been dominated by major empires for centuries , and Roman influence and alliance-seeking led to wars with these empires that further weakened them and therefore created an unstable power vacuum that only Rome could fill .
This had some important similarities to -LRB- and important differences from -RRB- the events in Italy centuries earlier , but this time on a global scale .
The first Roman republican wars were wars of both expansion and defence , aimed at protecting Rome itself from neighbouring cities and nations and establishing its territory in the region .
Initially , Rome 's immediate neighbours were either Latin towns and villages , or else tribal Sabines from the Apennine hills beyond .
By 390 BC , several Gallic tribes were invading Italy from the north as their culture expanded throughout Europe .
These towns , overwhelmed by the enemy 's numbers and ferocity , called on Rome for help .
Romans and Gauls continued to war intermittently in Italy for more than two centuries .
-LSB- relevant ?
-- discuss -RSB-
Despite early victories , Pyrrhus found his position in Italy untenable .
While Beneventum was indecisive , Pyrrhus realised his army had been exhausted and reduced by years of foreign campaigns .
He cut off the Roman army from its base by re-establishing Carthaginian naval supremacy .
The Romans held off Hannibal in three battles , but then Hannibal smashed a succession of Roman consular armies .
Carthage was almost defenceless , and submitted when besieged .
The city was besieged , stormed , and completely destroyed .
Ultimately , all of Carthage 's North African and Iberian territories were acquired by Rome .
The First Macedonian War saw the Romans involved directly in only limited land operations , but they ultimately achieved their objective of pre-occupying Philip and preventing him from aiding Hannibal .
The past century had seen the Greek world dominated by the three primary successor kingdoms of Alexander the Great 's empire : Ptolemaic Egypt , Macedonia and the Seleucid Empire .
In 202 BC , internal problems led to a weakening of Egypt 's position , thereby disrupting the power balance among the successor states .
Macedonia and the Seleucid Empire agreed to an alliance to conquer and divide Egypt .
Fearing this increasingly unstable situation , several small Greek kingdoms sent delegations to Rome to seek an alliance .
The delegation succeeded , even though prior Greek attempts to involve Rome in Greek affairs had been met with Roman apathy .
Our primary source about these events , the surviving works of Polybius , do not state Rome 's reason for getting involved .
Doubting Rome 's strength -LRB- a reasonable doubt , given Rome 's performance in the First Macedonian War -RRB- Philip ignored the request , and Rome sent an army of Romans and Greek allies , beginning the Second Macedonian War .
Despite his recent successes against the Greeks and earlier successes against Rome , Philip 's army buckled under the pressure from the Roman-Greek army .
With Egypt and Macedonia weakened , the Seleucid Empire made increasingly aggressive and successful attempts to conquer the entire Greek world .
Fearing the worst , the Romans began a major mobilization , all but pulling out of recently pacified Spain and Gaul .
This fear was shared by Rome 's Greek allies , who had largely ignored Rome in the years after the Second Macedonian War , but now followed Rome again for the first time since that war .
A major Roman-Greek force was mobilized under the command of the great hero of the Second Punic War , Scipio Africanus , and set out for Greece , beginning the Roman-Syrian War .
After initial fighting that revealed serious Seleucid weaknesses , the Seleucids tried to turn the Roman strength against them at the Battle of Thermopylae -LRB- as they believed the 300 Spartans had done centuries earlier -RRB- .
The Romans pursued the Seleucids by crossing the Hellespont , which marked the first time a Roman army had ever entered Asia .
The Seleucids sued for peace , and Rome forced them to give up their recent Greek conquests .
Although they still controlled a great deal of territory , this defeat marked the decline of their empire , as they were to begin facing increasingly aggressive subjects in the east -LRB- the Parthians -RRB- and the west -LRB- the Greeks -RRB- .
Their empire disintegrated into a rump over the course of the next century , when it was eclipsed by Pontus .
In fact , it did the opposite .
Perseus initially had some success against the Romans .
Yet , Macedonian agitation continued .
It constituted the final Roman pacification of Northern Africa , after which Rome largely ceased expansion on the continent after reaching natural barriers of desert and mountain .
Following Jugurtha 's usurpation of the throne of Numidia , a loyal ally of Rome since the Punic Wars , Rome felt compelled to intervene .
At the Battle of Aquae Sextiae and the Battle of Vercellae both tribes were virtually annihilated , which ended the threat .
The massacre was the official reason given for the commencement of hostilities in the First Mithridatic War .
A peace was made between Rome and Pontus , but this proved only a temporary lull .
By 59 BC an unofficial political alliance known as the First Triumvirate was formed between Gaius Julius Caesar , Marcus Licinius Crassus , and Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus -LRB- `` Pompey the Great '' -RRB- to share power and influence .
The death of Crassus removed some of the balance in the Triumvirate and , consequently , Caesar and Pompey began to move apart .
Caesar chose civil war over laying down his command and facing trial .
His enemies feared that he had ambitions to become an autocratic ruler .
Antony was denounced as a public enemy , and Caesar 's adopted son and chosen heir , Gaius Octavianus , was entrusted with the command of the war against him .
At the Battle of Mutina Mark Antony was defeated by the consuls Hirtius and Pansa , who were both killed .
The ambitious Octavian built a power base of patronage and then launched a campaign against Mark Antony .
Tarquin made a number of attempts to retake the throne , including the Tarquinian conspiracy , the war with Veii and Tarquinii and finally the war between Rome and Clusium , all of which failed to achieve Tarquin 's objectives .
The most important constitutional change during the transition from kingdom to republic concerned the chief magistrate .
Now , two consuls were elected by the citizens for an annual term .
Each consul would check his colleague , and their limited term in office would open them up to prosecution if they abused the powers of their office .
The plebeian soldiers refused to march against the enemy , and instead seceded to the Aventine Hill .
The patricians agreed , and the plebeians returned to the battlefield .
The plebeians called these new officials `` plebeian tribunes '' .
The result of these reforms was that any law passed by the plebeian would have the full force of law .
In 443 BC , the censorship was created .
After the consulship had been opened to the plebeians , the plebeians were able to hold both the dictatorship and the censorship .
During these years , the tribunes and the senators grew increasingly close .
The senate realised the need to use plebeian officials to accomplish desired goals .
As the tribunes and the senators grew closer , plebeian senators were often able to secure the tribunate for members of their own families .
During the early republic , only consuls could appoint new senators .
This initiative , however , transferred this power to the censors .
Thus , the number of plebeian senators probably increased quickly .
However , it remained difficult for a plebeian to enter the senate if he was not from a well-known political family , as a new patrician-like plebeian aristocracy emerged .
The new nobility existed due to the organization of society .
As such , only a revolution could overthrow this new structure .
The problem appears to have centered around widespread indebtedness .
The plebeians seceded to the Janiculum hill .
To end the secession , a dictator was appointed .
This was not the first law to require that an act of the Plebeian Council have the full force of law .
The Plebeian Council acquired this power during a modification to the original Valerian law in 449 BC .
The significance of this law was in the fact that it robbed the patricians of their final weapon over the plebeians .
The result was that control over the state fell , not onto the shoulders of voters , but to the new plebeian nobility .
However , the plight of the average plebeian had not changed .
The patricians then noticed how much they needed the plebeians and accepted their terms .
The plebeians then returned to Rome and continued their work .
The Hortensian Law deprived the patricians of their last weapon against the plebeians , and thus resolved the last great political question of the era .
This was the most militarily active era of the Roman Republic .
In the final decades of this era many plebeians grew poorer .
The result was the ultimate bankruptcy of countless farmers .
Masses of unemployed plebeians soon began to flood into Rome , and thus into the ranks of the legislative assemblies .
He attempted to enact a law which would have limited the amount of land that any individual could own .
The aristocrats , who stood to lose an enormous amount of money , were bitterly opposed to this proposal .
Tiberius then used the Plebeian Council to impeach Octavius .
If carried to its logical end , this theory would remove all constitutional restraints on the popular will , and put the state under the absolute control of a temporary popular majority .
In the past , for example , the senate would eliminate political rivals either by establishing special judicial commissions or by passing a senatus consultum ultimum -LRB- `` ultimate decree of the senate '' -RRB- .
Both devices would allow the Senate to bypass the ordinary due process rights that all citizens had .
Gaius outlawed the judicial commissions , and declared the senatus consultum ultimum to be unconstitutional .
This last proposal was not popular with the plebeians and he lost much of his support .
Though the senate retained control , the Gracchi had strengthened the political influence of the plebeians .
In 118 BC , King Micipsa of Numidia -LRB- current-day Algeria and Tunisia -RRB- died .
Micipsa divided his kingdom between these three sons .
Jugurtha , however , turned on his brothers , killing Hiempsal and driving Adherbal out of Numidia .
Adherbal fled to Rome for assistance , and initially Rome mediated a division of the country between the two brothers .
Eventually , Jugurtha renewed his offensive , leading to a long and inconclusive war with Rome .
He also bribed several Roman commanders , and at least two tribunes , before and during the war .
Marius invaded Numidia and brought the war to a quick end , capturing Jugurtha in the process .
The apparent incompetence of the Senate , and the brilliance of Marius , had been put on full display .
The army , however , was defeated .
Sulla , a member of the aristocratic -LRB- `` optimates '' -RRB- party , brought his army back to Italy and marched on Rome .
He then returned to his war against Mithridates .
They also transgressed the established oligarchy by advancing unelected individuals to magisterial office , and by substituting magisterial edicts for popular legislation .
Sulla , having observed the violent results of radical popular reforms , was naturally conservative .
As such , he sought to strengthen the aristocracy , and by extension the senate .
Sulla made himself dictator , passed a series of constitutional reforms , resigned the dictatorship , and served one last term as consul .
Upon their return , Pompey and Crassus found the populares party fiercely attacking Sulla 's constitution .
They attempted to forge an agreement with the populares party .
The two were soon elected , and quickly dismantled most of Sulla 's constitution .
After several failures , the movement 's leaders decided to use any means that were necessary to accomplish their goals .
The rural malcontents were to advance on Rome , and be aided by an uprising within the city .
After assassinating the consuls and most of the senators , Catiline would be free to enact his reforms .
The conspiracy was set in motion in 63 BC .
The consul for the year , Marcus Tullius Cicero , intercepted messages that Catiline had sent in an attempt to recruit more members .
In 62 BC , Pompey returned victorious from Asia .
Pompey , in effect , became powerless .
Under the agreement , Pompey 's arrangements would be ratified .
Caesar became consul in 59 BC .
His colleague , Marcus Calpurnius Bibulus , was an extreme aristocrat .
Caesar submitted the laws that he had promised Pompey to the assemblies .
Caesar was then made governor of three provinces .
Clodius set about depriving Caesar 's senatorial enemies of two of their more obstinate leaders in Cato and Cicero .
Clodius also passed a bill that forced Cato to lead the invasion of Cyprus which would keep him away from Rome for some years .
The political alliance of the triumvirate was crumbling .
Eventually , the triumvirate was renewed at Lucca .
This resulted in his defeat and death at the Battle of Carrhae .
This event severed the last remaining bond between Pompey and Caesar .
Beginning in the summer of 54 BC , a wave of political corruption and violence swept Rome .
On 1 January 49 BC , an agent of Caesar presented an ultimatum to the senate .
The ultimatum was rejected , and the senate then passed a resolution which declared that if Caesar did not lay down his arms by July of that year , he would be considered an enemy of the Republic .
Pompey 's army , however , was composed largely of untested conscripts .
On 10 January , Caesar crossed the Rubicon with his veteran army -LRB- in violation of Roman laws -RRB- and marched towards Rome .
Caesar entered the city unopposed .
In 48 BC , Caesar was given permanent tribunician powers .
This robbed the senatorial aristocracy of its prestige , and made it increasingly subservient to him .
While the assemblies continued to meet , he submitted all candidates to the assemblies for election , and all bills to the assemblies for enactment .
Thus , the assemblies became powerless and were unable to oppose him .
The assassination was led by Gaius Cassius and Marcus Brutus .
Others feared loss of property or prestige as Caesar carried out his land reforms in favor of the landless classes .
The civil war that followed destroyed what was left of the Republic .
They held powers that were nearly identical to the powers that Caesar had held under his constitution .
As such , the Senate and assemblies remained powerless , even after Caesar had been assassinated .
Eventually , however , Antony and Octavian fought against each other in one last battle .
In 29 BC , Octavian returned to Rome as the unchallenged master of the Empire and later accepted the title of Augustus -LRB- `` Exalted One '' -RRB- .
He was convinced that only a single strong ruler could restore order in Rome .
From the outset , Rome 's military typified this pattern and the majority of Rome 's wars were characterized by one of two types .
Roman armies were not invincible , despite their formidable reputation and host of victories .
Over the centuries the Romans `` produced their share of incompetents '' who led Roman armies into catastrophic defeats .
Nevertheless , it was generally the fate of the greatest of Rome 's enemies , such as Pyrrhus and Hannibal , to win early battles but lose the war .
Each subsequent rank consisted of those with less wealth and poorer equipment than the one before it .
There was an additional class of troops who followed the army without specific martial roles and were deployed to the rear of the third line .
Their role in accompanying the army was primarily to supply any vacancies that might occur in the maniples .
They were armed with a sword and a small shield , as well as several light javelins .
The extraordinary demands of the Punic Wars , in addition to a shortage of manpower , exposed the tactical weaknesses of the manipular legion , at least in the short term .
As a result , the Roman state was forced to arm its soldiers at the expense of the state , which it had not had to do in the past .
This move formalised and concluded a gradual process that had been growing for centuries , of removing property requirements for military service .
The distinction between the three heavy infantry classes , which had already become blurred , had collapsed into a single class of heavy legionary infantry .
The army 's higher-level officers and commanders were still drawn exclusively from the Roman aristocracy .
The legions of the late Republic were , structurally , almost entirely heavy infantry .
The cohort was therefore a much larger unit than the earlier maniple sub-unit , and was divided into six centuries of 80 men each .
Legions also contained a dedicated group of artillery crew of perhaps 60 men .
Each legion was normally partnered with an approximately equal number of allied -LRB- non-Roman -RRB- troops .
This esteem and prestige was based on both precedent and custom , as well as the caliber and reputation of the senators .
These were officially `` advice '' from the senate to a magistrate .
In practice , however , they were usually followed by the magistrates .
The power of the senate expanded over time as the power of the legislative assemblies declined , and the senate took a greater role in ordinary law-making .
Its members were usually appointed by Roman Censors , who ordinarily selected newly elected magistrates for membership in the senate , making the senate a partially elected body .
An adult male citizen with the full complement of legal and political rights was called `` optimo jure . ''
There were two types of legislative assemblies .
Citizens were organized on the basis of centuries and tribes , which would each gather into their own assemblies .
The centuries would vote , one at a time , until a measure received support from a majority of the centuries .
It also elected censors .
Only the Comitia Centuriata could declare war , and ratify the results of a census .
The order that the thirty-five tribes would vote in was selected randomly by lot .
The Plebeian Council was identical to the assembly of the tribes , but excluded the patricians -LRB- the elite who could trace their ancestry to the founding of Rome -RRB- .
They elected their own officers , plebeian tribunes and plebeian aediles .
This assembly passed most laws , and could also act as a court of appeal .
Each republican magistrate held certain constitutional powers .
Imperium was held by both consuls and praetors .
This was used by magistrates to maintain public order .
While in Rome , all citizens had a judgement against coercion .
This protection was called provocatio -LRB- see below -RRB- .
This power would often be used to obstruct political opponents .
One check on a magistrate 's power was his collegiality .
Another such check was provocatio .
It was a precursor to habeas corpus .
This created problems for some consuls and praetors , and these magistrates would occasionally have their imperium extended .
The consuls of the Roman Republic were the highest ranking ordinary magistrates ; each consul served for one year .
While in the city of Rome , the consuls were the head of the Roman government .
They would preside over the senate and the assemblies .
While abroad , each consul would command an army .
His authority abroad would be nearly absolute .
During the census , they could enroll citizens in the senate , or purge them from the senate .
Aediles were officers elected to conduct domestic affairs in Rome , such as managing public games and shows .
Their duties were often financial .
Since the tribunes were considered to be the embodiment of the plebeians , they were sacrosanct .
Their sacrosanctity was enforced by a pledge , taken by the plebeians , to kill any person who harmed or interfered with a tribune during his term of office .
When the dictator 's term ended , constitutional government would be restored .
The city also had several theatres , gymnasiums , and many taverns , baths and brothels .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
In architecture and sculpture , the difference between Greek models and Roman paintings are apparent .
The chief Roman contributions to architecture were the arch and the dome .
Its significance is perhaps best reflected in its endurance and influence , as is seen in the longevity and lasting importance of works of Virgil and Ovid .
Roman law laid the foundations for the laws of many European countries and their colonies .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Generally , mutilation and murder of slaves was prohibited by legislation .
If the accused were a noble and the victim , not a noble , the likelihood of finding for the accused was small .
At most , the accused might have to pay a fine for killing a slave .
The cloth and the dress distinguished one class of people from the other class .
The tunic worn by plebeians , or common people , like shepherds and slaves , was made from coarse and dark material , whereas the tunic worn by patricians was of linen or white wool .
A knight or magistrate would wear an augusticlavus , a tunic bearing small purple studs .
Military tunics were shorter than the ones worn by civilians .
Boys , up until the festival of Liberalia , wore the toga praetexta , which was a toga with a crimson or purple border .
The toga picta was worn by triumphant generals and had embroidery of their skill on the battlefield .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Cato the Elder once advised cutting his rations in half to conserve wine for the workforce .
Many types of drinks involving grapes and honey were consumed as well .
Prominent Roman alcoholics included Mark Antony , and Cicero 's own son Marcus -LRB- Cicero Minor -RRB- .
Even Cato the Younger was known to be a heavy drinker .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Conforming to discipline was a point of great emphasis .
Education began at the age of around six , and in the next six to seven years , boys and girls were expected to learn the basics of reading , writing and counting .
By the age of twelve , they would be learning Latin , Greek , grammar and literature , followed by training for public speaking .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Many of these languages , including French , Italian , Portuguese , Romanian and Spanish , flourished , the differences between them growing greater over time .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Some of the earliest works we possess are of historical epics telling the early military history of Rome .
As the republic expanded , authors began to produce poetry , comedy , history , and tragedy .
The genre of satire was common in Rome , and satires were written by , among others , Juvenal and Persius .
The rhetorical works of Cicero are considered -LSB- by whom ? -RSB-
to be some of the best bodies of correspondence recorded in antiquity .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Roman cities were well planned , efficiently managed and neatly maintained .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Later , the Campus became Rome 's track and field playground .
In the campus , the youth assembled to play and exercise , which included jumping , wrestling , boxing and racing .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Equestrian sports , throwing , and swimming were also preferred physical activities .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- In the countryside , pastimes included fishing and hunting .
Other activities included chariot races , and musical and theatrical performances .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Roman religious beliefs date back to the founding of Rome , around 800 BC .
Private and personal worship was an important aspect of religious practices .
The two most famous deities were Jupiter -LRB- the king God -RRB- and Mars -LRB- the god of war -RRB- .
With its cultural influence spreading over most of the Mediterranean , Romans began accepting foreign gods into their own culture , as well as other philosophical traditions such as Cynicism and Stoicism .
-LSB- nb 9 -RSB-
into the Greater East Asia War .
By 1937 , Japan controlled Manchuria and was ready to move deeper into China .
In August 1937 , Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek deployed his best army to fight about 300,000 Japanese troops in Shanghai , but , after three months of fighting , Shanghai fell .
but then the city of Xuzhou was taken by Japanese in May .
In June 1938 , Japan deployed about 350,000 troops to invade Wuhan and captured it in October .
Japanese forces broke their agreement with the Vichy administration and fighting broke out , ending in a Japanese victory .
The war entered a new phase with the unprecedented defeat of the Japanese at Battle of Suixian-Zaoyang and 1st Battle of Changsha .
In addition , Japanese control of northern and central China was somewhat tenuous , in that Japan was usually able to control railroads and the major cities -LRB- `` points and lines '' -RRB- , but did not have a major military or administrative presence in the vast Chinese countryside .
This gamble did not pay off .
Japan 's fallback strategy , relying on a war of attrition to make the U.S. come to terms , was beyond the IJN 's capabilities .
Opposition to war in the U.S. vanished after the attack .
Other areas , including India , Hawaii , and the rest of Australia remained under separate local commands .
The pace of conquest was rapid : Bali and Timor also fell in February .
The rapid collapse of Allied resistance had left the `` ABDA area '' split in two .
In Burma the British , under intense pressure , made a fighting retreat from Rangoon to the Indo-Burmese border .
This cut the Burma Road which was the western Allies ' supply line to the Chinese Nationalists .
Cooperation between the Chinese Nationalists and the Communists had waned from its zenith at the Battle of Wuhan , and the relationship between the two had gone sour as both attempted to expand their area of operations in occupied territories .
Most of the Nationalist guerrilla areas were eventually overtaken by the Communists .
On the other hand , some Nationalist units were deployed to blockade the Communists and not the Japanese .
Furthermore , many of the forces of the Chinese Nationalists were warlords allied to Chiang Kai-Shek , but not directly under his command .
The defeat of this army would do much to end Chiang 's power . ''
The Japanese exploited this lack of unity to press ahead in their offensives .
In early 1942 elements of the Imperial Japanese Navy proposed an invasion of Australia .
Enemy naval activity reached Sydney in late May 1942 , when Japanese midget submarines launched a daring raid on Sydney Harbour .
In early 1942 , the governments of smaller powers began to push for an inter-governmental Asia-Pacific war council , based in Washington , D.C. .
A council was established in London , with a subsidiary body in Washington .
However , the smaller powers continued to push for an American-based body .
Representatives from India and the Philippines were later added .
Allied resistance , at first symbolic , gradually began to stiffen .
By mid-1942 , the Japanese found themselves holding a vast area from the Indian Ocean to the Central Pacific , even though they lacked the resources to defend or sustain it .
Moreover , Combined Fleet doctrine was inadequate to execute the proposed `` barrier '' defence .
Instead , Japan decided on additional attacks in both the south and central Pacific .
While she had the element of surprise at Pearl Harbor , Allied codebreakers had now turned the tables .
They discovered an attack was planned against Port Moresby ; if it fell , Japan would control the seas to the north and west of Australia and could isolate the country .
Although Allied losses were heavier than Japanese , the attack on Port Moresby was thwarted and the Japanese invasion force turned back , a strategic victory for the Allies .
The Japanese were forced to abandon their attempts to isolate Australia .
Moreover , Japan lacked the capacity to replace losses in ships , planes and trained pilots .
In May , Allied codebreakers discovered his intentions .
Nagumo was again in tactical command but was focused on the invasion of Midway ; Yamamoto 's complex plan had no provision for intervention by Nimitz before the Japanese expected him .
Planned surveillance of the U.S. fleet by long range seaplane did not happen -LRB- as a result of an abortive identical operation in March -RRB- , so Fletcher 's carriers were able to proceed to a flanking position without being detected .
Nagumo executed a first strike against Midway , while Fletcher launched his aircraft , bound for Nagumo 's carriers .
At 09:35 , 15 additional TBDs from Enterprise attacked in which 14 were lost , again with no hits .
Thus far , Fletcher 's attacks had been disorganized and seemingly ineffectual , but they succeeded in drawing Nagumo 's defensive fighters down to sea level where they expended much of their fuel and ammunition repulsing the two waves of torpedo bombers .
As a result , when U.S. dive bombers arrived at high altitude , the Zeros were poorly positioned to defend .
Nagumo 's indecision had also created confusion aboard his carriers .
Within minutes , all three were ablaze and had to be abandoned with great loss of life .
However , a second attack from the U.S. carriers a few hours later found and destroyed Hiryū , the last remaining fleet carrier available to Nagumo .
With his carriers lost and the Americans withdrawn out of range of his powerful battleships , Yamamoto was forced to call off the operation , leaving Midway in American hands .
Japan would be largely on the defensive for the rest of the war .
Japanese land forces continued to advance in the Solomon Islands and New Guinea .
They were beaten back by Allied -LRB- primarily Australian Army -RRB- forces .
With Japanese and Allied forces occupying various parts of the island , over the following six months both sides poured resources into an escalating battle of attrition on land , at sea , and in the sky .
Many were lost in numerous engagements with the Allied air forces based at Henderson Field as well as carrier based aircraft .
The convoys often faced night battles with enemy naval forces in which they expended destroyers that the IJN could ill-afford to lose .
However , the Allies were much better able to replace these losses .
In the sixth month war of attrition , the Japanese had lost as a result of failing to commit enough forces in sufficient time .
In January 1942 , Chinese forces got a victory at Changsha which was the first Allied success against Japan .
After the Doolittle Raid , the Japanese army conducted a massive sweep through Zhejiang and Jiangxi of China , now known as the Zhejiang-Jiangxi Campaign , with the goal of searching out the surviving American airmen , applying retribution on the Chinese who aided them and destroying air bases .
This operation started on 15 May 1942 with 40 infantry battalions and 15 -- 16 artillery battalions but was repelled by Chinese forces in September .
During this campaign , The Imperial Japanese Army left behind a trail of devastation and had also spread cholera , typhoid , plague and dysentery pathogens .
Around 1,700 Japanese troops died out of a total 10,000 Japanese soldiers who fell ill with disease when their own biological weapons attack rebounded on their own forces .
During the seven-week Battle of Changde , the Chinese forced Japan to fight a costly war of attrition .
Although the Japanese army initially successfully captured the city , the Chinese 57th division was able to pin them down long enough for reinforcements to arrive and encircle the Japanese .
The Chinese army then cut off the Japanese supply lines , forcing them into retreat , whereupon the Chinese pursued their enemy .
During the battle , in an act of desperation , Japan used chemical weapons .
In the aftermath of the Japanese conquest of Burma , there was widespread disorder in eastern India , and a disastrous famine in Bengal , which ultimately caused up to 3 million deaths .
In spite of these , and inadequate lines of communication , British and Indian forces attempted limited counter-attacks in Burma in early 1943 .
An offensive in Arakan failed , while a long distance raid mounted by the Chindits under Brigadier Orde Wingate suffered heavy losses , but was publicized to bolster Allied morale .
It also provoked the Japanese to mount major offensives themselves the following year .
Under Lieutenant General William Slim , its training , morale and health greatly improved .
Midway proved to be the last great naval battle for two years .
At the same time , Japan , lacking an adequate industrial base or technological strategy , a good aircrew training program , or adequate naval resources and commerce defense , fell further and further behind .
In strategic terms the Allies began a long movement across the Pacific , seizing one island base after another .
Allied submarines did not adopt a defensive posture and wait for the enemy to attack .
This meant sinking any warship , commercial vessel , or passenger ship in Axis-controlled waters , without warning and without help to survivors .
While Japan had a large number of submarines , they did not make a significant impact on the war .
In 1942 , the Japanese fleet subs performed well , knocking out or damaging many Allied warships .
The Japanese promptly changed it , and the new code was not broken again by OP-20G until 1943 .
Japanese commerce protection was `` shiftless beyond description , '' -LSB- nb 14 -RSB- and convoys were poorly organized and defended compared to Allied ones , a product of flawed IJN doctrine and training -- errors concealed by American faults as much as Japanese overconfidence .
By 1945 , sinkings of Japanese vessels had decreased because so few targets dared to venture out on the high seas .
Most were small cargo-carriers , but 124 were tankers bringing desperately needed oil from the East Indies .
Another 320 were passenger ships and troop transports .
At critical stages of the Guadalcanal , Saipan , and Leyte campaigns , thousands of Japanese troops were killed or diverted from where they were needed .
During this time , many of the newest American-trained Chinese units and supplies were forcibly locked in the Burmese theater under Joseph Stilwell set by terms of the Lend-Lease Agreement .
Despite major tactical victories , the operation overall failed to provide Japan with any significant strategic gains .
A great majority of the Chinese forces were able to retreat out of the area , and later come back to attack Japanese positions such as Battle of West Hunan .
Japan was not any closer in defeating China after this operation , and the constant defeats the Japanese suffered in the Pacific meant that Japan never got the time and resources needed to achieve final victory over China .
Operation Ichi-go created a great sense of social confusion in the areas of China that it affected .
In February 1944 the Japanese mounted a local counter-attack in the Arakan .
Although several units of the British Fourteenth Army had to fight their way out of encirclement , by early April they had concentrated around Imphal in Manipur state .
During April , the Japanese attacks against Imphal failed , while fresh Allied formations drove the Japanese from the positions they had captured at Kohima .
As many Japanese had feared , Japan 's supply arrangements could not maintain her forces .
During May , while Mutaguchi continued to order attacks , the Allies advanced southwards from Kohima and northwards from Imphal .
The Japanese finally broke off the operation on 3 July .
This represented the worst defeat suffered by the Japanese Army to that date .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Ozawa 's pilots were outnumbered 2:1 and their aircraft were becoming or were already obsolete .
The Japanese had considerable antiaircraft defenses but lacked proximity fuzes or good radar .
With the odds against him , Ozawa devised an appropriate strategy .
His planes had greater range because they were not weighed down with protective armor ; they could attack at about 480 km -LRB- 300 mi -RRB- -LSB- citation needed -RSB- , and could search a radius of 900 km -LSB- citation needed -RSB- -LRB- 560 mi -RRB- .
Ozawa planned to use this advantage by positioning his fleet 300 miles -LRB- 480 km -RRB- -LSB- citation needed -RSB- out .
The Japanese planes would hit the U.S. carriers , land at Guam to refuel , then hit the enemy again when returning to their carriers .
Ozawa also counted on about 500 land-based planes at Guam and other islands .
The forces converged in the largest sea battle of World War II up to that point .
Repeated U.S. raids destroyed the Japanese land-based planes .
The result was later dubbed the Great Marianas Turkey Shoot .
The few attackers to reach the U.S. fleet encountered massive AA fire with proximity fuzes .
Mitscher launched 230 torpedo planes and dive bombers .
He then discovered the enemy was actually another 60 miles -LRB- 97 km -RRB- -LSB- citation needed -RSB- further off , out of aircraft range -LRB- based on a roundtrip flight -RRB- .
Mitscher decided this chance to destroy the Japanese fleet was worth the risk of aircraft losses due to running out of fuel on the return flight .
The Imperial Japanese Navy 's carrier force was effectively destroyed .
Leyte Gulf featured the largest battleships ever built , was the last time in history that battleships engaged each other , and was also notable as the first time that kamikaze aircraft were used .
Allied victory in the Philippine Sea established Allied air and sea superiority in the western Pacific .
This would give the Allies control of the sea routes to Japan from southern Asia , cutting off substantial Japanese garrisons .
MacArthur favored an invasion of the Philippines , which also lay across the supply lines to Japan .
Roosevelt adjudicated in favor of the Philippines .
Meanwhile , Japanese Combined Fleet Chief Toyoda Soemu prepared four plans to cover all Allied offensive scenarios .
Toyoda put Plan Sho-2 into effect , launching a series of air attacks against the U.S. carriers .
However the Japanese lost 600 planes in three days , leaving them without air cover .
It included the two largest battleships ever built : Yamato and Musashi .
As they passed Palawan Island after midnight on 23 October the force was spotted , and U.S. submarines sank two cruisers .
A second wave of planes scored many direct hits on Musashi .
A third wave , from USS Enterprise and USS Franklin hit Musashi with 11 bombs and eight torpedoes .
Kurita retreated but in the evening turned around to head for San Bernardino Strait .
Musashi sank at about 19:30 .
Because they were observing radio silence , Nishimura was unable to synchronize with Shima and Kurita .
As they passed Panaon Island , Nishimura 's force ran into a trap set for them by the U.S.-Australian 7th Fleet Support Force .
To pass the strait and reach the landings , Nishimura had to run the gauntlet .
At about 03:00 the Japanese battleship Fusō and three destroyers were hit by torpedoes and Fusō broke in two .
At 03:50 the U.S. battleships opened fire .
Radar fire control meant they could hit targets from a much greater distance than the Japanese .
The battleship Yamashiro , a cruiser and a destroyer were crippled by 16-inch -LRB- 406 mm -RRB- shells ; Yamashiro sank at 04:19 .
Only one of Nishimura 's force of seven ships survived the engagement .
At 04:25 Shima 's force of two cruisers and eight destroyers reached the battle .
Seeing Fusō and believing her to be the wrecks of two battleships , Shima ordered a retreat , ending the last battleship-vs-battleship action in history .
The carriers had only 108 planes .
At 20:00 Toyoda ordered all remaining Japanese forces to attack .
Halsey saw an opportunity to destroy the remnants of the Japanese carrier force .
Halsey 's ships set out in pursuit of Ozawa just after midnight .
U.S. commanders ignored reports that Kurita had turned back towards San Bernardino Strait .
They had taken the bait set by Ozawa .
On the morning of 25 October Ozawa launched 75 planes .
Most were shot down by U.S. fighter patrols .
By 08:00 U.S. fighters had destroyed the screen of Japanese fighters and were hitting ships .
By evening , they had sunk the carriers Zuikaku , Zuihō , and Chiyoda , and a destroyer .
The fourth carrier , Chitose , and a cruiser were disabled and later sank .
Each group had six escort carriers , with a total of more than 500 planes , and seven or eight destroyers or destroyer escorts -LRB- DE -RRB- .
Kinkaid still believed that Lee 's force was guarding the north , so the Japanese had the element of surprise when they attacked Taffy 3 at 06:45 .
Kurita mistook the Taffy carriers for large fleet carriers and thought he had the whole Third Fleet in his sights .
Since escort carriers stood little chance against a battleship , Adm. Clifton Sprague directed the carriers of Taffy 3 to turn and flee eastward , hoping that bad visibility would reduce the accuracy of Japanese gunfire , and used his destroyers to divert the Japanese battleships .
The destroyers made harassing torpedo attacks against the Japanese .
For ten minutes Yamato was caught up in evasive action .
Two U.S. destroyers and a DE were sunk , but they had bought enough time for the Taffy groups to launch planes .
Taffy 3 turned and fled south , with shells scoring hits on some of its carriers and sinking one of them .
The superior speed of the Japanese force allowed it to draw closer and fire on the other two Taffy groups .
However , at 09:20 Kurita suddenly turned and retreated north .
Signals had disabused him of the notion that he was attacking the Third Fleet , and the longer Kurita continued to engage , the greater the risk of major air strikes .
The Japanese retreated through the San Bernardino Strait , under continuous air attack .
The Battle of Leyte Gulf was over ; and a large part of the Japanese surface fleet destroyed .
On 7 December U.S. Army units landed at Ormoc Bay and , after a major land and air battle , cut off the Japanese ability to reinforce and supply Leyte .
Almost 175,000 men followed across the twenty-mile -LRB- 32 km -RRB- beachhead within a few days .
The Japanese put up little direct defense of Palawan , but cleaning up pockets of Japanese resistance lasted until late April , as the Japanese used their common tactic of withdrawing into the mountain jungles , dispersed as small units .
Lt. General Tadamichi Kuribayashi , the commander of the island 's defense , knew that he could not win the battle , but he hoped to make the Americans suffer far more than they could endure .
The heavy American naval and air bombardment did little but drive the Japanese further underground , making their positions impervious to enemy fire .
Their pillboxes and bunkers were all connected so that if one was knocked out , it could be reoccupied again .
However , Kuribayashi 's hidden guns and defenses survived the constant bombardment virtually unscathed .
For some time , they did not come under fire .
This was part of Kuribayashi 's plan to hold fire until the landing beaches were full .
As soon as the Marines pushed inland to a line of enemy bunkers , they came under devastating machine gun and artillery fire which cut down many of the men .
The flag raising is often cited as the most reproduced photograph of all time and became the archetypal representation not only of that battle , but of the entire Pacific War .
For the rest of February , the Americans pushed north , and by 1 March , had taken two-thirds of the island .
The Japanese fought to the last man , killing 6,800 Marines and wounding nearly 20,000 more .
Historians debate whether it was strategically worth the casualties sustained .
Slim feared that the Japanese would defend Rangoon house-to-house during the monsoon , placing his army in a disastrous supply situation , and in March he had asked that a plan to capture Rangoon by an amphibious force , Operation Dracula , which had been abandoned earlier , be reinstated .
The troops which occupied Rangoon linked up with Fourteenth Army five days later , securing the Allies ' lines of communication .
Although the campaign was criticized in Australia at the time , and in subsequent years , as pointless or a `` waste '' of the lives of soldiers , it did achieve a number of objectives , such as increasing the isolation of significant Japanese forces occupying the main part of the Dutch East Indies , capturing major oil supplies and freeing Allied prisoners of war , who were being held in deteriorating conditions .
Both nations were exhausted by years of battles , bombings and blockades .
After Japanese victories in Operation Ichi-Go , Japan were losing the battle in Burma and facing constant attacks from Chinese Nationalists forces and Communist guerrillas in the country side .
At the same time , it airlifted the entire Chinese New 6th Corps , an American-equipped corps and veterans of the Burma Expeditionary Force , from Kunming to Zhijiang .
Chinese forces totaled 110,000 men in 20 divisions .
They were supported by about 400 aircraft from Chinese and American air forces .
Chinese forces achieved a decisive victory and launched a large counterattack in this campaign .
Concurrently , the Chinese managed to repel a Japanese offensive in Henan and Hubei .
Afterwards , Chinese forces retook Hunan and Hubei provinces in South China .
Chinese launched a counter offensive to retake Guangxi which was the last major Japanese stronghold in South China .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The supporting naval forces were the targets for 4,000 sorties , many by Kamikaze suicide planes .
The Americans suffered 75,000 casualties on the ground ; 94 % of the Japanese soldiers died along with many civilians .
Hard-fought battles on the Japanese home islands of Iwo Jima , Okinawa , and others resulted in horrific casualties on both sides but finally produced a Japanese defeat .
Japanese industrial production plunged as nearly half of the built-up areas of 67 cities were destroyed by B-29 firebombing raids .
LeMay also oversaw Operation Starvation , in which the inland waterways of Japan were extensively mined by air , which disrupted the small amount of remaining Japanese coastal sea traffic .
This ultimatum stated that , if Japan did not surrender , it would face `` prompt and utter destruction . ''
In a press release issued after the atomic bombing of Hiroshima , Truman warned Japan to surrender or '' ... expect a rain of ruin from the air , the like of which has never been seen on this earth . ''
More than 140,000 -- 240,000 people died as a direct result of these two bombings .
The necessity of the atomic bombings has long been debated , with detractors claiming that a naval blockade and aerial bombing campaign had already made invasion , hence the atomic bomb , unnecessary .
However , other scholars have argued that the bombings shocked the Japanese government into surrender , with Emperor finally indicating his wish to stop the war .
Soviet gains on the continent were Manchukuo , Mengjiang -LRB- Inner Mongolia -RRB- and northern Korea .
The rapid defeat of Japan 's Kwantung Army has been argued to be a significant factor in the Japanese surrender and the end of World War II , as Japan realized the Soviets were willing and able to take the cost of invasion of its Home Islands , after their rapid conquest of Manchuria and Invasion of South Sakhalin island .
In 1993 , Chief Cabinet Secretary Yohei Kono said that women were coerced into brothels run by Japan 's wartime military .
Curtin predicted that the `` battle for Australia '' would now follow .
It became the capital of the Colony and Dominion of Virginia in 1780 .
The city entered the 20th century with one of the world 's first successful electric streetcar systems , as well as a national hub of African-American commerce and culture , the Jackson Ward neighborhood .
The legacy of the canal boatmen is represented by the figure in the center of the city flag .
As a result of this and ample access to hydropower due to the falls , Richmond became home to some of the largest manufacturing facilities in the country , including iron works and flour mills , the largest facilities of their kind in the South .
Official action came in May , after the Confederacy promised to move its national capital to Richmond .
The city was at the end of a long supply line , which made it somewhat difficult to defend , although supplies continued to reach the city by canal and wagon for years , since it was protected by the Army of Northern Virginia and arguably the Confederacy 's best troops and commanders .
On April 1 , General Philip Sheridan , assigned to interdict the Southside Railroad , met brigades commanded by George Pickett at the Five Forks junction , smashing them , taking thousands of prisoners , and encouraging General Grant to order a general advance .
General Lee then informed Jefferson Davis that he was about to evacuate Richmond .
Lincoln met Confederate assistant secretary of War John A. Campbell , and handed him a note inviting Virginia 's legislature to end their rebellion .
After Campbell spun the note to Confederate legislators as a possible end to the Emancipation Proclamation , Lincoln rescinded his offer and ordered General Weitzel to prevent the Confederate state legislature from meeting .
Union forces killed , wounded or captured 8000 Confederate troops at Saylor 's Creek southwest of Petersburg on April 6 .
General Lee continued to reject General Grant 's surrender suggestion until Sheridan 's infantry and cavalry appeared in front of his retreating army on April 8 .
when Lincoln rejected the surrender terms negotiated by general Sherman and envoys of North Carolina governor Zebulon Vance , which failed to mention slavery .
Richmond emerged a decade after the smoldering rubble of the Civil War to resume its position as an economic powerhouse , with iron front buildings and massive brick factories .
Designed by electric power pioneer Frank J. Sprague , the trolley system opened its first line in 1888 , and electric streetcar lines rapidly spread to other cities across the country .
Sprague 's system used an overhead wire and trolley pole to collect current , with electric motors on the car 's trucks .
In Richmond , the transition from streetcars to buses began in May 1947 and was completed on November 25 , 1949 .
Today , the bank is called the Consolidated Bank and Trust Company , and it is the oldest surviving African-American bank in the U.S. .
Other figures from this time included John Mitchell , Jr. .
In 1910 , the former city of Manchester was consolidated with the city of Richmond , and in 1914 , the city annexed Barton Heights , Ginter Park , and Highland Park areas of Henrico County .
In May 1914 , Richmond became the headquarters of the Fifth District of the Federal Reserve Bank .
In 1996 , still-sore tensions arose amid controversy involved in placing a statue of African American Richmond native and tennis star Arthur Ashe to the famed series of statues of Confederate heroes of the Civil War on Monument Avenue .
After several months of controversy , the bronze statue of Ashe was finally completed on Monument Avenue facing the opposite direction from the Confederate Heroes on July 10 , 1996 .
Richmond is located at 37 ° 32 ′ N 77 ° 28 ′ W / 37.533 ° N 77.467 ° W / 37.533 ; -77.467 -LRB- 37.538 , − 77.462 -RRB- .
The Piedmont region is characterized by relatively low , rolling hills , and lies between the low , sea level Tidewater region and the Blue Ridge Mountains .
Modern Downtown Richmond is located slightly farther west , on the slopes of Shockoe Hill .
The area between Belvidere Street , Interstate 195 , Interstate 95 , and the river , which includes Virginia Commonwealth University , is socioeconomically and architecturally diverse .
Cary Street between Interstate 195 and the Boulevard is a popular commercial area called Carytown .
Other Southside neighborhoods include Fawnbrook , Broad Rock , Cherry Gardens , Cullenwood , and Beaufont Hills .
The open waters of the Chesapeake Bay and Atlantic Ocean contribute to the humid summers and mild winters .
Downtown areas straddle the border between USDA Hardiness zones 7B and 8A , and temperatures seldom lower to 0 °F -LRB- − 18 °C -RRB- , with the most recent subzero -LRB- °F -RRB- reading occurring on January 28 , 2000 , when the temperature reached − 1 °F -LRB- − 18 °C -RRB- .
Extremes in temperature have ranged from − 12 °F -LRB- − 24 °C -RRB- on January 19 , 1940 up to 107 °F -LRB- 42 °C -RRB- on August 6 , 1918 .
-LSB- a -RSB-
Precipitation is rather uniformly distributed throughout the year .
There is considerable variability in total monthly amounts from year to year so that no one month can be depended upon to be normal .
Snow has been recorded during seven of the twelve months .
Hurricanes and tropical storms have been responsible for most of the flooding during the summer and early fall months .
Hurricanes passing near Richmond have produced record rainfalls .
There were 92,282 housing units at an average density of 1,536.2 per square mile -LRB- 593.1 / km ² -RRB- .
Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.6 % of the population .
Over the next decade , the city saw a major increase in total homicides .
Richmond has several historic churches .
Because of its early English colonial history from the early 17th century to 1776 , Richmond has a number of prominent Anglican/Episcopal churches including Monumental Church , St. Paul 's Episcopal Church and St. John 's Episcopal Church .
The city is also home to the historic Cathedral of the Sacred Heart which is the motherchurch for the Roman Catholic Diocese of Richmond .
The first Jewish congregation in Richmond was Kahal Kadosh Beth Shalom .
Kahal Kadosh Beth Shalom was the sixth congregation in the United States .
By 1822 K.K. Beth Shalom members worshipped in the first synagogue building in Virginia .
They eventually merged with Congregation Beth Ahabah , an offshoot of Beth Shalom .
Along with such religious congregations , there are a variety of other Jewish charitable , educational and social service institutions , each serving the Jewish and general communities .
These include the Weinstein Jewish Community Center , Jewish Family Services , Jewish Community Federation of Richmond and Richmond Jewish Foundation .
There are seven current masjids in the Greater Richmond area , with three more currently in construction , accommodating the growing Muslim population , the first one being Masjid Bilal .
In the 1950s , Muslims from the East End got organized under Nation of Islam -LRB- NOI -RRB- .
By 1976 , the Muslims used to meet in a rented church .
Only by 1990 did the Muslims renamed it to `` Masjid Bilal '' .
Masjid Bilal was followed by the Islamic Center of Virginia , ICVA masjid .
With aggressive fundraising , ICVA was able to buy land on Buford road .
Construction of the new masjid began in the early 1980s .
The rest of the five current masjids in the Richmond area are Islamic Center of Richmond -LRB- ICR -RRB- in the west end , Masjid Umm Barakah on 2nd street downtown , Islamic Society of Greater Richmond -LRB- ISGR -RRB- in the west end , Masjidullah in the north side , and Masjid Ar-Rahman in the east end .
Hinduism is actively practiced , particularly in suburban areas of Henrico and Chesterfield .
Hindus are served by several temples and cultural centers .
Law and finance have long been driving forces in the economy .
Richmond is home to the rapidly developing Virginia BioTechnology Research Park , which opened in 1995 as an incubator facility for biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies .
Once fully developed , park officials expect the site to employ roughly 3,000 scientists , technicians and engineers .
Richmond is also fast-becoming known for its food scene , with several restaurants in the Fan , Church Hill , Jackson Ward and elsewhere around the city generating regional and national attention for their fare .
Several organizations , including the Virginia Film Office and the Virginia Production Alliance , along with events like the Richmond International Film Festival and French Film Festival , continue to put draw supporters of film and media to the region .
However , only Dominion Resources and MeadWestvaco are headquartered within the city of Richmond ; the others are located in the neighboring counties of Henrico and Hanover .
Other Fortune 500 companies , while not headquartered in the area , do have a major presence .
Several of the city 's large general museums are located near the Boulevard .
Within the downtown are the Library of Virginia and the Valentine Richmond History Center .
Elsewhere are the Virginia Holocaust Museum and the Old Dominion Railway Museum .
As the primary former Capital of the Confederate States of America , Richmond is home to many museums and battlefields of the American Civil War .
The city is home to many monuments and memorials , most notably those along Monument Avenue .
The following is a list of the more formal arts establishments -LRB- Companies , theaters , galleries , and other large venues -RRB- in Richmond :
Both festivals are expected to continue this year with artists such as Ron English slated to produce work .
From earliest days , Virginia , and Richmond in particular , have welcomed live theatrical performances .
In the 20th century , Richmonders ' love of theater continued with many amateur troupes and regular touring professional productions .
Even fewer now remain due to construction and demolition that has taken place since Reconstruction .
In spite of this , Richmond contains many historically significant buildings and districts .
Architectural classicism is heavily represented in all districts of the city , particularly in Downtown , the Fan , and the Museum District .
Several notable classical architects have designed buildings in Richmond .
Main Street Station , designed by Wilson , Harris , and Richards , has been returned to use in its original purpose .
Many buildings on the University of Richmond campus , including Jeter Hall and Ryland Hall , were designed by Ralph Adams Cram , most famous for his Princeton University Chapel and the Cathedral of Saint John the Divine .
Among Richmond 's most interesting architectural features is its Cast-iron architecture .
Richmond 's position as a center of iron production helped to fuel its popularity within the city .
In some cases cast were made for a single residential or commercial application .
Richmond is home to several notable instances of various styles of modernism .
Philip Johnson designed the WRVA Building .
Other notable architects to have worked in the city include Rick Mather , I.M. Pei , and Gordon Bunshaft .
There are also parks on two major islands in the river : Belle Isle and Brown 's Island .
One can walk the island and still see many of the remains of the Civil War prison camp , such as an arms storage room and a gun emplacement that was used to quell prisoner riots .
Maymont , located adjacent to Byrd Park , is a 100-acre -LRB- 40 ha -RRB- Victorian estate with a museum , formal gardens , native wildlife exhibits , nature center , carriage collection , and children 's farm .
The Squirrels opened their first season at The Diamond on April 15 , 2010 .
Auto racing is also popular in the area .
Southside Speedway has acted as the breeding grounds for many past NASCAR legends including Richard Petty , Bobby Allison and Darrell Waltrip , and claims to be the home track of NASCAR superstar Denny Hamlin .
The Richmond metro area is served by many local television and radio stations .
There are also a wide variety of radio stations in the Richmond area , catering to many different interests , including news , talk radio , and sports , as well as an eclectic mix of musical interests .
Beginning with the November 2008 election Council terms was lengthened to 4 years .
The city council elects from among its members one member to serve as Council President and one to serve as Council Vice President .
Following Prince 's election , Reverend Gwendolyn Hedgepeth and the Reverend Leonidas Young , former Richmond Mayor were elected to public office .
Prior to Prince 's election black clergy made political endorsements and served as appointees to the Richmond School Board and other boards throughout the city .
Today religion and politics continues to thrive in the Commonwealth of Virginia .
In addition , there are several Technical Colleges in Richmond including ITT Technical Institute , ECPI College of Technology and Centura College .
There are several vocational colleges also , such as Fortis College and Bryant Stratton College .
Multiple runs per day connect directly with Washington , D.C. , New York , Raleigh , and elsewhere .
Most other connections to Megabus served cites , such as New York , can be made from Washington , D.C. Richmond , and the surrounding metropolitan area , was granted -LSB- when ? -RSB-
The GRTC , however , serves only small parts of the suburban counties .
The Richmond area also has two railroad stations served by Amtrak .
Each station receives regular service from north of Richmond including Washington , D.C. , Philadelphia , and New York .
As a result , the Staples Mill Road station receives more trains and serves more passengers overall .
These three plants provide a total of 4,453 megawatts of power .
These include facilities in Chester , and Surry , and two plants in Richmond -LRB- Gravel Neck and Darbytown -RRB- .
There is also a wastewater treatment plant located on the south bank of the James River .
The Presidio and Mission San Diego de Alcalá , founded in 1769 , formed the first European settlement in what is now California .
In 1821 , San Diego became part of the newly-independent Mexico , which reformed as the First Mexican Republic two years later .
The first European to visit the region was Portuguese-born explorer Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo sailing under the flag of Castile .
It was the first settlement by Europeans in what is now the state of California .
In 1822 , Mexico began attempting to extend its authority over the coastal territory of Alta California .
The Mission was secularized by the Mexican government in 1833 , and most of the Mission lands were sold to wealthy Californio settlers .
-LRB- See , List of pre-statehood mayors of San Diego . -RRB-
Beyond town Mexican land grants expanded the number of California ranchos that modestly added to the local economy .
In 1846 , the United States went to war against Mexico and sent a naval and land expedition to conquer Alta California .
At first they had an easy time of it capturing the major ports including San Diego , but the Californios in southern Alta California struck back .
Following the successful revolt in Los Angeles , the American garrison at San Diego was driven out without firing a shot in early October 1846 .
For the next several months the Americans were blockaded inside the pueblo .
Skirmishes occurred daily and snipers shot into the town every night .
On December 1 the Americans garrison learned that the dragoons of General Stephen W. Kearney were at Warner 's Ranch .
Their joint command of 150 men , returning to San Diego , encountered about 93 Californios under Andrés Pico .
That same year San Diego was designated the seat of the newly established San Diego County and was incorporated as a city .
The original town of San Diego was located at the foot of Presidio Hill , in the area which is now Old Town San Diego State Historic Park .
Horton promoted the area heavily , and people and businesses began to relocate to New Town because of its location on San Diego Bay convenient to shipping .
New Town soon eclipsed the original settlement , known to this day as Old Town , and became the economic and governmental heart of the city .
The buildings were intended to be temporary structures , but most remained in continuous use until they progressively fell into disrepair .
The menagerie of exotic animals featured at the 1915 exposition provided the basis for the San Diego Zoo .
In the 2010s there was a proposal for a large-scale celebration of the 100th anniversary of Balboa Park , but the plans were abandoned when the organization tasked with putting on the celebration went out of business .
The southern portion of the Point Loma peninsula was set aside for military purposes as early as 1852 .
The city was also an early center for aviation : as early as World War I , San Diego was proclaiming itself `` The Air Capital of the West '' .
During World War II , San Diego became a major hub of military and defense activity , due to the presence of so many military installations and defense manufacturers .
During the final months of the war , the Japanese had a plan to target multiple U.S. cities for biological attack , starting with San Diego .
Traditionally , San Diegans have built their homes and businesses on the mesas , while leaving the urban canyons relatively wild .
Thus , the canyons give parts of the city a segmented feel , creating gaps between otherwise proximate neighborhoods and contributing to a low-density , car-centered environment .
Downtown San Diego is located on San Diego Bay .
Balboa Park encompasses several mesas and canyons to the northeast , surrounded by older , dense urban communities including Hillcrest and North Park .
To the east and southeast lie City Heights , the College Area , and Southeast San Diego .
To the north lies Mission Valley and Interstate 8 .
The communities north of the valley and freeway , and south of Marine Corps Air Station Miramar , include Clairemont , Kearny Mesa , Tierrasanta , and Navajo .
Stretching north from Miramar are the northern suburbs of Mira Mesa , Scripps Ranch , Rancho Peñasquitos , and Rancho Bernardo .
Carmel Valley and Del Mar Heights occupy the northwest corner of the city .
To their south are Torrey Pines State Reserve and the business center of the Golden Triangle .
A narrow strip of land at the bottom of San Diego Bay connects these southern neighborhoods with the rest of the city .
An iconic description of the skyline includes its skyscrapers being compared to the tools of a toolbox .
Dewpoints in the summer months range from 57.0 °F -LRB- 13.9 °C -RRB- to 62.4 °F -LRB- 16.9 °C -RRB- .
The climate in San Diego , like most of Southern California , often varies significantly over short geographical distances resulting in microclimates .
In San Diego , this is mostly because of the city 's topography -LRB- the Bay , and the numerous hills , mountains , and canyons -RRB- .
Sometimes the June gloom can last into July , causing cloudy skies over most of San Diego for the entire day .
Rainfall along the coast averages about 10 inches -LRB- 250 mm -RRB- of precipitation annually .
Most of the rainfall occurs during the cooler months .
Though there are few wet days per month during the rainy period , rainfall can be heavy when it does fall .
Variability of rainfall can be extreme : in the wettest years of 1883/1884 and 1940/1941 more than 24 inches -LRB- 610 mm -RRB- fell in the city , whilst in the driest years as little as 3.2 inches -LRB- 80 mm -RRB- has fallen for a full year .
San Diego and its backcountry are subject to periodic wildfires .
The estimated city population in 2009 was 1,306,300 .
0.5 % Pacific Islander -LRB- 0.2 % Guamanian , 0.1 % Samoan , 0.1 % Native Hawaiian -RRB- , 12.3 % from other races , and 5.1 % from two or more races .
The population was 45.3 % non-Hispanic whites , down from 78.9 % in 1970 , 27.7 % Hispanics , 15.6 % Asians/Pacific Islanders , 7.1 % blacks , 0.4 % American Indians , and 3.9 % from other races .
In 2000 , the median income for a household in the city was $ 45,733 , and the median income for a family was $ 53,060 .
The per capita income for the city was $ 23,609 .
San Diego hosts several major producers of wireless cellular technology .
There are more than 400 biotechnology companies in the area .
The downtown branch consists of two building on two opposite streets .
Old Globe Theatre at Balboa Park produces about 15 plays and musicals annually .
Both the Old Globe Theatre and the La Jolla Playhouse have produced the world premieres of plays and musicals that have gone on to win Tony Awards or nominations on Broadway .
The Joan B. Kroc Theatre at Kroc Center 's Performing Arts Center is a 600-seat state-of-the-art theatre that hosts music , dance , and theatre performances .
The San Diego Surf of the American Basketball Association is located in the city .
This course was also the site of the 2008 U.S. Open Golf Championship .
In 2006 , the city 's form of government changed from a council -- manager government to a strong mayor government .
The mayor is in effect the chief executive officer of the city , while the council is the legislative body .
The City of San Diego is responsible for police , public safety , streets , water and sewer service , planning and zoning , and similar services within its borders .
Elections are held on a non-partisan basis per California state law ; nevertheless , most officeholders do identify themselves as either Democrats or Republicans .
Both subsequently resigned .
Crime in San Diego increased in the early 2000s .
In 2004 , San Diego had the sixth lowest crime rate of any U.S. city with over half a million residents .
Total property crimes per 100,000 people were lower than the national average in 2008 .
Stations based in Mexico -LRB- with ITU prefixes of XE and XH -RRB- also serve the San Diego market .
Due to the ratio of U.S. and Mexican-licensed stations , San Diego is the largest media market in the United States that is legally unable to support a television station duopoly between two full-power stations under FCC regulations , which disallow duopolies in metropolitan areas with fewer than nine full-power television stations and require that there must be eight unique station owners that remain once a duopoly is formed -LRB- there are only seven full-power stations on the California side of the San Diego-Tijuana market -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Though the E. W. Scripps Company owns KGTV and KZSD-LP , they are not considered a duopoly under the FCC 's legal definition as common ownership between full-power and low-power television stations in the same market is permitted regardless to the number of stations licensed to the area .
San Diego 's roadway system provides an extensive network of routes for travel by bicycle .
Older and denser neighborhoods around the downtown tend to be utility cycling oriented .
As a result , a vast majority of cycling-related activities are recreational .
San Diego is served by the San Diego Trolley light rail system , by the SDMTS bus system , and by Coaster and Amtrak Pacific Surfliner commuter rail ; northern San Diego county is also served by the Sprinter light rail line .
It is the busiest single-runway airport in the United States .
It is located on San Diego Bay three miles -LRB- 4.8 km -RRB- from downtown .
San Diego International Airport maintains scheduled flights to the rest of the United States including Hawaii , as well as to Mexico , Canada , Japan , and the United Kingdom .
Numerous regional transportation projects have occurred in recent years to mitigate congestion in San Diego .
Notable efforts are improvements to San Diego freeways , expansion of San Diego Airport , and doubling the capacity of the cruise ship terminal of the port .
The proposed budget fell $ 84.6 million short of bringing the city 's streets to an acceptable level .
Port expansions included a second cruise terminal on Broadway Pier which opened in 2010 .
In a modern geopolitical sense , the term `` Islamic Nation '' usually refers collectively to Muslim-majority countries , states , districts , or towns .
The Abbasids were influenced by the Quranic injunctions and hadiths , such as `` the ink of a scholar is more holy than the blood of a martyr , '' that stressed the value of knowledge .
The major Islamic capital cities of Baghdad , Cairo , and Córdoba became the main intellectual centers for science , philosophy , medicine , and education .
During this period , the Muslim world was a collection of cultures ; they drew together and advanced the knowledge gained from the ancient Greek , Roman , Persian , Chinese , Indian , Egyptian , and Phoenician civilizations .
Other centers for innovative ceramic pottery in the Old world included Fustat -LRB- from 975 to 1075 -RRB- , Damascus -LRB- from 1100 to around 1600 -RRB- and Tabriz -LRB- from 1470 to 1550 -RRB- .
All Arabian fantasy tales tend to be called Arabian Nights stories when translated into English , regardless of whether they appear in The Book of One Thousand and One Nights or not .
Imitations were written , especially in France .
Various characters from this epic have themselves become cultural icons in Western culture , such as Aladdin , Sinbad the Sailor and Ali Baba .
It is a tragic story of undying love much like the later Romeo and Juliet , which was itself said to have been inspired by a Latin version of Layla and Majnun to an extent .
Amir Arsalan was also a popular mythical Persian story , which has influenced some modern works of fantasy fiction , such as The Heroic Legend of Arslan .
However , while Hayy lives alone with animals on the desert island for the rest of the story in Philosophus Autodidactus , the story of Kamil extends beyond the desert island setting in Theologus Autodidactus , developing into the earliest known coming of age plot and eventually becoming the first example of a science fiction novel .
It deals with various science fiction elements such as spontaneous generation , futurology , the end of the world and doomsday , resurrection , and the afterlife .
Ibn al-Nafis ' fiction explained Islamic religious teachings via science and Islamic philosophy .
The Moors also had a noticeable influence on the works of George Peele and William Shakespeare .
One of the common definitions for `` Islamic philosophy '' is `` the style of philosophy produced within the framework of Islamic culture . ''
Islamic philosophy , in this definition is neither necessarily concerned with religious issues , nor is exclusively produced by Muslims .
European scholars and writers influenced by this novel include John Locke , Gottfried Leibniz , Melchisédech Thévenot , John Wallis , Christiaan Huygens , George Keith , Robert Barclay , the Quakers , and Samuel Hartlib .
Muslim scientists contributed to advances in the sciences .
They placed far greater emphasis on experiment than had the Greeks .
The most important development of the scientific method was the use of experiments to distinguish between competing scientific theories set within a generally empirical orientation , which began among Muslim scientists .
Some have also described Ibn al-Haytham as the `` first scientist . ''
Other medical advancements came in the fields of pharmacology and pharmacy .
Heliocentric theories were also discussed by several other Muslim astronomers such as Al-Biruni , Al-Sijzi , Qotb al-Din Shirazi , and Najm al-Dīn al-Qazwīnī al-Kātibī .
There was also a dense network of trade routes in the Mediterranean , along which Muslim countries traded with each other and with European powers such as Venice , Genoa and Catalonia .
The Silk Road crossing Central Asia passed through Muslim states between China and Europe .
Muslim engineers in the Islamic world made a number of innovative industrial uses of hydropower , and early industrial uses of tidal power and wind power , fossil fuels such as petroleum , and early large factory complexes -LRB- tiraz in Arabic -RRB- .
A variety of industrial mills were being employed in the Islamic world , including early fulling mills , gristmills , hullers , sawmills , ship mills , stamp mills , steel mills , sugar mills , tide mills and windmills .
Such advances made it possible for industrial tasks that were previously driven by manual labour in ancient times to be mechanized and driven by machinery instead in the medieval Islamic world .
The transfer of these technologies to medieval Europe had an influence on the Industrial Revolution .
Major languages spoken by Muslims include Arabic , Urdu , Bengali , Punjabi , Malay , Javanese , Sundanese , Swahili , Hausa , Fula , Berber , Tuareg , Somali , Albanian , Bosnian , Russian , Turkish , Azeri , Kazakh , Uzbek , Tatar , Persian , Kurdish , Pashto , Balochi , Sindhi and Kashmiri , among many others .
These two main differences stem from the understanding of which hadith are to interpret the Quran .
Literacy rate in the Muslim world varies .
Several Muslim countries like Turkey and Iran exhibit high scientific publication .
Some countries have tried to encourage scientific research .
Encompasses both secular and religious styles , the design and style made by Muslims and their construction of buildings and structures in Islamic culture included the architectural types : the Mosque , the Tomb , the Palace and the Fort .
Through Islamic architecture , effects of varying cultures within Islamic civilization can be illustrated .
Generally , the use of Islamic geometric patterns and foliage based arabesques were striking .
Instead , Muslims describe God by the names and attributes that , according to Islam , he revealed to his creation .
Islamic calligraphy is an omnipresent decoration in Islamic art , and is usually expressed in the form of Quranic verses .
In this respect , fractal geometry has been a key utility , especially for mosques and palaces .
The role of domes in Islamic architecture has been considerable .
And as late as the 19th century , Islamic domes had been incorporated into European architecture .
It begins on the vernal equinox .
The first six months have 31 days , the next five have 30 days , and the last month has 29 days in usual years but 30 days in leap years .
It is the only country that has both a Caspian Sea and an Indian Ocean coastline .
Iran has long been of geostrategic importance because of its central location in Eurasia and Western Asia , and its proximity to the Strait of Hormuz .
The Parthian Empire emerged from the ashes and was succeeded by the Sassanid Dynasty in 224 AD , under which Iran again became one of the leading powers in the world , along with the Roman-Byzantine Empire , for a period of more than four centuries .
Arabic replaced Persian as the official language , while Persian remained the language of both ordinary people and of literature .
Iran became a major contributor to the Islamic Golden Age , producing many influential scientists , scholars , artists , and thinkers .
Establishment of the Safavid Dynasty in 1501 , converted the Iranian people from Sunni Islam to Twelver Shia Islam , and made Twelver Shia Islam the official religion of Iran .
Safavid conversion of Iran from Sunnism to Shiism marked one of the most important turning points in Iranian and Muslim history .
Starting in 1736 under Nader Shah , Iran reached its greatest territorial extent since the Sassanid Empire , briefly possessing what was arguably the most powerful empire at the time .
Popular unrest culminated in the Persian Constitutional Revolution of 1906 , which established a constitutional monarchy and the country 's first Majles -LRB- parliament -RRB- .
Following a coup d'état instigated by the U.K. and the U.S. in 1953 , Iran gradually became close allies with the United States and the rest of the West , remained secular , but grew increasingly autocratic .
As the most extensive interactions the Ancient Greeks had with any outsider was with the Persians , the term persisted , even long after the Persian rule in Greece .
-LSB- page needed -RSB-
This marked the end of the Kingdom of Urartu as well , which was subsequently conquered and dissolved .
Later conquests under Cyrus and his successors expanded the empire to include Lydia , Babylon , Egypt , parts of the Balkans and Eastern Europe proper , as well as the lands to the west of the Indus and Oxus rivers .
The empire had a centralized , bureaucratic administration under the emperor , a large professional army , and civil services , inspiring similar developments in later empires .
Together with their neighboring arch-rival , the Roman-Byzantines , they made up the world 's two most dominant powers at the time , for over four centuries .
The prolonged and gradual process of the Islamization of Iran began following the conquest .
As a result , the mamluks gained a significant political power .
The Seljuks subsequently gave rise to the Sultanate of Rum in Anatolia , while taking their thoroughly Persianized identity with them .
The result of the adoption and patronage of Persian culture by Turkish rulers was the development of a distinct Turko-Persian tradition .
Beginning with Azerbaijan , he subsequently extended his authority over all of the Iranian territories , and established an intermittent Iranian hegemony over the vast relative regions , reasserting the Iranian identity within large parts of the Greater Iran .
The Safavid Era saw the start of mass integration from Caucasian populations into new layers of the society of Iran , as well as mass resettlement of them within the heartlands of Iran , playing a pivotal role in the history of Iran for centuries onwards .
The Persian Campaign commenced furthermore during World War I in Northwestern Iran after an Ottoman invasion , as part of the Middle Eastern Theatre of World War I .
Apart from the rule of Aqa Mohammad Khan , the Qajar rule is characterized as a century of misrule .
The presence of so many foreign troops in the nation also culminated in the Soviet-backed establishment of two puppet regimes in the nation ; the Azerbaijan People 's Government , and the Republic of Mahabad .
By 1974 , the economy of Iran was experiencing double digit inflation , and despite many large projects to modernize the country , corruption was rampant and caused large amounts of waste .
By the late 1970s , many of these people opposed the Shah 's regime and began to organize and join the protests against it .
In July 1982 , with Iraq thrown on the defensive , Iran took the decision to invade Iraq and conducted countless offensives in a bid to conquer Iraqi territory and capture cities , such as Basra .
Iran consists of the Iranian Plateau with the exception of the coasts of the Caspian Sea and Khuzestan Province .
On the northern edge of the country -LRB- the Caspian coastal plain -RRB- temperatures rarely fall below freezing and the area remains humid for the rest of the year .
The coastal plains of the Persian Gulf and Gulf of Oman in southern Iran have mild winters , and very humid and hot summers .
The ruins of Persepolis and Pasargadae , two of the four capitals of the Achaemenid Empire , are located around the modern-day city of Shiraz .
The others are elected by the Iranian Parliament from among the jurists nominated by the Head of the Judiciary .
The Council interprets the constitution and may veto Parliament .
If a law is deemed incompatible with the constitution or Sharia -LRB- Islamic law -RRB- , it is referred back to Parliament for revision .
The Court 's rulings are final and can not be appealed .
As with the presidential and parliamentary elections , the Guardian Council determines candidates ' eligibility .
The Assembly elects the Supreme Leader and has the constitutional authority to remove the Supreme Leader from power at any time .
It has not challenged any of the Supreme Leader 's decisions .
Many countries have expressed concern that Iran 's nuclear program could divert civilian nuclear technology into a weapons program .
This would be among the largest troop mobilizations in the world .
Iran 's military doctrine is based on deterrence .
In recent years , official announcements have highlighted the development of weapons such as the Hoot , Kowsar , Zelzal , Fateh-110 , Shahab-3 and Sejjil missiles , and a variety of unmanned aerial vehicles -LRB- UAVs -RRB- .
The objective is to move towards free market prices in a 5-year period and increase productivity and social justice .
Iran has also developed a biotechnology , nanotechnology , and pharmaceuticals industry .
In the early 2000s , the industry faced serious limitations in infrastructure , communications , industry standards and personnel training .
Several organized tours from Germany , France and other European countries come to Iran annually to visit archaeological sites and monuments .
Domestic tourism in Iran is one of the largest in the world .
Weak advertising , unstable regional conditions , a poor public image in some parts of the world , and absence of efficient planning schemes in the tourism sector have all hindered the growth of tourism .
Oil industry output averaged 4 million barrels per day -LRB- 640,000 m3/d -RRB- in 2005 , compared with the peak of six million barrels per day reached in 1974 .
In the early years of the 2000s -LRB- decade -RRB- , industry infrastructure was increasingly inefficient because of technological lags .
Few exploratory wells were drilled in 2005 .
In 2004 , a large share of natural gas reserves in Iran were untapped .
Iran is the third country in the world to have developed GTL technology .
Iranian scientists outside Iran have also made some major contributions to science .
Iranian physics is especially strong in string theory , with many papers being published in Iran .
Iranian-American string theorist Kamran Vafa proposed the Vafa-Witten theorem together with Edward Witten .
Since the 1979 Revolution , the persecution of Bahais has increased with executions , the denial of civil rights and liberties , and the denial of access to higher education and employment .
A bas-relief from this period in Taq Bostan depicts a complex hunting scene .
Similar works from the period have been found to articulate movements and actions in a highly sophisticated manner .
It is even possible to see a progenitor of the cinema close-up in one of these works of art , which shows a wounded wild pig escaping from the hunting ground .
The majority of production focused on melodrama and thrillers .
With the screening of the films Kaiser and The Cow , directed by Masoud Kimiai and Dariush Mehrjui respectively in 1969 , alternative films established their status in the film industry .
The continuous presence of Iranian films in prestigious international festivals , such as the Cannes Film Festival , the Venice Film Festival , and the Berlin International Film Festival , attracted world attention to Iranian masterpieces .
Critics considered this a remarkable event in the history of Iranian cinema .
Iran ranks 24th among countries by number of Internet users .
According to the statistics provided by the web information company of Alexa , Google Search and Yahoo! are the most used search engines in Iran .
Direct access to Facebook has been blocked in Iran since the 2009 Iranian presidential election protests , due to organization of the opposition movements on the website ; but however , Facebook has around 12 to 17 million users in Iran who are using virtual private networks and proxy servers to access the website .
Around 90 % of Iran 's e-commerce takes place on the Iranian online store of Digikala , which has around 750,000 visitors per day and more than 2.3 million subscribers .
To achieve a balanced taste , characteristic flavourings such as saffron , dried limes , cinnamon , and parsley are mixed delicately and used in some special dishes .
Onions and garlic are normally used in the preparation of the accompanying course , but are also served separately during meals , either in raw or pickled form .
Other non-governmental estimations regarding the groups other than the Persians and Azerbaijanis roughly congruate with the World Factbook and the Library of Congress .
However , many scholarly and organisational estimations regarding the number of these two groups differ significantly from the mentioned census .
Iranian art encompasses many disciplines , including architecture , painting , weaving , pottery , calligraphy , metalworking , and stonemasonry .
Two sovereign states are located on the islands : Ireland -LRB- which covers roughly five-sixths of the island with the same name -RRB- and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland .
During the Silurian period the north-western regions collided with the south-east , which had been part of a separate continental landmass .
The topography of the islands is modest in scale by global standards .
The North Atlantic Drift brings significant moisture and raises temperatures 11 °C -LRB- 20 °F -RRB- above the global average for the latitude .
This led to a landscape which was long dominated by temperate rainforest , although human activity has since cleared the vast majority of forest cover .
Great Britain became an island by 5600 BC .
The first Anglo-Saxons arrived as Roman power waned in the 5th century and eventually dominated the bulk of what is now England .
The subsequent Norman conquest of England in 1066 and the later Angevin partial conquest of Ireland from 1169 led to the imposition of a new Norman ruling elite across much of Britain and parts of Ireland .
By the Late Middle Ages , Great Britain was separated into the Kingdoms of England and Scotland , while control in Ireland fluxed between Gaelic kingdoms , Hiberno-Norman lords and the English-dominated Lordship of Ireland , soon restricted only to The Pale .
The 1603 Union of the Crowns , Acts of Union 1707 and Acts of Union 1800 attempted to consolidate Britain and Ireland into a single political unit , the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , with the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands remaining as Crown Dependencies .
The expansion of the British Empire and migrations following the Irish Famine and Highland Clearances resulted in the distribution of the islands ' population and culture throughout the world and a rapid de-population of Ireland in the second half of the 19th century .
Within them , they are also sometimes referred to as these islands .
In the 1st century BC , Diodorus Siculus has Prettanikē nēsos , `` the British Island '' , and Prettanoi , `` the Britons '' .
Strabo used Βρεττανική -LRB- Brettanike -RRB- , and Marcian of Heraclea , in his Periplus maris exteri , used αἱ Πρεττανικαί νῆσοι -LRB- the Prettanic Isles -RRB- to refer to the islands .
Today , this name is seen by some as carrying imperialist overtones although it is still commonly used .
Nonetheless , British Isles is still the most widely accepted term for the archipelago .
The British Isles lie at the juncture of several regions with past episodes of tectonic mountain building .
These orogenic belts form a complex geology that records a huge and varied span of Earth 's history .
Baltica formed roughly the northwestern half of Ireland and Scotland .
Lakes on the islands are generally not large , although Lough Neagh in Northern Ireland is an exception , covering 150 square miles -LRB- 390 km2 -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The largest freshwater body in Great Britain -LRB- by area -RRB- is Loch Lomond at 27.5 square miles -LRB- 71 km2 -RRB- , and Loch Ness , by volume whilst Loch Morar is the deepest freshwater body in the British Isles , with a maximum depth of 310 m -LRB- 1,017 ft -RRB- .
There are a number of major rivers within the British Isles .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The river Severn at 220 mi -LRB- 354 km -RRB- -LSB- citation needed -RSB- is the longest in Great Britain .
The isles have a temperate marine climate .
The North Atlantic Drift -LRB- `` Gulf Stream '' -RRB- which flows from the Gulf of Mexico brings with it significant moisture and raises temperatures 11 °C -LRB- 20 °F -RRB- above the global average for the islands ' latitudes .
Most Atlantic depressions pass to the north of the islands , combined with the general westerly circulation and interactions with the landmass , this imposes an east-west variation in climate .
The islands enjoy a mild climate and varied soils , giving rise to a diverse pattern of vegetation .
There are however , fewer numbers of species , with Ireland having even less .
As with most of Europe , prehistoric Britain and Ireland were covered with forest and swamp .
By the 18th century , most of Britain 's forests were consumed for shipbuilding or manufacturing charcoal and the nation was forced to import lumber from Scandinavia , North America , and the Baltic .
Most forest land in Ireland is maintained by state forestation programmes .
Almost all land outside urban areas is farmland .
However , relatively large areas of forest remain in east and north Scotland and in southeast England .
Oak , elm , ash and beech are amongst the most common trees in England .
In Scotland , pine and birch are most common .
Beech and lime , though not native to Ireland , are also common there .
Farmland hosts a variety of semi-natural vegetation of grasses and flowering plants .
Woods , hedgerows , mountain slopes and marshes host heather , wild grasses , gorse and bracken .
Other small mammals , such as rabbits , foxes , badgers , hares , hedgehogs , and stoats , are very common and the European beaver has been reintroduced in parts of Scotland .
Wild boar have also been reintroduced to parts of southern England , following escapes from boar farms and illegal releases .
Many rivers contain otters and seals are common on coasts .
Large birds are declining in number , except for those kept for game such as pheasant , partridge , and red grouse .
Sea fish include dogfish , cod , sole , pollock and bass , as well as mussels , crab and oysters along the coast .
There are more than 21,000 species of insects .
Few species of reptiles or amphibians are found in Great Britain or Ireland .
This pattern is also true for birds and insects .
In elsewhere on Great Britain and on Ireland , high density of population is limited to areas around , or close to , a few large cities .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Ireland for most of its history comprised a population proportionate to its land area -LRB- about one third of the total population -RRB- .
The Norman languages of Guernésiais , Jèrriais and Sarkese spoken in the Channel Islands are similar to French .
However , English , sometimes in the form of Scots , is the dominant language , with few monoglots remaining in the other languages of the region .
The Norn language of Orkney and Shetland became extinct around 1880 .
Ice covered almost all of what is now Scotland , most of Ireland and Wales , and the hills of northern England .
It is likely that Ireland became settled by sea after it had already become an island .
Initially , their arrival seems to have been at the invitation of the Britons as mercenaries to repulse incursions by the Hiberni and Picts .
This dominance creating what is now England and leaving culturally British enclaves only in the north of what is now England , in Cornwall and what is now known as Wales .
Ireland had been unaffected by the Romans except , significantly , having been Christianised , traditionally by the Romano-Briton , Saint Patrick .
These were later joined by Anglo-Saxon missions of a similar nature .
Though the Vikings were eventually neutralised in Ireland , their influence remained in the cities of Dublin , Cork , Limerick , Waterford and Wexford .
The remnants of the Duchy of Normandy , which conquered England , remain associated to the English Crown as the Channel Islands to this day .
A century later the marriage of the future Henry II of England to Eleanor of Aquitaine created the Angevin Empire , partially under the French Crown .
Though initially intended to be kept as an independent kingdom , the failure of the Irish High King to ensure the terms of the Treaty of Windsor led Henry II , as King of England , to rule as effective monarch under the title of Lord of Ireland .
This title was granted to his younger son but when Henry 's heir unexpectedly died the title of King of England and Lord of Ireland became entwined in one person .
Power in Ireland fluxed between Gaelic kingdoms , Hiberno-Norman lords and the English-dominated Lordship of Ireland .
A similar situation existed in the Principality of Wales , which was slowly being annexed into the Kingdom of England by a series of laws .
During the course of the 15th century , the Crown of England would assert a claim to the Crown of France , thereby also releasing the King of England as from being vassal of the King of France .
Scotland , meanwhile had remained an independent Kingdom .
English colonialism in Ireland of the 16th century was extended by large-scale Scottish and English colonies in Ulster .
Religious division heightened and the King in England came into conflict with parliament .
Ireland , largely Catholic was mainly loyal to the king .
Following defeat to the parliaments army , large scale land distributions from loyalist Irish nobility to English commoners in the service of the parliamentary army created the beginnings a new Ascendancy class which over the next hundred years would obliterate the English -LRB- Hiberno-Norman -RRB- and Gaelic Irish nobility in Ireland .
This theme would influence Irish politics for centuries to come .
When the monarchy was restored in England , the king found it politically impossible to restore all the lands of former land-owners in Ireland .
The `` Glorious Revolution '' of 1688 repeated similar themes : a Catholic king pushing for religious tolerance in opposition to a Protestant parliament in England .
The king 's army was defeated at the Battle of the Boyne and at the militarily crucial Battle of Aughrim in Ireland .
Resistance held out , and a guarantee of religious tolerance was a cornerstone of the Treaty of Limerick .
However , in the evolving political climate , the terms of Limerick were superseded , a new monarchy was installed , and the new Irish parliament was packed with the new elite which legislated increasing intolerant Penal Laws , which discommoded both Dissenters and Catholics .
The Isle of Man and the Channel Islands remaining outside of the United Kingdom but with their ultimate good governance being the responsibility of the British Crown -LRB- effectively the British government -RRB- .
Although , the colonies of North American that would become the United States of America were lost by the start of the 19th century , the British Empire expanded rapidly elsewhere .
Mass migrations following the Irish Famine and Highland Clearances resulted in the distribution of the islands ' population and culture throughout the world and a rapid de-population of Ireland in the second-half of the 19th century .
The Isle of Man and the two states of the Channel Islands , Jersey and Guernsey , are known as the Crown Dependencies .
They exercise constitutional rights of self-government and judicial independence ; responsibility for international representation rests largely upon the UK -LRB- in consultation with the respective governments -RRB- ; and responsibility for defence is reserved by the UK .
The United Kingdom is made up of four constituent parts : England , Scotland and Wales , forming Great Britain , and Northern Ireland in the north-east of the island of Ireland .
For judicial purposes , Scotland , Northern Ireland and England and Wales -LRB- the latter being one entity -RRB- form separate legal jurisdiction , with there being no single law for the UK as a whole .
All parts of the United Kingdom return members to parliament in London .
The British monarch is the head of state for all parts of the isles except for the Republic of Ireland , where the head of state is the President of Ireland .
The Crown Dependencies are not a part of the EU however do participate in certain aspects that were negotiated as a part of the UK 's accession to the EU .
However , since the partition of Ireland , an informal free-travel area had existed across the region .
In the United Kingdom , these pre-date European Union law , and in both jurisdictions go further than that required by European Union law .
These arrangements were made following the 1998 Good Friday Agreement .
The British -- Irish Parliamentary Assembly -LRB- Irish : Tionól Pharlaiminteach na Breataine agus na hÉireann -RRB- predates the British -- Irish Council and was established in 1990 .
Reports on its findings are presented to the Governments of Ireland and the United Kingdom .
During the February 2008 meeting of the British -- Irish Council , it was agreed to set up a standing secretariat that would serve as a permanent ` civil service ' for the Council .
A few cultural events are organised for the island group as a whole .
The Man Booker Prize is awarded to authors from the Commonwealth of Nations and Ireland .
The Mercury Music Prize is handed out every year to the best album from a British or Irish musician or group .
While this is organised separately in different national associations , leagues and national teams , even within the UK , it is a common passion in all parts of the islands .
Ireland play as a united team , represented by players from both Northern Ireland and the Republic .
Also since 2001 the professional club teams of Ireland , Scotland , Wales and Italy compete against each other in the RaboDirect Pro12 .
A rail tunnel was proposed in 1997 on a different route , between Dublin and Holyhead , by British engineering firm Symonds .
Phaininda and episkyros were Greek ball games .
Phaininda , episkyros and harpastum were played involving hands and violence .
They all appear to have resembled rugby football , wrestling and volleyball more than what is recognizable as modern football .
As with pre-codified `` mob football '' , the antecedent of all modern football codes , these three games involved more handling the ball than kicking .
Outfield players mostly use their feet to strike or pass the ball , but may also use their head or torso to do so instead .
The team that scores the most goals by the end of the match wins .
If the score is level at the end of the game , either a draw is declared or the game goes into extra time and/or a penalty shootout depending on the format of the competition .
Association football in itself does not have a classical history .
They were not universally adopted .
During the 1850s , many clubs unconnected to schools or universities were formed throughout the English-speaking world , to play various forms of football .
At a professional level , most matches produce only a few goals .
For example , the 2005 -- 06 season of the English Premier League produced an average of 2.48 goals per match .
Players in these positions are referred to as outfield players , to distinguish them from the goalkeeper .
These positions are further subdivided according to the area of the field in which the player spends most time .
For example , there are central defenders , and left and right midfielders .
The ten outfield players may be arranged in any combination .
The number of players in each position determines the style of the team 's play ; more forwards and fewer defenders creates a more aggressive and offensive-minded game , while the reverse creates a slower , more defensive style of play .
While players typically spend most of the game in a specific position , there are few restrictions on player movement , and players can switch positions at any time .
The only school to be represented on this occasion was Charterhouse .
The Freemason 's Tavern was the setting for five more meetings between October and December , which eventually produced the first comprehensive set of rules .
At the final meeting , the first FA treasurer , the representative from Blackheath , withdrew his club from the FA over the removal of two draft rules at the previous meeting : the first allowed for running with the ball in hand ; the second for obstructing such a run by hacking -LRB- kicking an opponent in the shins -RRB- , tripping and holding .
These rules included handling of the ball by `` marks '' and the lack of a crossbar , rules which made it remarkably similar to Victorian rules football being developed at that time in Australia .
The growing popularity of the international game led to the admittance of FIFA representatives to the International Football Association Board in 1913 .
In many parts of the world football evokes great passions and plays an important role in the life of individual fans , local communities , and even nations .
R. Kapuscinski says that Europeans who are polite , modest , or humble fall easily into rage when playing or watching football games .
The growth in women 's football has seen major competitions being launched at both national and international level mirroring the male competitions .
Women 's football has faced many struggles .
Association football is played in accordance with a set of rules known as the Laws of the Game .
Although players usually use their feet to move the ball around , they may use any part of their body -LRB- notably , `` heading '' with the forehead -RRB- other than their hands or arms .
After a stoppage , play recommences with a specified restart .
The same laws are designed to apply to all levels of football , although certain modifications for groups such as juniors , seniors , women and people with physical disabilities are permitted .
In addition to the seventeen laws , numerous IFAB decisions and other directives contribute to the regulation of football .
Goalkeepers are the only players allowed to play the ball with their hands or arms , provided they do so within the penalty area in front of their own goal .
In front of the goal is the penalty area .
Other markings define the position of the ball or players at kick-offs , goal kicks , penalty kicks and corner kicks .
Each half runs continuously , meaning that the clock is not stopped when the ball is out of play .
There is usually a 15-minute half-time break between halves .
The end of the match is known as full-time .
The referee is the official timekeeper for the match , and may make an allowance for time lost through substitutions , injured players requiring attention , or other stoppages .
This added time is called additional time in FIFA documents , but is most commonly referred to as stoppage time or injury time , while loss time can also be used as a synonym .
The referee alone signals the end of the match .
In matches where a fourth official is appointed , toward the end of the half the referee signals how many minutes of stoppage time he intends to add .
The fourth official then informs the players and spectators by holding up a board showing this number .
The signalled stoppage time may be further extended by the referee .
Trailing 1 -- 0 and with just two minutes remaining , Stoke were awarded a penalty .
Villa 's goalkeeper kicked the ball out of the ground , and by the time the ball had been recovered , the 90 minutes had elapsed and the game was over .
The same law also states that the duration of either half is extended until the penalty kick to be taken or retaken is completed , thus no game shall end with a penalty to be taken .
In league competitions , games may end in a draw .
Golden goal was used at the World Cup in 1998 and 2002 .
Silver goal was used in Euro 2004 .
Both these experiments have been discontinued by IFAB .
If a player has been dismissed , no substitute can be brought on in their place .
Misconduct may occur at any time , and while the offences that constitute misconduct are listed , the definitions are broad .
In particular , the offence of `` unsporting behaviour '' may be used to deal with most events that violate the spirit of the game , even if they are not listed as specific offences .
A referee can show a yellow or red card to a player , substitute or substituted player .
Some on-field incidents , if considered very serious -LRB- such as allegations of racial abuse -RRB- , may result in competitions deciding to impose heavier sanctions than those normally associated with a red card .
Before the inception of the World Cup , the Olympics -LRB- especially during the 1920s -RRB- had the same status as the World Cup .
In the past the Olympics have allowed a restricted number of over-age players per team .
After the World Cup , the most important international football competitions are the continental championships , which are organised by each continental confederation and contested between national teams .
The FIFA Confederations Cup is contested by the winners of all six continental championships , the current FIFA World Cup champions and the country which is hosting the Confederations Cup .
The most prestigious competitions in club football are the respective continental championships , which are generally contested between national champions , for example the UEFA Champions League in Europe and the Copa Libertadores in South America .
Teams are placed into tables , placing them in order according to points accrued .
At the end of a season , the top team is declared the champion .
Common reasons for a substitution include injury , tiredness , ineffectiveness , a tactical switch , or timewasting at the end of a finely poised game .
In standard adult matches , a player who has been substituted may not take further part in a match .
IFAB recommends `` that a match should not continue if there are fewer than seven players in either team . ''
In America the term `` Georgian '' is generally used to describe all building from the period , regardless of style ; in Britain it is generally restricted to buildings that are `` architectural in intention '' , and have stylistic characteristics that are typical of the period , though that covers a wide range .
From the mid-18th century , Georgian styles were assimilated into an architectural vernacular that became part and parcel of the training of every architect , designer , builder , carpenter , mason and plasterer , from Edinburgh to Maryland .
Other prominent architects of the early Georgian period include James Paine , Robert Taylor , and John Wood , the Elder .
The styles that resulted fall within several categories .
From the mid-1760s a range of Neoclassical modes were fashionable , associated with the British architects Robert Adam , James Gibbs , Sir William Chambers , James Wyatt , George Dance the Younger , Henry Holland and Sir John Soane .
A single block was typical , with a perhaps a small court for carriages at the front marked off by railings and a gate , but rarely a stone gatehouse , or side wings around the court .
Some windows were subsequently bricked-in .
The views to and from the front and rear of the main block were concentrated on , with the side approaches usually much less important .
The roofline was generally clear of ornament except for a balustrade or the top of a pediment .
Where , as often , a new street or set of streets was developed , the road and pavements were raised up , and the gardens or yards behind the houses at a lower level , usually representing the original one .
In early and central schemes of development , plots were sold and built on individually , though there was often an attempt to enforce some uniformity , but as development reached further out schemes were increasingly built as a uniform scheme and then sold .
The late Georgian period saw the birth of the semi-detached house , planned systematically , as a suburban compromise between the terraced houses of the city and the detached `` villas '' further out , where land was cheaper .
There had been occasional examples in town centres going back to medieval times .
Most early suburban examples are large , and in what are now the outer fringes of Central London , but were then in areas being built up for the first time .
Especially in country parishes , the external appearance generally retained the familiar signifiers of a Gothic church , with a tower or spire , a large west front with one or more doors , and very large windows along the nave , but all with any ornament drawn from the classical vocabulary .
Where funds permitted , a classical temple portico with columns and a pediment might be used at the west front .
Public buildings generally varied between the extremes of plain boxes with grid windows and Italian Late Renaissance palaces , depending on budget .
Barracks and other less prestigious buildings could be as functional as the mills and factories that were growing increasingly large by the end of the period .
Georgian architecture was widely disseminated in the English colonies during the Georgian era .
The United States did not recognize Liberia 's independence until during the American Civil War on February 5 , 1862 .
The Black American settlers carried their culture with them to Liberia .
In January 3 , 1848 Joseph Jenkins Roberts , a wealthy free-born Black American from Virginia who settled in Liberia , was elected as Liberia 's first president after the people proclaimed independence .
A peace agreement in 2003 led to democratic elections in 2005 .
Recovery proceeds but about 85 % of the population live below the international poverty line .
These new inhabitants brought skills such as cotton spinning , cloth weaving , iron smelting , rice and sorghum cultivation , and social and political institutions from the Mali and Songhai empires .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Some abolitionists collaborated on relocation of free blacks , as they were discouraged by discrimination against them in the North and believed they would never be accepted in the larger society .
Leading activists in the North strongly opposed the ACS , but some free blacks were ready to try a different environment .
They knew nothing of their cultures , languages or animist religion .
Because of feeling set apart and superior by their culture and education to the indigenous peoples , the Americo-Liberians developed as a small elite that held on to political power .
Because of the cultural gap between the groups and assumption of superiority of western culture , the Americo-Liberians envisioned creating a western-style state to which the tribesmen should assimilate .
A peace deal between warring parties was reached in 1995 , leading to Taylor 's election as president in 1997 .
Under heavy pressure from the international community and the domestic Women of Liberia Mass Action for Peace movement , Taylor resigned in August 2003 and went into exile in Nigeria .
Nimba is the largest of the counties in size at 11,551 km2 -LRB- 4,460 sq mi -RRB- , while Montserrado is the smallest at 1,909 km2 -LRB- 737 sq mi -RRB- .
Montserrado is also the most populous county with 1,144,806 residents as of the 2008 census .
Each House member represents an electoral district within a county as drawn by the National Elections Commission and is elected by a plurality of the popular vote of their district into a six-year term .
Senators serve nine-year terms and are elected at-large by a plurality of the popular vote .
The vice president serves as the President of the Senate , with a President pro tempore serving in their absence .
The judiciary is further divided into circuit and speciality courts , magistrate courts and justices of the peace .
The judicial system is a blend of common law , based on Anglo-American law , and customary law .
An informal system of traditional courts still exists within the rural areas of the country , with trial by ordeal remaining common despite being officially outlawed .
In 2011 , the country 's nominal GDP was US$ 1.154 billion , while nominal GDP per capita stood at US$ 297 , the third-lowest in the world .
Upon the end of the war in 2003 , GDP growth began to accelerate , reaching 9.4 % in 2007 .
Especially palm oil companies like Sime Darby -LRB- Malaysia -RRB- and Golden Veroleum -LRB- USA -RRB- are being accused by critics of the destruction of livelihoods and the displacement of local communities , enabled through government concessions .
Americo-Liberians , who are descendants of African American and West Indian , mostly Barbadian settlers , make up 2.5 % .
These latter two groups established political control in the 19th century which they kept well into the 20th century .
Numerous immigrants have come as merchants and become a major part of the business community , including Lebanese , Indians , and other West African nationals .
In other areas children are required to pay a tuition fee to attend school .
A number of highly communicable diseases are widespread , including tuberculosis , diarrheal diseases and malaria .
Approximately 58.2 % -- 66 % of women are estimated to have undergone female genital mutilation .
Windows 8 was released to a mixed critical reception .
Three milestone releases of Windows 8 leaked to the general public .
It was also probably the first appearance of the Metro-style font , and its wallpaper had the text shhh ... let 's not leak our hard work .
However , its detailed build number reveals that the build was created on September 22 , 2010 .
The leaked copy edition was Enterprise edition .
The OS still reads as `` Windows 7 '' .
This build introduced a new ribbon in Windows Explorer .
The `` Windows 7 '' logo was temporarily replaced with text displaying `` Microsoft Confidential '' .
On June 17 , 2011 , build 7989 64-bit edition was leaked .
It introduced a new boot screen featuring the same fish as the default Windows 7 Beta wallpaper , which was later scrapped , and the circling dots as featured in the final -LRB- although the final version comes with smaller circling dots throbber -RRB- .
It also had the text Welcome below them , although this was also scrapped .
The Windows Store was announced during the presentation , but was not available in this build .
On August 15 , 2012 , Windows 8 was made available to download for MSDN and TechNet subscribers .
Windows 8 was made available for students with a DreamSpark Premium subscription on August 22 , 2012 , earlier than advertised .
Windows 8 provides heavier integration with online services from Microsoft and others .
A SkyDrive client for the desktop and File Explorer is not included in Windows 8 , and must be downloaded separately .
Other bundled apps provide the ability to link Flickr and Facebook .
The Internet Explorer app does not support plugins or ActiveX components , but includes a version of Adobe Flash Player that is optimized for touch and low power usage .
The desktop version does not contain these limitations .
Windows 8 introduces a new style of application , Windows Store apps .
Apps can run either in a full-screen mode , or be snapped to the side of a screen .
Apps can provide toast notifications on screen or animate their tiles on the Start screen with dynamic content .
Windows Store apps run within a new set of APIs known as Windows Runtime , which supports programming languages such as C , C++ , Visual Basic .
NET , C# , along with HTML5 and JavaScript .
The term was phased out in August 2012 ; a Microsoft spokesperson denied rumors that the change was related to a potential trademark issue , and stated that `` Metro '' was only a codename that would be replaced prior to Windows 8 's release .
Following these reports , the terms `` Modern UI-style apps '' , `` Windows 8-style apps '' and `` Windows Store apps '' began to be used by various Microsoft documents and material to refer to the new apps .
An MSDN page explaining the Metro design language uses the term `` Modern design '' to refer to the language as a whole .
Exceptions to the restrictions faced by Windows Store apps are given to web browsers .
In October 2013 , Chrome 's app was changed to mimic the desktop environment used by Chrome OS .
Development of the Firefox app for Windows 8 has since been cancelled , citing a lack of user adoption for the beta versions .
Windows 8 introduces significant changes to the operating system 's user interface , many of which are aimed at improving its experience on tablet computers and other touchscreen devices .
As a form of multi-tasking , apps can be snapped to the side of a screen .
The Start button on the taskbar from previous versions of Windows has been converted into a hotspot in the lower-left corner of the screen , which displays a large tooltip displaying a thumbnail of the Start screen .
Aside from the removal of the Start button and the replacement of the Aero Glass theme with a flatter and solid-colored design , the desktop interface on Windows 8 is similar to that of Windows 7 .
As with prior versions , third-party DVD player software can still be used to enable DVD playback .
:76 Shadow Copy , a component of Windows Explorer that once saved previous versions of changed files , no longer protects local files and folders .
Each edition of Windows 8 includes all of the capabilities and features of the edition below it , and add additional features oriented towards their market segments .
Users of Windows 8 can purchase a `` Pro Pack '' license that upgrades their system to Windows 8 Pro through Add features to Windows .
This license also includes Windows Media Center .
Windows 8 was distributed as a retail box product on DVD , and through a digital download that could be converted into DVD or USB install media .
Several PC manufacturers offered rebates and refunds on Windows 8 upgrades obtained through the promotion on select models , such as Hewlett-Packard -LRB- in the U.S. and Canada on select models -RRB- , and Acer -LRB- in Europe on selected Ultrabook models -RRB- .
The `` full version software '' SKU , which was more expensive but could be installed on computers without an eligible OS or none at all , was discontinued .
Pricing for these new copies remain identical .
The 32-bit version runs on CPUs compatible with x86 architecture 3rd generation -LRB- known as IA-32 -RRB- or newer , and can run 32-bit and 16-bit applications , although 16-bit support must be enabled first .
Microsoft started moving away from this architecture after Windows 95 . -RRB-
Windows RT does not support running IA-32 or x64 applications .
Windows Store apps can either support both the x86 and ARM architectures , or compiled to support a specific architecture .
Concerns were raised that secure boot could prevent or hinder the use of alternate operating systems such as Linux .
It also revealed that ARM devices -LRB- Windows RT -RRB- would be required to have secure boot permanently enabled , with no way for users to disable it .
However , Tom Warren of The Verge noted that other vendors have implemented similar hardware restrictions on their own ARM-based tablet and smartphone products -LRB- including those running Microsoft 's own Windows Phone platform -RRB- , but still argued that Microsoft should `` keep a consistent approach across ARM and x86 , though , not least because of the number of users who 'd love to run Android alongside Windows 8 on their future tablets . ''
No mandate is made regarding the installation of third-party certificates that would enable running alternative programs .
Reviews of the various editions of Windows 8 have been mixed .
Tom Warren of The Verge said that although Windows 8 's emphasis on touch computing was significant and risked alienating desktop users , a `` tablet PC with Windows 8 makes an iPad feel immediately out of date '' due to the capabilities of the operating system 's hybrid model and increased focus on cloud services .
In contrast , an ExtremeTech article said it was Microsoft `` flailing '' and a review in PC Magazine condemned the Metro-style user interface .
Some of the included apps in Windows 8 were considered to be basic and lacking in functionality , but the Xbox apps were praised for their promotion of a multi-platform entertainment experience .
Peter Bright of Ars Technica wrote that while its user interface changes may overshadow them , Windows 8 's improved performance , updated file manager , new storage functionality , expanded security features , and updated Task Manager were still positive improvements for the operating system .
Despite this `` stumbling block '' , Bright said that Windows 8 's interface worked well in some places , but began to feel incoherent when switching between the `` Metro '' and desktop environments , sometimes through inconsistent means .
Tom Warren of The Verge wrote that the new interface was `` as stunning as it is surprising '' , contributing to an `` incredibly personal '' experience once it is customized by the user , but had a steep learning curve , and was awkward to use with a keyboard and mouse .
He noted that while forcing all users to use the new touch-oriented interface was a risky move for Microsoft as a whole , it was necessary in order to push development of apps for the Windows Store .
However , intake of Windows 8 still lags behind that of Windows Vista and Windows 7 at the same point in their release cycles .
This matched sales of Windows 7 over a similar period .
This statistic includes shipments to channel warehouses which now need to be sold in order to make way for new shipments .
Microsoft had similarly cut the price of Windows XP licenses to compete against the early waves of Linux-based netbooks .
Some media outlets falsely reported that the SKU associated with this plan , `` Windows 8.1 with Bing '' , was a variant which would be a free or low-cost version of Windows 8 for consumers using older versions of Windows .
Windows 8.1 was released to OEM hardware partners on August 27 , 2013 , and released publicly as a free download through Windows Store on October 17 , 2013 .
Volume license customers and subscribers to MSDN Plus and TechNet Plus were initially unable to obtain the RTM version upon its release ; a spokesperson said the policy was changed to allow Microsoft to work with OEMs `` to ensure a quality experience at general availability . ''
Windows 8.1 also added support for 3D printing , Miracast media streaming , NFC printing , and Wi-Fi Direct .
Despite its size , however , its climate and topography is diverse , ranging from a cool and mountainous highveld to a hot and dry lowveld .
After the Anglo-Boer War , Swaziland was a British protectorate from 1903 until 1967 .
It regained its independence on 6 September 1968 .
Swaziland is a developing country with a small economy .
Swaziland 's major overseas trading partners are the United States and the European Union .
The majority of the country 's employment is provided by its agricultural and manufacturing sectors .
Swaziland is a member of the Southern African Development Community -LRB- SADC -RRB- , the African Union , the Commonwealth of Nations and the United Nations .
Swaziland derives its name from a later king named Mswati II .
KaNgwane , named for Ngwane III , is an alternative name for Swaziland the surname of whose royal house remains Nkhosi Dlamini .
The extent of their autonomy however was drastically curtailed by Mswati , who attacked and subdued some of them in the 1850s .
Changes to the original constitution proposed by the Legislative Council were accepted by Britain and a new constitution providing for a House of Assembly and Senate was drawn up .
At this point Sobhuza II had ruled Swaziland for 61 years , making him the longest ruling monarch in history .
The king is allowed by the constitution to appoint some members to parliament for special interests .
These special interests are citizens who might have been left out by the electorate during the course of elections or did not enter as candidates .
Special interests could be people of gender , race , disability , the business community , civic society , scholars , chiefs and so on .
The elections are held every five years after dissolution of parliament by the king .
The balloting is done on a non-party basis in all categories .
In 2005 , the constitution was put into effect .
There is still much debate in the country about the constitutional reforms .
Nominations take place at the chiefdoms .
These run from North to South and are determined by altitude .
Several rivers flow through the country , such as the Great Usutu River .
Economic growth in Swaziland has lagged behind that of its neighbours .
Low agricultural productivity in the SNLs , repeated droughts , the devastating effect of HIV/AIDS and an overly large and inefficient government sector are likely contributing factors .
The considerable spending did not lead to more growth and did not benefit the poor .
Much of the increased spending has gone to current expenditures related to wages , transfers , and subsidies .
The recent rapid growth in SACU revenues has , however , reversed the fiscal situation , and a sizeable surplus was recorded since 2006 .
Swaziland 's other key trading partners are the United States and the EU , from whom the country has received trade preferences for apparel exports -LRB- under the African Growth and Opportunity Act -- AGOA -- to the US -RRB- and for sugar -LRB- to the EU -RRB- .
Under these agreements , both apparel and sugar exports did well , with rapid growth and a strong inflow of foreign direct investment .
Swaziland is not poor enough to merit an IMF program ; however , the country is struggling to reduce the size of the civil service and control costs at public enterprises .
The government is trying to improve the atmosphere for foreign direct investment .
15 % of the population follows traditional religions ; other non-Christian religions practised in the country include Islam -LRB- 1 % -RRB- , the Bahá ' í Faith -LRB- 0.5 % -RRB- , and Hinduism -LRB- 0.2 % -RRB- .
Life expectancy had fallen from 61 years in 2000 to 32 years in 2009 .
Many patients have a multi-drug resistant strain , and 83 % are co-infected with HIV .
Education in Swaziland begins with pre-school education for infants , primary , secondary and high school education for general education and training -LRB- GET -RRB- , and universities and colleges at tertiary level .
There is an external public examination -LRB- Junior Certificate -RRB- at the end of the junior secondary that learners have to pass to progress to the senior secondary level .
A few schools offer the Advanced Studies -LRB- AS -RRB- programme in their curriculum .
There are some teaching and nursing assistant colleges around the country .
Ngwane Teacher 's College and William Pitcher College are the country 's teaching colleges .
Other vocational institutions include Nhlangano Agricultural Skills Training Center and Siteki Industrial Training Centre .
At the end of the training , a graduation ceremony takes place where all the local sangoma come together for feasting and dancing .
-LRB- There is no formal competition . -RRB-
The royal family appoints a commoner maiden to be `` induna '' -LRB- captain -RRB- of the girls and she announces over the radio the dates of the ceremony .
She will be an expert dancer and knowledgeable on royal protocol .
One of the King 's daughters will be her counterpart .
The grammatical differences between `` fixed-word-order '' languages -LRB- e.g. English , French , German -RRB- and `` free-word-order '' languages -LRB- e.g. , Greek , Latin , Polish , Russian -RRB- have been no impediment in this regard .
It had come to include virtually any intellectual production anywhere in the world . ''
Schleiermacher favored the latter approach ; he was motivated , however , not so much by a desire to embrace the foreign , as by a nationalist desire to oppose France 's cultural domination and to promote German literature .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
There Arabic texts , Hebrew texts , and Latin texts were translated into the other tongues by Muslim , Jewish and Christian scholars , who also argued the merits of their respective religions .
This and Erasmus ' Latin edition of the New Testament led to a new attitude to translation .
The Septuagint became the source text for later translations into many languages , including Latin , Coptic , Armenian and Georgian .
Airports often have facilities to store and maintain aircraft , and a control tower .
Larger airports may have fixed base operator services , airport aprons , air traffic control centres , passenger facilities such as restaurants and lounges , and emergency services .
The majority of the world 's airports are non-towered , with no air traffic control presence .
There are a number of aids available to pilots , though not all airports are equipped with them .
Many airports have lighting that help guide planes using the runways and taxiways at night or in rain , snow , or fog .
In the U.S. and Canada , the vast majority of airports , large and small , will either have some form of automated airport weather station , a human observer or a combination of the two .
Most of the world 's airports are owned by local , regional , or national government bodies who then lease the airport to private corporations who oversee the airport 's operation .
Bengaluru International Airport and Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport are controlled by GVK Group .
The rest of India 's airports are managed by the Airports Authority of India .
Access from landside areas to airside areas is tightly controlled at most airports .
However , some airports now regulate costs to keep them comparable to `` street prices '' .
This term is misleading as prices often match the manufacturers ' suggested retail price -LRB- MSRP -RRB- but are almost never discounted .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Airports may also contain premium and VIP services .
This can sometimes be part of a reciprocal deal , as when multiple airlines are part of the same alliance , or as a ploy to attract premium customers away from rival airlines .
Such a connection lowers risk of missed flights due to traffic congestion .
Large airports usually have access also through controlled-access highways -LRB- ` freeways ' or ` motorways ' -RRB- from which motor vehicles enter either the departure loop or the arrival loop .
The distances passengers need to move within a large airport can be substantial .
Bisbee-Douglas International Airport in Arizona was declared `` the first international airport of the Americas '' by US president Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1943 .
Pearson Field Airport in Vancouver , Washington had a dirigible land in 1905 and planes in 1911 and is still in use .
Bremen Airport opened in 1913 and remains in use , although it served as an American military field between 1945 and 1949 .
Amsterdam Airport Schiphol opened on September 16 , 1916 as a military airfield , but only accepted civil aircraft from December 17 , 1920 , allowing Sydney Airport in Sydney , Australia -- which started operations in January 1920 -- to claim to be one of the world 's oldest continually operating commercial airports .
Minneapolis-Saint Paul International Airport in Minneapolis-Saint Paul , Minnesota , opened in 1920 and has been in continuous commercial service since .
Of the airports constructed during this early period in aviation , it is one of the largest and busiest that is still currently operating .
Increased aircraft traffic during World War I led to the construction of landing fields .
Aircraft had to approach these from certain directions and this led to the development of aids for directing the approach and landing slope .
In 1922 , the first permanent airport and commercial terminal solely for commercial aviation was opened at Flughafen Devau near what was then Königsberg , East Prussia .
These indicated the proper direction and angle of descent .
The colours and flash intervals of these lights became standardized under the International Civil Aviation Organization -LRB- ICAO -RRB- .
This consisted of two rows of lights that formed a funnel indicating an aircraft 's position on the glideslope .
Additional lights indicated incorrect altitude and direction .
These systems became commonplace in the United States by the 1970s .
The majority of the world 's airports are non-towered , with no air traffic control presence .
This coordinated oversight facilitates safety and speed in complex operations where traffic moves in all three dimensions .
The busiest airports also have clearance delivery , apron control , and other specialized ATC stations .
This includes planes , baggage trains , snowplows , grass cutters , fuel trucks , stair trucks , airline food trucks , conveyor belt vehicles and other vehicles .
They coordinate the sequencing of aircraft in the traffic pattern and direct aircraft on how to safely join and leave the circuit .
They may help to assure smooth traffic flow between departing and arriving aircraft .
There is no technical need within modern aviation for performing this pattern , provided there is no queue .
If for instance an aircraft approaches runway 17 -LRB- which has a heading of approx .
170 degrees -RRB- from the north -LRB- coming from 360/0 degrees heading towards 180 degrees -RRB- , the aircraft will land as fast as possible by just turning 10 degrees and follow the glidepath , without orbit the runway for visual reasons , whenever this is possible .
For smaller piston engined airplanes at smaller airfields without ILS equipment , things are very differently though .
Generally , this pattern is a circuit consisting of five `` legs '' that form a rectangle -LRB- two legs and the runway form one side , with the remaining legs forming three more sides -RRB- .
Each leg is named -LRB- see diagram -RRB- , and ATC directs pilots on how to join and leave the circuit .
One of the main reason for this is that pilots sit on the left side of the airplane , and a Left-hand patterns improves their visibility of the airport and pattern .
Right-handed patterns do exist , usually because of obstacles such as a mountain , or to reduce noise for local residents .
The predetermined circuit helps traffic flow smoothly because all pilots know what to expect , and helps reduce the chance of a mid-air collision .
This then allows aircraft to take the most direct approach path to the runway and land without worrying about interference from other aircraft .
While this system keeps the airspace free and is simpler for pilots , it requires detailed knowledge of how aircraft are planning to use the airport ahead of time and is therefore only possible with large commercial airliners on pre-scheduled flights .
The system has recently become so advanced that controllers can predict whether an aircraft will be delayed on landing before it even takes off ; that aircraft can then be delayed on the ground , rather than wasting expensive fuel waiting in the air .
There are a number of aids available to pilots , though not all airports are equipped with them .
VORs are often accompanied by a distance measuring equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- to determine the distance to the VOR .
VORs are also located off airports , where they serve to provide airways for aircraft to navigate upon .
The number of instrument approaches based on the use of the Global Positioning System -LRB- GPS -RRB- is rapidly increasing and may eventually be the primary means for instrument landings .
The fields must be kept clear of debris using cleaning equipment so that loose material does not become a projectile and enter an engine duct -LRB- see foreign object damage -RRB- .
For waiting aircraft , equipment is used to spray special deicing fluids on the wings .
Many ground crew at the airport work at the aircraft .
It keeps the electricity running in the plane when it stands at the terminal .
The engines are not working , therefore they do not generate the electricity , as they do in flight .
There is a cleaning service to clean the aircraft after the aircraft lands .
Flight catering provides the food and drinks on flights .
A toilet waste truck removes the human waste from the tank which holds the waste from the toilets in the aircraft .
A water truck fills the water tanks of the aircraft .
A fuel transfer vehicle transfers aviation fuel from fuel tanks underground , to the aircraft tanks .
A tractor and its dollies bring in luggage from the terminal to the aircraft .
They also carry luggage to the terminal if the aircraft has landed , and is being unloaded .
Hi-loaders lift the heavy luggage containers to the gate of the cargo hold .
The ground crew push the luggage containers into the hold .
If it has landed , they rise , the ground crew push the luggage container on the hi-loader , which carries it down .
The luggage container is then pushed on one of the tractors dollies .
The conveyor , which is a conveyor belt on a truck , brings in the awkwardly shaped , or late luggage .
The airbridge is used again by the new passengers to embark the aircraft .
The tow tractor pushes the aircraft away from the terminal to a taxi area .
The airport charges the airline for the time the aircraft spends at the airport .
Some airbases , known as military airports , provide facilities similar to their civilian counterparts .
Some airbases are co-located with civilian airports , sharing the same ATC facilities , runways , taxiways and emergency services , but with separate terminals , parking areas and hangars .
Airports have played major roles in films and television programs due to their very nature as a transport and international hub , and sometimes because of distinctive architectural features of particular airports .
They are also one of the major elements in movies such as The V.I.P.s , Airplane !
They have also played important parts in television series like Lost , The Amazing Race , America 's Next Top Model , Cycle 10 which have significant parts of their story set within airports .
In other programmes and films , airports are merely indicative of journeys , e.g. Good Will Hunting .
Most airports welcome filming on site , although it must be agreed in advance and may be subject to a fee .
To film in an airside location , all visitors must go through security , the same as passengers , and be accompanied by a full airside pass holder and have their passport with them at all times .
Sviatoslav I -LRB- died 972 -RRB- achieved the first major expansion of Kievan Rus ' territorial control , fighting a war of conquest against the Khazar Empire .
Later , the Russian term was rendered into Belarusian and Ukrainian as Кіеўская Русь Kijeŭskaja Rus ' and Ки́ївська Русь Kyivs ` ka Rus ' , respectively .
To their north and east were the Vyatichi , and to their south was forested land settled by Slav farmers , giving way to steppelands populated by nomadic herdsmen .
This uncertainty is due largely to a paucity of contemporary sources .
Attempts to address this question instead rely on archaeological evidence , the accounts of foreign observers , legends and literature from centuries later .
To some extent the controversy is related to the foundation myths of modern states in the region .
Normanist theories focus on the earliest written source for the East Slavs , the Russian Primary Chronicle , although even this account was not produced until the 12th century .
Nationalist accounts have suggested that the Rus ' were present before the arrival of the Varangians , noting that only a handful of Scandinavian words can be found in modern Russian and that Scandinavian names in the early chronicles were soon replaced by Slavic names .
Nevertheless , archaeological evidence from the area suggests that a Scandinavian population was present during the 10th century at the latest .
On balance , it seems likely that the Rus ' proper were a small minority of Scandinavians who formed an elite ruling class , while the great majority of their subjects were Slavs .
Considering the linguistic arguments mounted by nationalist scholars , if the proto-Rus ' were Scandinavians , they must have quickly become nativized , adopting Slavic languages and other cultural practices .
Liutprand of Cremona , who was twice an envoy to the Byzantine court -LRB- 949 and 968 -RRB- , identifies the `` Russi '' with the Norse -LRB- `` the Russi , whom we call Norsemen by another name '' -RRB- but explains the name as a Greek term referring to their physical traits -LRB- `` A certain people made up of a part of the Norse , whom the Greeks call -LSB- ... -RSB- the Russi on account of their physical features , we designate as Norsemen because of the location of their origin . '' -RRB-
.
The tribes had no laws , however , and soon began to make war with one another , prompting them to invite the Varangians back to rule them and bring peace to the region :
A short time later , two of Rurik 's men , Askold and Dir , asked him for permission to go to Tsargrad -LRB- Constantinople -RRB- .
Patriarch Photius vividly describes the `` universal '' devastation of the suburbs and nearby islands , and another account further details the destruction and slaughter of the invasion .
The Rus ' turned back before attacking the city itself , due either to a storm dispersing their boats , the return of the Emperor , or in a later account , due to a miracle after a ceremonial appeal by the Patriarch and the Emperor to the Virgin .
In 880-82 , Oleg led a military force south along the Dnieper river , capturing Smolensk and Lyubech before reaching Kiev , where he deposed and killed Askold and Dir , proclaimed himself prince , and declared Kiev the `` mother of Rus ' cities . ''
Oleg set about consolidating his power over the surrounding region and the riverways north to Novgorod , imposing tribute on the East Slav tribes .
By 885 he had subjugated the Poliane , Severiane , Vyatichi , and Radimichs , forbidding them to pay further tribute to the Khazars .
Oleg continued to develop and expand a network of Rus ' forts in Slav lands , begun by Rurik in the north .
In the north , Novgorod served as a commercial link between the Baltic Sea and the Volga trade route to the lands of the Volga Bulgars , the Khazars , and across the Caspian Sea as far as Baghdad , providing access to markets and products from Central Asia and the Middle East .
Trade from the Baltic also moved south on a network of rivers and short portages along the Dnieper known as the `` route from the Varangians to the Greeks , '' continuing to the Black Sea and on to Constantinople .
These commercial connections enriched Rus ' merchants and princes , funding military forces and the construction of churches , palaces , fortifications , and further towns .
In the late 8th century , the collapse of the Göktürk Khaganate led the Magyars and the Pechenegs , Ugric and Turkic peoples from Central Asia , to migrate west into the steppe region , leading to military conflict , disruption of trade , and instability within the Khazar Khaganate .
The Rus ' and Slavs had earlier allied with the Khazars against Arab raids on the Caucasus , but they increasingly worked against them to secure control of the trade routes .
The Byzantines established the Theme of Cherson , formally known as Klimata , in the Crimea in the 830s to defend against raids by the Rus ' and to protect vital grain shipments supplying Constantinople .
Cherson also served as a key diplomatic link with the Khazars and others on the steppe , and it became the centre of Black Sea commerce .
The Byzantines arranged for the Magyars to attack Bulgarian territory from the north , and Bulgaria in turn persuaded the Pechenegs to attack the Magyars from their rear .
Boxed in , the Magyars were forced to migrate further west across the Carpathian Mountains into the Hungarian plain , depriving the Khazars of an important ally and a buffer from the Rus ' .
The migration of the Magyars allowed Rus ' access to the Black Sea , and they soon launched excursions into Khazar territory along the sea coast , up the Don river , and into the lower Volga region .
The Pechenegs were thus secure to raid the lands of the Khazars from their base between the Volga and Don rivers , allowing them to expand to the west .
Rus ' relations with the Pechenegs were complex , as the groups alternately formed alliances with and against one another .
The lucrative Rus ' trade with the Byzantine Empire had to pass through Pecheneg-controlled territory , so the need for generally peaceful relations was essential .
Nevertheless , while the Primary Chronicle reports the Pechenegs entering Rus ' territory in 915 and then making peace , they were waging war with one another again in 920 .
Pechenegs are reported assisting the Rus ' in later campaigns against the Byzantines , yet allied with the Byzantines against the Rus ' at other times .
They translated portions of the Bible and drafted the first Slavic civil code and other documents , and the language and texts spread throughout Slavic territories , including Kievan Rus ' .
The mission of Cyril and Methodius served both evangelical and diplomatic purposes , spreading Byzantine cultural influence in support of imperial foreign policy .
The wealth and income of the Rus ' depended heavily upon trade with Byzantium .
Constantine Porphyrogenitus described the annual course of the princes of Kiev , collecting tribute from client tribes , assembling the product into a flotilla of hundreds of boats , conducting them down the Dnieper to the Black Sea , and sailing to the estuary of the Dniester , the Danube delta , and on to Constantinople .
On their return trip they would carry silk fabrics , spices , wine , and fruit .
The importance of this trade relationship led to military action when disputes arose .
The Chronicle glorifies the military prowess and shrewdness of Oleg , an account imbued with legendary detail .
Byzantine sources do not mention the attack , but a pair of treaties in 907 and 911 set forth a trade agreement with the Rus ' , the terms suggesting pressure on the Byzantines , who granted the Rus ' quarters and supplies for their merchants and tax-free trading privileges in Constantinople .
Oleg goes to visit the horse and stands over the carcass , gloating that he had outlived the threat , when a snake strikes him from among the bones , and he soon becomes ill and dies .
The Rus ' burned towns , churches , and monasteries , butchering the people and amassing booty .
Liutprand of Cremona wrote that `` the Rus ' , seeing the flames , jumped overboard , preferring water to fire .
Some sank , weighed down by the weight of their breastplates and helmets ; others caught fire . ''
Those captured were beheaded .
The ploy dispelled the Rus ' fleet , but their attacks continued into the hinterland as far as Nicomedia , with many atrocities reported as victims were crucified and set up for use as targets .
At last a Byzantine army arrived from the Balkans to drive the Rus ' back , and a naval contingent reportedly destroyed much of the Rus ' fleet on its return voyage -LRB- possibly an exaggeration since the Rus ' soon mounted another attack -RRB- .
The outcome indicates increased military might by Byzantium since 911 , suggesting a shift in the balance of power .
Igor returned to Kiev keen for revenge .
The Emperor sent gifts and offered tribute in lieu of war , and the Rus ' accepted .
The agreement again focused on trade , but this time with terms less favorable to the Rus ' , including stringent regulations on the conduct of Rus ' merchants in Cherson and Constantinople and specific punishments for violations of the law .
The Byzantines may have been motivated to enter the treaty out of concern of a prolonged alliance of the Rus ' , Pechenegs , and Bulgarians against them , though the more favorable terms further suggest a shift in power .
His decade-long reign over Rus ' was marked by rapid expansion through the conquest of the Khazars of the Pontic steppe and the invasion of the Balkans .
In contrast with his mother 's conversion to Christianity , Sviatoslav , like his druzhina , remained a staunch pagan .
Due to his abrupt death in an ambush in 972 , Sviatoslav 's conquests , for the most part , were not consolidated into a functioning empire , while his failure to establish a stable succession led to a fratricidal feud among his sons , which resulted in two of his three sons being killed .
The Grand Prince -LRB- `` velikiy kniaz ' '' -RRB- of Kiev controlled the lands around the city , and his formally subordinate relatives ruled the other cities and paid him tribute .
Both rulers continued the steady expansion of Kievan Rus ' that had begun under Oleg .
In Scandinavia , with the help of his relative Earl Håkon Sigurdsson , ruler of Norway , Vladimir assembled a Viking army and reconquered Novgorod and Kiev from Yaropolk .
The Primary Chronicle states that when Vladimir had decided to accept a new faith instead of the traditional idol-worship -LRB- paganism -RRB- of the Slavs , he sent out some of his most valued advisors and warriors as emissaries to different parts of Europe .
They visited the Christians of the Latin Rite , the Jews , and the Muslims before finally arriving in Constantinople .
They rejected Islam because , among other things , it prohibited the consumption of alcohol , and Judaism because the god of the Jews had permitted his chosen people to be deprived of their country .
They found the ceremonies in the Roman church to be dull .
But at Constantinople , they were so astounded by the beauty of the cathedral of Hagia Sophia and the liturgical service held there that they made up their minds there and then about the faith they would like to follow .
Adherence to the Eastern Church had long-range political , cultural , and religious consequences .
In contrast , educated people in medieval Western and Central Europe learned Latin .
Enjoying independence from the Roman authority and free from tenets of Latin learning , the East Slavs developed their own literature and fine arts , quite distinct from those of other Eastern Orthodox countries .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- -LRB- See Old East Slavic language and Architecture of Kievan Rus for details -RRB- .
Following the Great Schism of 1054 , the Rus ' church maintained communion with both Rome and Constantinople for some time , but along with most of the Eastern churches it eventually split to follow the Eastern Orthodox .
That being said , unlike other parts of the Greek world , Kievan Rus ' did not have a strong hostility to the Western world .
Subsequently , his eldest surviving brother , Svyatopolk the Accursed , killed three of his other brothers and seized power in Kiev .
Yaroslav , with the active support of the Novgorodians and the help of Viking mercenaries , defeated Svyatopolk and became the grand prince of Kiev in 1019 .
Like Vladimir , Yaroslav was eager to improve relations with the rest of Europe , especially the Byzantine Empire .
Yaroslav 's granddaughter , Eupraxia the daughter of his son Vsevolod I , Prince of Kiev , was married to Henry III , Holy Roman Emperor .
Yaroslav also arranged marriages for his sister and three daughters to the kings of Poland , France , Hungary and Norway .
Yaroslav promulgated the first East Slavic law code , Russkaya Pravda ; built Saint Sophia Cathedral in Kiev and Saint Sophia Cathedral in Novgorod ; patronized local clergy and monasticism ; and is said to have founded a school system .
Yaroslav 's sons developed the great Kiev Pechersk Lavra -LRB- monastery -RRB- , which functioned in Kievan Rus ' as an ecclesiastical academy .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Three of Yaroslav 's sons that first allied together found themselves fighting each other especially after their defeat to the Cuman forces in 1068 at the Battle of the Alta River .
At the same time an uprising took place in Kiev , bringing to power Vseslav of Polotsk who supported the traditional Slavic paganism .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- The affairs became even more complicated by the end of the 11th century driving the state into chaos and constant warfare .
However even though that did not really stop the fighting , it certainly cooled things off .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
After his death in 1132 the Kievan Rus ' fell into recession and a rapid decline , and Mstislav 's successor Yaropolk II of Kiev instead of focussing on the external threat of the Cumans was embroiled in conflicts with the growing power of the Novgorod Republic .
The sack of the city fundamentally changed the perception of Kiev and was evidence of the fragmentation of the Kievan Rus ' .
Concurrently with it the Ruthenian Federation of Kievan Rus ' started to disintegrate into smaller principalities as the Rurik dynasty grew .
The local Orthodox Christianity of Kievan Rus ' , while struggling to establish itself in the predominantly pagan state and losing its main base in Constantinople was on the brink of extinction .
Some of the main regional centres that developed later were Novgorod , Chernigov , Galich , Kiev , Ryazan , Vladimir-upon-Klyazma , Vladimir of Volyn and Polotsk .
A local oligarchy ruled Novgorod ; major government decisions were made by a town assembly , which also elected a prince as the city 's military leader .
Since then Novgorod enjoyed a wide degree of autonomy although being closely associated with the Kievan Rus .
The combined principality of Vladimir-Suzdal asserted itself as a major power in Kievan Rus ' in the late 12th century .
In 1169 Prince Andrey Bogolyubskiy of Vladimir-Suzdal sacked the city of Kiev and took over the title of the -LRB- Великий Князь / Velikiy Knyaz/Grand Prince or Grand Duke -RRB- to Vladimir , this way claiming the primacy in Rus ' .
Prince Andrey then installed his younger brother , who ruled briefly in Kiev while Andrey continued to rule his realm from Suzdal .
His son , Prince Daniil -LRB- r. 1238 -- 1264 -RRB- looked for support from the West .
He accepted a crown as a `` Rex Rusiae '' -LRB- `` King of Russia '' -RRB- from the Roman papacy , apparently doing so without breaking with Constantinople .
In 1370 , the patriarch of the Eastern Orthodox Church in Constantinople granted the King of Poland a metropolitan for his Russian subjects .
Lithuanian rulers also requested and received a metropolitan for Novagrudok shortly afterwards .
In 1439 , Kiev became the seat of a separate `` Metropolitan of Kiev , Galich and all Rus ' '' for all Greek Orthodox Christians under Polish-Lithuanian rule .
As these communes became larger , the emphasis was taken off the family holdings and placed on the territory that surrounded .
This shift in ideology became known as the verv ' .
Leading soldiers and officials received income and land from the princes in return for their political and military services .
Nevertheless , urban merchants , artisans and labourers sometimes exercised political influence through a city assembly , the veche -LRB- council -RRB- , which included all the adult males in the population .
In some cases , the veche either made agreements with their rulers or expelled them and invited others to take their place .
At the bottom of society was a stratum of slaves .
The widespread personal serfdom characteristic of Western Europe did not exist in Kievan Rus ' .
However , in the 13th century they began to slowly lose their rights and became less equal in the eyes of the law .
Literacy in Kiev , Novgorod and other large cities was high .
As birch bark documents attest , they exchanged love letters and prepared cheat sheets for schools .
The Russkaya Pravda confined punishments to fines and generally did not use capital punishment .
Kievan Rus ' also played an important genealogical role in European politics .
A grandson married the only daughter of the last Anglo-Saxon king of England .
Thus the Rurikids were a well-connected royal family of the time .
Some speculation exists that the Pechenegs drove off the Tivertsi and the Ulichs to the regions of the upper Dniester river in Bukovina .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The exact date of creation of the Kiev Metropolis is uncertain , as well as who was the first leader of the church .
The first metropolitan to be confirmed by historical sources is Theopemp , who was appointed by Patriarch Alexius of Constantinople in 1038 .
Before 1015 there were five dioceses : Kiev , Chernihiv , Bilhorod , Volodymyr , Novgorod , and soon thereafter Yuriy-upon-Ros .
The Kiev Metropolitan sent his own delegation to the Council of Bari in 1098 .
, officially adopting the abbreviated name of its predecessor , the Family Computer -RRB- , or SFC for short .
Although each version is essentially the same , several forms of regional lockout prevent the different versions from being compatible with one another .
It was released in Brazil on September 2 , 1992 , by Playtronic .
However , it took several years for Sega 's system to become successful .
Nintendo executives were in no rush to design a new system , but they reconsidered when they began to see their dominance in the market slipping .
Most of the PAL region versions of the console use the Japanese Super Famicom design , except for labeling and the length of the joypad leads .
The Playtronic Super NES in Brazil , although PAL , uses the North American design .
According to a 2014 Wedbush Securities report based on NPD sales data , the SNES ultimately outsold the Genesis in the U.S. market .
Each region performed separate evaluations .
Nintendo of America also maintained a policy that , among other things , limited the amount of violence in the games on its systems .
While other companies were moving on to 32-bit systems , Rare and Nintendo proved that the SNES was still a strong contender in the market .
This game sent a message that early 32-bit systems had little to offer over the SNES , and helped make way for the more advanced consoles on the horizon .
Internally , a regional lockout chip -LRB- CIC -RRB- within the console and in each cartridge prevents PAL region games from being played on Japanese or North American consoles and vice versa .
The Japanese and North American machines have the same region chip .
Additionally , PAL 's higher resolution results in letterboxing of the output image .
Some commercial PAL region releases exhibit this same problem and , therefore , can be played in NTSC systems without issue while others will face a 20 % speedup if played in an NTSC console .
Later games will detect this setting and refuse to run , requiring the switch to be thrown only after the check completes .
The loading bay surface is curved , both to invite interaction and to prevent food or drinks from being placed on the console and spilling as had happened with the flat surfaced NES .
The Japanese and European versions are more rounded , with darker gray accents and buttons .
The European and American versions of the SNES controllers have much longer cables compared to the Japanese Super Famicom controllers .
in Japan and parts of Latin America .
A fairly normal mapping could easily address up to 95 Mbit of ROM data -LRB- 48 Mbit at FastROM speed -RRB- with 8 Mbit of battery-backed RAM .
However , most available memory access controllers only support mappings of up to 32 Mbit .
The Japanese and PAL region versions incorporate the colors of the four action buttons into system 's logo .
Several later consoles derive elements of their controller design from the SNES , including the PlayStation , Dreamcast , Xbox , and Wii Classic Controller .
Throughout the course of its life , a number of peripherals were released which added to the functionality of the SNES .
Hudson Soft , under license from Nintendo , released the Super Multitap , a multiplayer adapter for use with its popular series of Bomberman games .
Users of the Satellaview could download gaming news and specially designed games , which were frequently either remakes of or sequels to older Famicom titles , released in installments .
At the same time , GameDaily rated it fifth of ten for its graphics , audio , controllers , and games .
Professor Juris Zarins believes the Sumerians were settled along the coast of Eastern Arabia , today 's Persian Gulf region , before it flooded at the end of the Ice Age .
The Amorite `` dynasty of Isin '' persisted until c. 1700 BC , when Mesopotamia was united under Babylonian rule .
The Sumerians were eventually absorbed into the Akkadian -LRB- Assyro-Babylonian -RRB- population .
It appears that this culture was derived from the Samarran culture from northern Mesopotamia .
It is not known whether or not these were the actual Sumerians who are identified with the later Uruk culture .
Eridu remained an important religious center when it was gradually surpassed in size by the nearby city of Uruk .
It is quite possible that the later Sumerian pantheon was modeled upon this political structure .
There was little evidence of organized warfare or professional soldiers during the Uruk period , and towns were generally unwalled .
Cities became walled , and increased in size as undefended villages in southern Mesopotamia disappeared .
-LRB- Gilgamesh is credited with having built the walls of Uruk -RRB- .
In addition , his realm extended to parts of Elam and along the Persian Gulf .
Eannatum 's Stele of the Vultures depicts vultures pecking at the severed heads and other body parts of his enemies .
There are texts written entirely in Old Akkadian dating from c. 2500 BC .
Gelb and Westenholz differentiate three stages of Old Akkadian : that of the pre-Sargonic era , that of the Akkadian empire , and that of the `` Neo-Sumerian Renaissance '' that followed it .
Thorkild Jacobsen has argued that there is little break in historical continuity between the pre - and post-Sargon periods , and that too much emphasis has been placed on the perception of a `` Semitic vs. Sumerian '' conflict .
However , it is certain that Akkadian was also briefly imposed on neighboring parts of Elam that were previously conquered by Sargon .
The last of these eventually came to dominate the south of Mesopotamia as the Babylonian Empire , just as the Old Assyrian Empire had already done so in the north from the late 21st century BC .
This period is generally taken to coincide with a major shift in population from southern Mesopotamia toward the north .
This greatly upset the balance of power within the region , weakening the areas where Sumerian was spoken , and comparatively strengthening those where Akkadian was the major language .
Henceforth Sumerian would remain only a literary and liturgical language , similar to the position occupied by Latin in medieval Europe .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The son of a lu was called a dumu-nita until he married .
A woman -LRB- munus -RRB- went from being a daughter -LRB- dumu-mi -RRB- , to a wife -LRB- dam -RRB- , then if she outlived her husband , a widow -LRB- numasu -RRB- and she could then remarry .
Triangular or wedge-shaped reeds were used to write on moist clay .
Monumental inscriptions and texts on different objects like statues or bricks are also very common .
Many texts survive in multiple copies because they were repeatedly transcribed by scribes-in-training .
Some authors have proposed that there may be evidence of a sub-stratum or add-stratum language for geographic features and various crafts and agricultural activities , called variously Proto-Euphratean or Proto Tigrean , but this is disputed by others .
This continued to influence the whole Mesopotamian mythos .
Describing the way that muddy islands emerge from the confluence of fresh and salty water at the mouth of the Euphrates , where the river deposited its load of silt , a second hieros gamos supposedly created Anshar and Kishar , the `` sky-pivot '' or axle , and the `` earth pivot '' , parents in turn of Anu -LRB- the sky -RRB- and Ki -LRB- the earth -RRB- .
The temples organized the mass labour projects needed for irrigation agriculture .
The temple itself had a central nave with aisles along either side .
After a time the Sumerians began to place the temples on top of multi-layered square constructions built as a series of rising terraces , giving rise to the Ziggurat style .
Those who could afford it sought burial at Dilmun .
It was referenced in the Epic of Gilgamesh when Enkidu was introduced to the food and beer of Gilgamesh 's people : `` Drink the beer , as is the custom of the land ... He drank the beer-seven jugs !
They then dragged the fields with pickaxes .
Unfortunately the high evaporation rate resulted in a gradual increase in the salinity of the fields .
It was provided with a door which turned on a hinge , and could be opened with a sort of key ; the city gate was on a larger scale , and seems to have been double .
The earliest traces of the Babylonian numerals also date back to this period .
There is also anecdotal evidence the Sumerians may have used a type of slide rule in astronomical calculations .
They were the first to find the area of a triangle and the volume of a cube .
They were denominated in barley or other crops and the interest rate was typically much higher than for commercial loans and could amount to 1/3 to 1/2 of the loan principal .
The spearmen are shown arranged in what resembles the phalanx formation , which requires training and discipline ; this implies that the Sumerians may have made use of professional soldiers .
The new concept quickly led to wheeled vehicles and mill wheels .
The first true city-states arose in Sumer , roughly contemporaneously with similar entities in what are now Syria and Lebanon .
Several centuries after the invention of cuneiform , the use of writing expanded beyond debt/payment certificates and inventory lists to be applied for the first time , about 2600 BC , to messages and mail delivery , history , legend , mathematics , astronomical records , and other pursuits .
Its nearest neighbours are Kiribati , Nauru , Samoa and Fiji .
The total land area of the islands of Tuvalu is 26 square kilometres -LRB- 10 sq mi -RRB- .
In 1819 the island of Funafuti was named Ellice 's Island ; the name Ellice was applied to all nine islands after the work of English hydrographer Alexander George Findlay .
Possible evidence of fire in the Caves of Nanumanga may indicate human occupation for thousands of years .
The stories as to the ancestors of the Tuvaluans vary from island to island .
Mourelle 's map and journal named the island El Gran Cocal -LRB- ` The Great Coconut Plantation ' -RRB- ; however , the latitude and longitude was uncertain .
Elekana began proselytising Christianity .
He was trained at Malua Theological College , a London Missionary Society -LRB- LMS -RRB- school in Samoa , before beginning his work in establishing the Church of Tuvalu .
By 1878 Protestantism was well established with preachers on each island .
He then became a trader on Nukufetau .
Captain Davis identified the following traders in the Ellice Group : Edmund Duffy -LRB- Nanumea -RRB- ; Jack Buckland -LRB- Niutao -RRB- ; Harry Nitz -LRB- Vaitupu -RRB- ; John -LRB- also known as Jack -RRB- O'Brien -LRB- Funafuti -RRB- ; Alfred Restieaux and Emile Fenisot -LRB- Nukufetau -RRB- ; and Martin Kleis -LRB- Nui -RRB- .
From 1900 the numbers of palagi traders in Tuvalu declined and the last of the palagi traders were Fred Whibley on Niutao , Alfred Restieaux on Nukufetau , and Martin Kleis on Nui .
The Janet Nicoll visited three of the Ellice Islands ; while Fanny records that they made landfall at Funafuti , Niutao and Nanumea , Jane Resture suggests that it was more likely they landed at Nukufetau rather than Funafuti .
Drilling occurred in 1896 , 1897 and 1898 .
Professor Edgeworth David of the University of Sydney was a member of the 1896 `` Funafuti Coral Reef Boring Expedition of the Royal Society '' , under Professor William Sollas and lead the expedition in 1897 .
Photographers on these trips recorded people , communities , and scenes at Funafuti .
The descriptions of these were published in Memoir III of the Australian Museum Sydney between 1896 and 1900 .
Hedley also wrote the General Account of the Atoll of Funafuti , The Ethnology of Funafuti , and The Mollusca of Funafuti .
Edgar Waite was also part of the 1896 expedition and published an account of The mammals , reptiles , and fishes of Funafuti .
William Rainbow described the spiders and insects collected at Funafuti in The insect fauna of Funafuti .
The United States Marine Corps landed on Funafuti on 2 October 1942 and on Nanumea and Nukufetau in August 1943 .
The islanders assisted the American forces to build airfields on Funafuti , Nanumea and Nukufetau and to unload supplies from ships .
On Funafuti the islanders shifted to the smaller islets so as to allow the American forces to build the airfield and to build naval bases and port facilities on Fongafale .
The second stage occurred on 1 January 1976 when separate administrations were created out of the civil service of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony .
The ministers that form the Cabinet are appointed by the Governor General on the advice of the Prime Minister .
Appeals from the Island Courts and the Lands Courts Appeal Panel are made to the Magistrates Court , which has jurisdiction to hear civil cases involving up to $ T10 ,000 .
From the Court of Appeal there is a right of appeal to Her Majesty in Council , i.e. , the Privy Council in London .
Tuvalu has maintained a mission at the United Nations in New York City since 2000 .
Tuvalu is a member of the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank .
The feasibility of wind power generation will be considered .
Tuvalu participates in the operations of the Pacific Islands Applied Geoscience Commission -LRB- SOPAC -RRB- and the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme -LRB- SPREP -RRB- .
Tuvalu and the other members of the Pacific Island Forum Fisheries Agency -LRB- FFA -RRB- and the United States have settled a tuna fishing deal for 2015 ; a longer term deal will be negotiated .
The treaty is an extension of the Nauru Agreement and provides for US flagged purse seine vessels to fish 8,300 days in the region in return for a payment of US$ 90 million made up by tuna fishing industry and US-Government contributions .
The Pacific ACP States are the countries in the Pacific that are signatories to the Cotonou Agreement with the European Union .
The ulu-aliki and aliki exercise informal authority at the local level .
Ulu-aliki are always chosen based on ancestry .
However the subsequent grant of residence permits to the family was made on grounds unrelated to the refugee claim .
Permanent migration to Australia and New Zealand , such as for family reunification , requires compliance with the immigration legislation of those countries .
The Tuvaluan medical staff at PMH in 2011 comprised the Director of Health & Surgeon , the Chief Medical Officer Public Health , an anaesthetist , a paediatric medical officer and an obstetrics and gynaecology medical officer .
PMH also employs a dentist .
Fetuvalu offers the Cambridge syllabus .
Motufoua offers the Fiji Junior Certificate -LRB- FJC -RRB- at year 10 , Tuvaluan Certificate at Year 11 and the Pacific Senior Secondary Certificate -LRB- PSSC -RRB- at Year 12 , set by the Fiji-based exam board SPBEA .
Nauti School on Funafuti is the largest primary in Tuvalu with more than 900 students -LRB- 45 percent of the total primary school enrolment -RRB- .
The pupil-teacher ratio for Tuvalu is low compared to the Pacific region -LRB- ratio of 1:29 -RRB- .
At the end of their studies the graduates can apply to continue studies either at Motufoua Secondary School or the Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute -LRB- TMTI -RRB- .
Crochet -LRB- kolose -RRB- is one of the art forms practiced by Tuvaluan women .
The traditional foods eaten in Tuvalu are pulaka , taro , bananas , breadfruit and coconut .
Tuvaluans also eat seafood , including coconut crab and fish from the lagoon and ocean .
Under the Falekaupule Act , Falekaupule means `` traditional assembly in each island ... composed in accordance with the Aganu of each island '' .
A popular sport specific to Tuvalu is Ano , which is played with two round balls of 12 cm -LRB- 5 in -RRB- diameter .
The popular sports in Tuvalu include kilikiti , Ano , football , futsal , volleyball , handball , basketball and rugby union .
Tuvalu has sports organisations for athletics , badminton , tennis , table tennis , volleyball , football , basketball , rugby union , weightlifting and powerlifting .
-LRB- He also won bronze in the clean and jerk , and obtained the silver medal overall for the combined event . -RRB-
Two table tennis players attended the 2002 Commonwealth Games in Manchester , England ; Tuvalu entered competitors in shooting , table tennis and weightlifting at the 2006 Commonwealth Games in Melbourne , Australia ; three athletes participated in the 2010 Commonwealth Games in Delhi , India , entering the discus , shot put and weightlifting events ; and a team of 3 weightlifters and 2 table tennis players attended the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow .
On 5 August 2012 , the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund -LRB- IMF -RRB- concluded the Article IV consultation with Tuvalu , and assessed the economy of Tuvalu : `` A slow recovery is underway in Tuvalu , but there are important risks .
GDP grew in 2011 for the first time since the global financial crisis , led by the private retail sector and education spending .
We expect growth to rise slowly '' .
The IMF 2014 Country Report noted that real GDP growth in Tuvalu had been volatile averaging only 1 percent in the past decade .
Agriculture in Tuvalu is focused on coconut trees and growing pulaka in large pits of composted soil below the water table .
The ADB estimates that , at any one time , about 15 % of the adult male population works abroad as seafarers .
Job opportunities also exist as observers on tuna boats where the role is to monitor compliance with the boat 's tuna fishing licence .
Government revenues largely come from sales of fishing licenses , income from the Tuvalu Trust Fund , and from the lease of its highly fortuitous .
In 1998 , Tuvalu began deriving revenue from the use of its area code for premium-rate telephone numbers and from the commercialisation of its '' .
The '' .
Domain name income paid most of the cost of paving the streets of Funafuti and installing street lighting in mid-2002 .
Tuvalu had met targets so that Tuvalu was to graduate from LDC status .
The installation of upgraded transmission equipment allows Radio Tuvalu to be heard on all nine islands of Tuvalu .
Fenui -- news from Tuvalu is a free digital publication of the Tuvalu Media Department that is emailed to subscribers and operates a Facebook page , which publishes news about government activities and news about Tuvaluan events , such as a special edition covering the results of the 2015 general election .
The Nivaga III and Manu Folau provide round trip visits to the outer islands every three or four weeks .
The Manu Folau is a 50-metre vessel that was a gift from Japan to the people of Tuvalu .
In 2015 the United Nations Development Program -LRB- UNDP -RRB- assisted the government of Tuvalu to acquire MV Talamoana , a 30-metre vessel that will be used to implement Tuvalu 's National Adaptation Programme of Action -LRB- NAPA -RRB- to transport government officials and project personnel to the outer islands .
The islets that form the atolls are very low lying .
Nanumanga , Niutao , Niulakita are reef islands and the six true atolls are Funafuti , Nanumea , Nui , Nukufetau , Nukulaelae and Vaitupu .
On the atolls , an annular reef rim surrounds the lagoon with several natural reef channels .
Surveys were carried out in May 2010 of the reef habitats of Nanumea , Nukulaelae and Funafuti and a total of 317 fish species were recorded during this Tuvalu Marine Life study .
However , in 2011 a weak La Niña effect caused a drought by cooling the surface of the sea around Tuvalu .
Households on Funafuti and Nukulaelae were restricted to two buckets of fresh water per day -LRB- 40 litres -RRB- .
The coral base of the atoll was used as fill to create the runway .
In the low areas of Funafuti the sea water can be seen bubbling up through the porous coral rock to form pools with each high tide .
Since 1994 a project has been in development to assess the environmental impact of transporting sand from the lagoon to fill all the borrow pits and low-lying areas on Fongafale .
In 2014 the Tuvalu Borrow Pits Remediation -LRB- BPR -RRB- project was approved in order to fill 10 borrow pits , leaving Tafua Pond , which is a natural pond .
The project was carried out in 2015 with 365,000 sqm of sand being dredged from the lagoon to fill the holes and improve living conditions on the island .
The Environment Protection -LRB- Litter and Waste Control -RRB- Regulation 2013 is intended to improve the management of the importation of non-biodegradable materials .
The highest elevations are typically in narrow storm dunes on the ocean side of the islands which are prone to overtopping in tropical cyclones , as occurred with Cyclone Bebe , which was a very early-season storm that passed through the Tuvaluan atolls in October 1972 .
Cyclone Bebe submerged Funafuti , eliminating 90 % of structures on the island .
Sources of drinking water were contaminated as a result of the system 's storm surge and the flooding of the sources of fresh water .
On Nui the sources of fresh water were destroyed or contaminated .
The flooding in Nui and Nukufetau caused many families to shelter in evacuation centres or with other families .
Of the three northern islands -LRB- Nanumanga , Niutao , Nanumea -RRB- , Nanumanga suffered the most damage , with 60-100 houses flooded , with the waves also causing damage to the health facility .
Vasafua islet , part of the Funafuti Conservation Area , was severely damaged by Cyclone Pam .
The 2011 report of Pacific Climate Change Science Program of Australia concludes , in relation to Tuvalu , states the conclusions that over the course of the 21st century :
For Tuvalu I think we really need to mobilise public opinion in the Pacific as well as in the -LSB- rest of -RSB- world to really talk to their lawmakers to please have some sort of moral obligation and things like that to do the right thing . ''
This misunderstanding of the term immaculate conception is frequently met in the mass media .
The Church celebrates the Feast of the Immaculate Conception -LRB- when Mary was conceived free from original sin -RRB- on 8 December , exactly nine months before celebrating the Nativity of Mary .
The feast of the Annunciation -LRB- which commemorates the virginal conception and the Incarnation of Jesus -RRB- is celebrated on 25 March , nine months before Christmas Day .
In Luke 1:47 , Mary proclaims : `` My spirit has rejoiced in God my Saviour . ''
This is referred to as Mary 's pre-redemption by Christ .
St. Gregory Nazianzen designated Mary as `` prokathartheisa -LRB- prepurified -RRB- . ''
Gregory likely attempted to solve the riddle of the Purification of Jesus and Mary in the Temple through considering the human natures of Jesus and Mary as equally holy and therefore both purified in this manner of grace and glory .
Gregory 's doctrines surrounding Mary 's purification were likely related to the burgeoning commemoration of the Mother of God in and around Constantinople very close to the date of Christmas .
Nazianzen 's title of Mary at the Annunciation as `` prepurified '' was subsequently adopted by all theologians interested in his Mariology to justify the Byzantine equivalent of the Immaculate Conception .
This is especially apparent in the Fathers St. Sophronios of Jerusalem and St. John Damascene , who will be treated below in this article at the section on Church Fathers .
About the time of Damascene , the public celebration of the `` Conception of St. Ann -LSB- i.e. , of the Theotokos in her womb -RSB- '' was becoming popular .
It is admitted that the doctrine as defined by Pius IX was not explicitly mooted before the 12th century .
It is also agreed that `` no direct or categorical and stringent proof of the dogma can be brought forward from Scripture '' .
But it is claimed that the doctrine is implicitly contained in the teaching of the Fathers .
Their expressions on the subject of the sinlessness of Mary are , it is pointed out , so ample and so absolute that they must be taken to include original sin as well as actual .
It is true that he is here speaking directly of actual or personal sin .
Sophronius ' teaching is augmented and incorporated by St. John Damascene -LRB- d. 749/750 -RRB- .
John , besides many passages wherein he extolls the Theotokos for her purification at the Annunciation , grants her the unique honor of `` purifying the waters of baptism by touching them . ''
This honor was most famously and firstly attributed to Christ , especially in the legacy of Nazianzen .
As such , Nazianzen 's assertion of parallel holiness between the prepurified Mary and purified Jesus of the New Testament is made even more explicit in Damascene in his discourse on Mary 's holiness to also imitate Christ 's baptism at the Jordan .
The Damascene 's hymnongraphy and De fide Orthodoxa explicitly use Mary 's `` pre purification '' as a key to understanding her absolute holiness and unsullied human nature .
In fact , Damascene -LRB- along with Nazianzen -RRB- serves as the source for nearly all subsequent promotion of Mary 's complete holiness from her Conception by the `` all pure seed '' of Joachim and the womb `` wider than heaven '' of St. Ann .
The spread of the feast , by now with the adjective `` Immaculate '' attached to its title , met opposition on the part of some , on the grounds that sanctification was possible only after conception .
This decree was reaffirmed by the Council of Trent .
A feast of the Conception of the Blessed Virgin had already begun to be celebrated in some churches of the West .
In doing so , he takes occasion to repudiate altogether the view that the conception of Mary was sinless .
It is doubtful , however , whether he was using the term `` conception '' in the same sense in which it is used in the definition of Pope Pius IX .
and stronger expressions follow , showing that he is speaking of the mother and not of the child .
The most famous Eastern Orthodox theologian to imply Mary 's Immaculate Conception was St. Gregory Palamas .
Though many passages from his works were long known to extol and attribute to Mary a Christlike holiness in her human nature , traditional objections to Palamas ' disposition toward the Immaculate Conception typically rely on a poor understanding of his doctrine of `` the purification of Mary '' at the Annunciation .
Not only did he explicitly cite St. Gregory Nazianzen for his understanding of Jesus ' purification at His baptism and Mary 's at the Annunciation , but Theophanes of Nicaea , Joseph Bryennius , and Gennadios Scholarios all explicitly placed Mary 's Conception as the first moment of her all-immaculate participation in the divine energies to such a degree that she was always completely without spot and graced .
In addition to Emperor Manuel II and Gennadius Scholarius , St. Mark of Ephesus also fervently defended Mary 's title as `` prepurified '' against the Dominican , Manuel Calecas , who was perhaps promoting thomistic Mariology that denied Mary 's all-holiness from the first moment of her existence .
The Holy Spirit permitted the Virgin Mary to remain a true , natural human being of flesh and blood , just as we .
However , he warded off sin from her flesh and blood so that she became the mother of a pure child , not poisoned by sin as we are .
For in that moment when she conceived , she was a holy mother filled with the Holy Spirit and her fruit is a holy pure fruit , at once God and truly man , in one person . ''
And for this reason they say , neither of them were guilty of any sin , like the rest of the children of Adam . ''
should therefore not be taken in isolation from the Quran , and is to be interpreted within the specific context of exonerating Mary and her child from the charges that were made against them and is not a general statement .
The specific mention of Mary and Jesus in this hadith may also be taken to represent a class of people , in keeping with the Arabic language and the Quranic verse -LSB- O Satan -RSB- surely thou shalt have no power over My servants , except such of the erring ones as choose to follow thee -LRB- 15:42 -RRB-
Further claims were made that the Roman Catholic Church derives its doctrine from the Islamic teaching .
That he was speaking of her immaculate conception by her mother , not of her own virginal conception of Jesus , is shown by his footnote : `` In the xiith century the immaculate conception was condemned by St. Bernard as a presumptuous novelty . ''
An example is the antiphon that begins : `` Tota pulchra es , Maria , et macula originalis non est in te '' -LRB- You are all beautiful , Mary , and the original stain -LSB- of sin -RSB- is not in you .
You are all beautiful , Mary , and the original stain -LSB- of sin -RSB- is not in you .
You are the glory of Jerusalem , you are the joy of Israel , you give honour to our people .
You are all beautiful , Mary . -RRB-
Additional imagery may include clouds , a golden light , and cherubs .
In some paintings the cherubim are holding lilies and roses , flowers often associated with Mary .
Grades 1 -- 7 are primary level , grades 8 -- 12 secondary .
It shares land borders with Zambia and Angola to the north , Botswana to the east and South Africa to the south and east .
Its capital and largest city is Windhoek , and it is a member state of the United Nations -LRB- UN -RRB- , the Southern African Development Community -LRB- SADC -RRB- , the African Union -LRB- AU -RRB- , and the Commonwealth of Nations .
The port of Walvis Bay and the offshore Penguin Islands had been annexed by the Cape Colony under the British crown by 1878 and had become an integral part of the new Union of South Africa at its creation in 1910 .
Uprisings and demands by African leaders led the UN to assume direct responsibility over the territory .
The dry lands of Namibia were inhabited since early times by San , Damara , Nama and , since about the 14th century AD , by immigrating Bantu who came with the Bantu expansion from central Africa .
Their encounters with the nomadic Nama tribes were largely peaceful .
The missionaries accompanying the Orlams were well received by them , the right to use waterholes and grazing was granted against an annual payment .
On their way further northwards , however , the Orlams encountered clans of the Herero tribe at Windhoek , Gobabis , and Okahandja which were less accommodating .
Some of them settled in Namibia instead of continuing their journey .
The survivors , when finally released from detention , were subjected to a policy of dispossession , deportation , forced labour , racial segregation and discrimination in a system that in many ways anticipated apartheid .
Although the South African government desired to incorporate ` South-West Africa ' into its territory , it never officially did so , although it was administered as the de facto ` fifth province ' , with the white minority having representation in the whites-only Parliament of South Africa , as well as electing their own local administration the SWA Legislative Assembly .
The South African government also appointed the SWA administrator , who had extensive powers .
In 1966 the International Court of Justice dismissed a complaint brought by Ethiopia and Liberia against South Africa 's continued presence in the territory , but the U.N. General Assembly subsequently revoked South Africa 's mandate , while in 1971 the International Court of Justice issued an `` advisory opinion '' declaring South Africa 's continued administration to be illegal .
During the South African occupation of Namibia , white commercial farmers , most of whom came as settlers from South Africa and represented 0.2 % of the national population , owned 74 % of the arable land .
In 1978 the UN Security Council passed UN Resolution 435 which planned a transition toward independence for Namibia .
As a result , Cuba agreed to pull back its troops in southern Angola sent to support the MPLA in its war for control of Angola with UNITA .
As UNTAG began to deploy peacekeepers , military observers , police , and political workers , hostilities were briefly renewed on the day the transition process was supposed to begin .
After a new round of negotiations , a second date was set and the elections process began in earnest .
After the return of SWAPO exiles -LRB- over 46,000 exiles -RRB- , Namibia 's first one-person one-vote elections for the constitutional assembly took place in November 1989 .
This was won by SWAPO although it did not gain the two-thirds majority it had hoped for ; the South African-backed Democratic Turnhalle Alliance -LRB- DTA -RRB- became the official opposition .
The elections were peaceful and declared free and fair .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The Kalahari , while popularly known as a desert , has a variety of localised environments , including some verdant and technically non-desert areas .
Temperature maxima are limited by the overall elevation of the entire region : only in the far south , Warmbad for instance , are mid-40 °C maxima recorded .
Rainfall is however highly variable , and droughts are common .
The last -LSB- update -RSB- bad rainy season with rainfall far below the annual average occurred in summer 2006/07 .
The only perennial rivers are found on the national borders with South Africa , Angola , Zambia , and the short border with Botswana in the Caprivi .
In the interior of the country surface water is available only in the summer months when rivers are in flood after exceptional rainfalls .
Otherwise , surface water is restricted to a few large storage dams retaining and damming up these seasonal floods and their runoff .
Thus , where people do n't live near perennial rivers or make use of the storage dams , they are dependent on groundwater .
The main goal of this project is promote sustainable natural resource management by giving local communities rights to wildlife management and tourism .
A dynamic member of the Southern African Development Community , Namibia is a vocal advocate for greater regional integration .
This estimate considers people in the informal economy as employed .
Worldwide , Namibia also fared better than Hungary , Brazil and Mexico .
Bloomberg Markets magazine ranked the top 20 based on more than a dozen criteria .
The data came from Bloomberg 's own financial-market statistics , IMF forecasts and the World Bank .
The countries were also rated on areas of particular interest to foreign investors : the ease of doing business , the perceived level of corruption and economic freedom .
In order to attract foreign investment , the government has made improvement in reducing red tape resulted from excessive government regulations making the country one of the least bureaucratic places to do business in the region .
However , facilitation payments are occasionally demanded by customs due to cumbersome and costly customs procedures .
Namibia is also classified as an Upper Middle Income country by the World Bank , and ranks 87th out of 185 economies in terms of ease of doing business .
The inequality figures thus take into account people who do not actually rely on the formal economy for their survival .
While Namibia is known predominantly for its gem diamond and uranium deposits , a number of other minerals are extracted industrially such as lead , tungsten , gold , tin , fluorspar , manganese , marble , copper and zinc .
There are offshore gas deposits in the Atlantic Ocean that are planned to be extracted in the future .
According to `` The Diamond Investigation '' , a book about the global diamond market , from 1978 , De Beers , the largest diamond company , bought most of the Namibian diamonds , and would continue to do so , because `` whatever government eventually comes to power they will need this revenue to survive '' .
There are many lodges and reserves to accommodate eco-tourists .
According to The Namibia Tourism Exit Survey , which was produced by the Millennium Challenge Corporation for the Namibian Directorate of Tourism , 56 % of all tourists visiting Namibia during the time period , 2012 - 2013 , visited Windhoek .
Many of Namibia 's tourism related parastatals and governing bodies such as Namibia Wildlife Resorts , Air Namibia and the Namibia Tourism Board as well as Namibia 's tourism related trade associations such as the Hospitality Association of Namibia are also all headquartered in Windhoek .
As a result , access to improved sanitation has not increased much since independence : In Namibia 's rural areas 13 % of the population had more than basic sanitation , up from 8 % in 1990 .
Although their percentage of population is decreasing due to emigration and lower birth rates they still form the second-largest population of European ancestry , both in terms of percentage and actual numbers , in Sub-Saharan Africa -LRB- after South Africa -RRB- .
Nearly all Portuguese settlers came to the country from the former Portuguese colony of Angola .
The data collection method is to count every person resident in Namibia on the census reference night , wherever they happen to be .
Its implementation is focused on the civil service , education and the broadcasting system .
Some other languages have received semi-official recognition by being allowed as medium of instruction in primary schools .
It is expected of private schools to follow the same policy as state schools , and `` English language '' is a compulsory subject .
He won four Olympic silver medals -LRB- 1992 , 1996 -RRB- and also has medals from several World Athletics Championships .
He is also known for humanitarian activities in Namibia and beyond .
During German rule , the newspapers mainly reflected the living reality and the view of the white German-speaking minority .
The black majority was ignored or depicted as a threat .
During South African rule , the white bias continued , with mentionable influence of the Pretoria government on the `` South West African '' media system .
Independent newspapers were seen as a menace to the existing order , critical journalists threatened .
Furthermore , the print market is complemented with party publications , student newspapers and PR publications .
The African Media Barometer shows similarly positive results .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- However , as in other countries , there is still mentionable influence of representatives of state and economy on media in Namibia .
According to the 2011 UNAIDS Report , the epidemic in Namibia `` appears to be leveling off . ''
As the HIV/AIDS epidemic has reduced the working-aged population , the number of orphans has increased .
It falls to the government to provide education , food , shelter and clothing for these orphans .
Given infection rates this large , as well as a looming malaria problem , it may be very difficult for the government to deal with both the medical and economic impacts of this epidemic .
This distinction is found between pairs of almost all consonants and is one of the most distinguishing features of the language .
Another important aspect is the reduction of unstressed vowels .
Russian is a Slavic language of the Indo-European family .
An East Slavic Old Novgorod dialect , although vanished during the 15th or 16th century , is sometimes considered to have played a significant role in the formation of modern Russian .
Also Russian has notable lexical similarities with Bulgarian due to a common Church Slavonic influence on both languages , as well as because of later interaction in the 19th -- 20th centuries , although Bulgarian grammar differs markedly from Russian .
However , the East Slavic forms have tended to be used exclusively in the various dialects that are experiencing a rapid decline .
For details , see Russian phonology and History of the Russian language .
Command of Russian language , however , is rapidly decreasing among younger Estonians -LRB- primarily being replaced by the command of English -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Russian is spoken by 1.4 % of the population of Finland according to a 2014 estimate from the World Factbook .
Russian is spoken by 29.6 % of the population according to a 2001 estimate from the World Factbook .
20 % of school students receive their education primarily in Russian .
However , younger generations are usually not fluent in it , because Russian is no longer mandatory in the school system .
Significant Russian-speaking groups also exist in Western Europe .
These have been fed by several waves of immigrants since the beginning of the 20th century , each with its own flavor of language .
Russian is spoken by 1.4 % of the population according to a 2009 estimate from the World Factbook .
Russian is the language of 9 % of the population according to the World Factook .
Ethnologue cites Russian as the country 's de facto working language .
According to a 2001 estimate from the World Factbook , 95 % of the population can speak Russian .
Large Russian-speaking communities still exist in northern Kazakhstan , and ethnic Russians comprise 25.6 % of Kazakhstan 's population .
The 2009 census reported that 10,309,500 people , or 84.8 % of the population aged 15 and above , could read and write well in Russian , as well as understand the spoken language .
Sizable Russian-speaking communities also exist in North America , especially in large urban centers of the U.S. and Canada , such as New York City , Philadelphia , Boston , Los Angeles , Nashville , San Francisco , Seattle , Spokane , Toronto , Baltimore , Miami , Chicago , Denver and Cleveland .
In a number of locations they issue their own newspapers , and live in ethnic enclaves -LRB- especially the generation of immigrants who started arriving in the early 1960s -RRB- .
Afterward , the influx from the countries of the former Soviet Union changed the statistics somewhat , with ethnic Russians and Ukrainians immigrating along with some more Russian Jews and Central Asians .
According to the United States Census , in 2007 Russian was the primary language spoken in the homes of over 850,000 individuals living in the United States .
ru sites , but also on 88.7 % of sites with the former Soviet Union domain .
su .
However , Russian is the sixth-most used language on the top 1,000 sites , behind English , Chinese , French , German and Japanese .
Despite leveling after 1900 , especially in matters of vocabulary and phonetics , a number of dialects still exist in Russia .
All dialects also divided in two main chronological categories : the dialects of primary formation -LRB- the territory of the Eastern Rus ' or Muscovy , roughly consists of the modern Central and Northwestern Federal districts -RRB- ; and secondary formation -LRB- other territory -RRB- .
Dialectology within Russia recognizes dozens of smaller-scale variants .
Some of these are relics of ancient usage now completely discarded by the standard language .
Consonants include a fricative / ɣ / , a semivowel / w ~ u̯ / and / x ~ xv ~ xw / , whereas the Standard and Northern dialects have the consonants / ɡ / , / v / , and final / l / and / f / , respectively .
The morphology features a palatalized final / tʲ / in 3rd person forms of verbs -LRB- this is unpalatalized in the Standard and Northern dialects -RRB- .
While these older letters have been abandoned at one time or another , they may be used in this and related articles .
The yers ⟨ ъ ⟩ and ⟨ ь ⟩ originally indicated the pronunciation of ultra-short or reduced / ŭ / , / ĭ / .
Because of many technical restrictions in computing and also because of the unavailability of Cyrillic keyboards abroad , Russian is often transliterated using the Latin alphabet .
Free programs leveraging this Unicode extension are available which allow users to type Russian characters , even on Western ` QWERTY ' keyboards .
The Russian alphabet has many systems of character encoding .
This encoding was and still is widely used in UNIX-like operating systems .
/ Ты съе́л печенье ?
/ Ты съел пече́нье ?
-- Was it you who ate the cookie ?
/ Did you eat the cookie ?
/ Was it the cookie that you ate ? -RRB-
.
Stress marks are mandatory in lexical dictionaries and books for children or Russian learners .
The consonants typically come in plain vs. palatalized pairs , which are traditionally called hard and soft .
-LRB- See also : vowel reduction in Russian . -RRB-
Russian is notable for its distinction based on palatalization of most of the consonants .
In the case of / tʲ / and / dʲ / , the tongue is raised enough to produce slight frication -LRB- affricate sounds -RRB- .
Borrowings and calques from Byzantine Greek began to enter the Old East Slavic and spoken dialects at this time , which in their turn modified the Old Church Slavonic as well .
The political reforms of Peter the Great -LRB- Пётр Вели́кий , Pyótr Velíkiy -RRB- were accompanied by a reform of the alphabet , and achieved their goal of secularization and Westernization .
Even modern readers of younger age may only experience slight difficulties understanding some words in Pushkin 's texts , since relatively few words used by Pushkin have become archaic or changed meaning .
During the Soviet period , the policy toward the languages of the various other ethnic groups fluctuated in practice .
Currently the number speakers of Russian language in the world depends on the number of Russians in the world -LRB- as the main sources distribution Russian language -RRB- and total population Russia -LRB- where Russian is an official language -RRB- .
It is the most recent branch of the U.S. military to be formed , and is the largest and one of the world 's most technologically advanced air forces .
Moreover , different deterrence strategies are required to deter various adversaries , whether they are a nation state , or non-state/transnational actor .
Post-conflict , regeneration of a credible nuclear deterrent capability will deter further aggression .
Finally , the Air Force regularly exercises and evaluates all aspects of nuclear operations to ensure high levels of performance .
Because of their political and military importance , destructive power , and the potential consequences of an accident or unauthorized act , nuclear weapons and nuclear weapon systems require special consideration and protection against risks and threats inherent in their peacetime and wartime environments .
The Air Force continues to pursue safe , secure and effective nuclear weapons consistent with operational requirements .
Adversaries , allies , and the American people must be highly confident of the Air Force 's ability to secure nuclear weapons from accidents , theft , loss , and accidental or unauthorized use .
A major goal of DCA operations , in concert with OCA operations , is to provide an area from which forces can operate , secure from air and missile threats .
The DCA mission comprises both active and passive defense measures .
Passive defense is `` measures taken to reduce the probability of and to minimize the effects of damage caused by hostile action without the intention of taking the initiative '' -LRB- JP 1-02 -RRB- .
It incorporates all elements of Air Force Network Operations , information transport , enterprise management , and information assurance , and is dependent on ISR and all-source intelligence .
These operations may require covert , clandestine , or low-visibility capabilities .
Special operations are applicable across the ROMO .
The rapid and flexible options afforded by airlift allow military forces and national leaders the ability to respond and operate in a variety of situations and time frames .
It is the ability of the US government and its international partners to effect the recovery of isolated personnel across the ROMO and return those personnel to duty .
It includes both foreign partners as well as domestic partners and emphasizes collaboration with foreign governments , militaries and populations as well as US government departments , agencies , industry , and NGOs .
The 1940s proved to be important in other ways as well .
As a result , the USAF fleet is setting new records for average aircraft age and needs to replace its fleets of fighters , bombers , airborne tankers , and airborne warning aircraft , in an age of restrictive defense budgets .
While the intense training has become longer , it also has shifted to include a deployment phase .
The size of the active duty force in 2007 was roughly 64 % of that of what the USAF was at the end of the first Gulf War in 1991 .
Gates in effect fired both men for `` systemic issues associated with declining Air Force nuclear mission focus and performance . ''
The resignations were also the culmination of disputes between the Air Force leadership , populated primarily by non-nuclear background fighter pilots , versus Gates .
The organizational structure as shown above is responsible for the peacetime organization , equipping , and training of aerospace units for operational missions .
In the case of AFSPC , AFSOC , PACAF , and USAFE units , forces are normally employed in-place under their existing CCDR .
The AETF is the Air Force presentation of forces to a CCDR for the employment of Air Power .
Each C-NAF consists of a Commander , Air Force Forces -LRB- COMAFFOR -RRB- and AFFOR/A-staff , and an Air Operations Center -LRB- AOC -RRB- .
If the Air Force possesses the preponderance of air forces in a JFC 's area of operations , the COMAFFOR will also serve as the Joint Forces Air Component Commander -LRB- JFACC -RRB- .
The latter range from flight combat operations such as a gunner , to working in a dining facility to ensure that members are properly fed .
Promotions among enlisted personnel and non-commissioned officers are generally designated by increasing numbers of insignia chevrons .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The promotion from first lieutenant to captain is competitive after successfully completing another two years of service , with a selection rate varying between 99 % and 100 % .
At the 10 to 11 year mark , captains will take part in a selection board to major .
If not selected , they will meet a follow-on board to determine if they will be allowed to remain in the Air Force .
Most of the existing Air Force warrant officers entered the commissioned officer ranks during the 1960s , but small numbers continued to exist in the warrant officer grades for the next 21 years .
While all USAF military personnel are referred to as Airmen , the term also refers to the pay grades of E-1 through E-4 , which are below the level of non-commissioned officers -LRB- NCOs -RRB- .
The Air Force mirrored the Army from 1976 to 1991 with an E-4 being either a Senior Airman wearing three stripes without a star or a Sergeant -LRB- referred to as `` Buck Sergeant '' -RRB- , which was noted by the presence of the central star and considered an NCO .
This is worn with a light blue shirt -LRB- Shade 1550 -RRB- and Shade 1620 herringbone patterned necktie .
USAF personnel assigned to Base Honor Guard duties wear , for certain occasions , a modified version of the standard service dress uniform , but with silver trim on the sleeves and trousers , with the addition of a ceremonial belt -LRB- if necessary -RRB- , wheel cap with silver trim and Hap Arnold Device , and a silver aiguillette placed on the left shoulder seam and all devices and accoutrement .
Over time , various badges have been discontinued and are no longer distributed .
The annual ergo-cycle test which the USAF had used for several years had been replaced in 2004 .
Airmen can potentially earn a score of 100 , with the run counting as 60 % , waist circumference as 20 % , and both strength test counting as 10 % each .
Effective 1 July 2010 , the AFFT is administered by the base Fitness Assessment Cell -LRB- FAC -RRB- , and is required twice a year .
Additionally , only meeting the minimum standards on each one of these tests will not get you a passing score of 75 % , and failing any one component will result in a failure for the entire test .
In the US Air Force , the distinction between bombers , fighters that are actually fighter-bombers , and attack aircraft has become blurred .
Many fighter aircraft , such as the F-16 , are often used as ` bomb trucks ' , despite being designed for aerial combat .
The B-52 Stratofortress airframe design is over 60 years old and the B-52H aircraft currently in the active inventory were all built between 1960 and 1962 .
These aircraft are largely defined in terms of their range capability as strategic airlift -LRB- C-5 -RRB- , strategic/tactical -LRB- C-17 -RRB- , and tactical -LRB- C-130 -RRB- airlift to reflect the needs of the land forces they most often support .
It conducts long-range , special operations missions , and is equipped with extra fuel tanks and terrain-following radar .
Other missions include interception of bombers and other fighters , reconnaissance , and patrol .
The USAF has 2,025 fighters in service as of September 2012 .
This makes these aircraft an essential part of the Air Force 's global mobility and the U.S. force projection .
Daniel L. Magruder , Jr defines USAF culture as a combination of the rigorous application of advanced technology , individualism and progressive airpower theory .
Air Force officers have never felt they needed the formal social `` distance '' from their enlisted force that is common in the other U.S. armed services .
When the enlisted force did go into harm 's way , such as members of multi-crewed aircraft , the close comradeship of shared risk in tight quarters created traditions that shaped a somewhat different kind of officer/enlisted relationship than exists elsewhere in the military .
His research was distributed in Soviet , German and British scientific journals , but no practical use was made of the discovery for several decades .
Kurt Lehovec , Carl Accardo and Edward Jamgochian , explained these first light-emitting diodes in 1951 using an apparatus employing SiC crystals with a current source of battery or pulse generator and with a comparison to a variant , pure , crystal in 1953 .
.
Intercepting the beam stopped the music .
We had a great deal of fun playing with this setup . ''
This setup presaged the use of LEDs for optical communication applications .
By October 1961 , they had demonstrated efficient light emission and signal coupling between a GaAs p-n junction light emitter and an electrically-isolated semiconductor photodetector .
In October 1962 , TI announced the first LED commercial product -LRB- the SNX-100 -RRB- , which employed a pure GaAs crystal to emit a 890 nm light output .
In October 1963 , TI announced the first commercial hemispherical LED , the SNX-110 .
Holonyak first reported his LED in the journal Applied Physics Letters on the December 1 , 1962 .
In 1976 , T. P. Pearsall created the first high-brightness , high-efficiency LEDs for optical fiber telecommunications by inventing new semiconductor materials specifically adapted to optical fiber transmission wavelengths .
The Monsanto Company was the first organization to mass-produce visible LEDs , using gallium arsenide phosphide -LRB- GaAsP -RRB- in 1968 to produce red LEDs suitable for indicators .
These red LEDs were bright enough only for use as indicators , as the light output was not enough to illuminate an area .
Later , other colors became widely available and appeared in appliances and equipment .
These devices employed compound semiconductor chips fabricated with the planar process invented by Dr. Jean Hoerni at Fairchild Semiconductor .
The combination of planar processing for chip fabrication and innovative packaging methods enabled the team at Fairchild led by optoelectronics pioneer Thomas Brandt to achieve the needed cost reductions .
These methods continue to be used by LED producers .
In parallel , Isamu Akasaki and Hiroshi Amano in Nagoya were working on developing the important GaN nucleation on sapphire substrates and the demonstration of p-type doping of GaN .
The combination of that yellow with remaining blue light appears white to the eye .
However using different phosphors -LRB- fluorescent materials -RRB- it also became possible to instead produce green and red light through fluorescence .
The resulting mixture of red , green and blue is not only perceived by humans as white light but is superior for illumination in terms of color rendering , whereas one can not appreciate the color of red or green objects illuminated only by the yellow -LRB- and remaining blue -RRB- wavelengths from the YAG phosphor .
The same process is reversed here -LRB- i.e. the P-N junction emits light when electrical energy is applied to it -RRB- .
Thus the energy level of the holes will be lesser than the energy levels of the electrons .
This energy is emitted in the form of heat and light .
In 2006 , they demonstrated a prototype with a record white LED luminous efficacy of 131 lm/W at 20 mA .
Nichia Corporation has developed a white LED with luminous efficacy of 150 lm/W at a forward current of 20 mA .
Cree 's XLamp XM-L LEDs , commercially available in 2011 , produce 100 lm/W at their full power of 10 W , and up to 160 lm/W at around 2 W input power .
In 2012 , Cree announced a white LED giving 254 lm/W , and 303 lm/W in March 2014 .
Practical general lighting needs high-power LEDs , of one watt or more .
This causes stress on the material and may cause early light-output degradation .
Additionally , research has developed heat sink technologies that will transfer heat produced within the junction to appropriate areas of the light fixture .
At the time Maruska was on leave from RCA Laboratories , where he collaborated with Jacques Pankove on related work .
In 1974 the U.S. Patent Office awarded Maruska , Rhines and Stanford professor David Stevenson a patent for their work in 1972 -LRB- U.S. Patent US3819974 A -RRB- and today magnesium-doping of gallium nitride continues to be the basis for all commercial blue LEDs and laser diodes .
These devices built in the early 1970s had too little light output to be of practical use and research into gallium nitride devices slowed .
In August 1989 , Cree introduced the first commercially available blue LED based on the indirect bandgap semiconductor , silicon carbide -LRB- SiC -RRB- .
SiC LEDs had very low efficiency , no more than about 0.03 % , but did emit in the blue portion of the visible light spectrum .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Both Dr. Moustakas and Mr. Nakamura were issued separate patents , which confused the issue of who was the original inventor -LRB- partly because although Dr. Moustakas invented his first , Dr. Nakamura filed first -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
By the late 1990s , blue LEDs became widely available .
If un-alloyed GaN is used in this case to form the active quantum well layers , the device will emit near-ultraviolet light with a peak wavelength centred around 365 nm .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Recent research has shown that commercially available UVA LEDs -LRB- 365 nm -RRB- are already effective disinfection and sterilization devices .
UV-C wavelengths were obtained in laboratories using aluminium nitride -LRB- 210 nm -RRB- , boron nitride -LRB- 215 nm -RRB- and diamond -LRB- 235 nm -RRB- .
Nonetheless , this method has many applications because of the flexibility of mixing different colors , and in principle , this mechanism also has higher quantum efficiency in producing white light .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
However , although tetrachromatic white LEDs have excellent color rendering capability , they often have poor luminous efficacy .
Most perceivable colors can be formed by mixing different amounts of three primary colors .
This allows precise dynamic color control .
As more effort is devoted to investigating this method , multi-color LEDs should have profound influence on the fundamental method that we use to produce and control light color .
However , before this type of LED can play a role on the market , several technical problems must be solved .
Such problems inhibit and may preclude industrial use .
Thus , many new package designs aimed at solving this problem have been proposed and their results are now being reproduced by researchers and scientists .
Losses attributable to internal optical losses due to re-absorption in the LED chip and in the LED packaging itself account typically for another 10 % to 30 % of efficiency loss .
Conformal coating process is frequently used to address the issue of varying phosphor thickness .
Due to the higher radiative output of the ultraviolet LEDs than of the blue ones , both methods offer comparable brightness .
Manufacturing large sapphire material is difficult , while large silicon material is cheaper and more abundant .
LED companies shifting from using sapphire to silicon should be a minimal investment .
Their emission color can be tuned from the visible throughout the infrared spectrum .
One uses photo excitation with a primary light source LED -LRB- typically blue or UV LEDs are used -RRB- .
The other is direct electrical excitation first demonstrated by Alivisatos et al. .
This scheme is commonly studied for quantum dot display .
The tunability of emission wavelengths and narrow bandwidth is also beneficial as excitation sources for fluorescence imaging .
High-power LEDs -LRB- HP-LEDs -RRB- or high-output LEDs -LRB- HO-LEDs -RRB- can be driven at currents from hundreds of mA to more than an ampere , compared with the tens of mA for other LEDs .
For each half-cycle , part of the LED emits light and part is dark , and this is reversed during the next half-cycle .
A large number of LED elements in series may be able to operate directly from line voltage .
Seven-segment displays handle all numbers and a limited set of letters .
In addition to power and ground , these provide connections for data-in , data-out , and sometimes a clock or strobe signal .
Some even have refresh rates in the kHz range , allowing for basic video applications .
Usually they are packaged in a sealed enclosure with a shape similar to lamps they were designed to replace -LRB- e.g. a bulb -RRB- , and filled with inert nitrogen or carbon dioxide gas to remove heat efficiently .
If the applied voltage exceeds the LED 's forward voltage drop by a small amount , the current rating may be exceeded by a large amount , potentially damaging or destroying the LED .
However , the high resistance of three-volt coin cells combined with the high differential resistance of nitride-based LEDs makes it possible to power such an LED from such a coin cell without an external resistor .
In general , laser safety regulations -- and the `` Class 1 '' , `` Class 2 '' , etc. system -- also apply to LEDs .
In cold climates , LED traffic lights may remain snow-covered .
This gives drivers behind more time to react .
In a dual intensity circuit -LRB- rear markers and brakes -RRB- if the LEDs are not pulsed at a fast enough frequency , they can create a phantom array , where ghost images of the LED will appear if the eyes quickly scan across the array .
For some time , computers were commonly equipped with IrDA interfaces , which allowed them to send and receive data to nearby machines via infrared .
LEDs constitute a nearly ideal light source for machine vision systems for several reasons :
Opto-isolators use an LED combined with a photodiode or phototransistor to provide a signal path with electrical isolation between two circuits .
Many sensor systems rely on light as the signal source .
LEDs are often ideal as a light source due to the requirements of the sensors .
LEDs are used as motion sensors , for example in optical computer mice .
Further , its sensors only need be monochromatic , since at any one time the page being scanned is only lit by one color of light .
Since LEDs can also be used as photodiodes , they can be used for both photo emission and detection .
This could be used , for example , in a touchscreen that registers reflected light from a finger or stylus .
Many materials and biological systems are sensitive to , or dependent on , light .
The forward voltage drop -LRB- e.g. about 1.7 V for a normal red LED -RRB- can be used instead of a Zener diode in low-voltage regulators .
They rank as the class of tetrapods with the most living species , at approximately ten thousand , with more than half of these being passerines , sometimes known as perching birds or , less accurately , as songbirds .
DNA-based evidence finds that birds diversified dramatically around the time of the Cretaceous -- Paleogene extinction event that killed off all other dinosaurs .
Birds in South America survived this event and then migrated to other parts of the world via multiple land bridges while diversifying during periods of global cooling .
Primitive bird-like dinosaurs that lie outside class Aves proper , in the broader group Avialae , have been found dating back to the mid-Jurassic period .
Birds have wings which are more or less developed depending on the species ; the only known groups without wings are the extinct moas and elephant birds .
Some bird species of aquatic environments , particularly the aforementioned flightless penguins , and also members of the duck family , have also evolved for swimming .
Many species annually migrate great distances .
Birds are social , communicating with visual signals , calls , and bird songs , and participating in such social behaviours as cooperative breeding and hunting , flocking , and mobbing of predators .
The vast majority of bird species are socially monogamous , usually for one breeding season at a time , sometimes for years , but rarely for life .
Other species have polygynous -LRB- `` many females '' -RRB- or , rarely , polyandrous -LRB- `` many males '' -RRB- breeding systems .
Most birds have an extended period of parental care after hatching .
Some birds , such as hens , lay eggs even when not fertilized , though unfertilized eggs do not produce offspring .
Many species of birds are economically important .
Domesticated and undomesticated birds -LRB- poultry and game -RRB- are important sources of eggs , meat , and feathers .
Birds prominently figure throughout human culture .
Human activity threatens about 1,200 bird species with extinction , though efforts are underway to protect them .
Recreational birdwatching is an important part of the ecotourism industry .
During the late 1990s , Aves was most commonly defined phylogenetically as all descendants of the most recent common ancestor of modern birds and Archaeopteryx lithographica .
However , an earlier definition proposed by Jacques Gauthier gained wide currency in the 21st century , and is used by many scientists including adherents of the Phylocode system .
This was done by excluding most groups known only from fossils , and assigning them , instead , to the Avialae , in part to avoid the uncertainties about the placement of Archaeopteryx in relation to animals traditionally thought of as theropod dinosaurs .
As scientists have discovered more theropods closely related to birds , the previously clear distinction between non-birds and birds has become blurred .
Together , these form a group called Paraves .
Some basal members of this group , such as Microraptor , have features which may have enabled them to glide or fly .
The most basal deinonychosaurs were very small .
This evidence raises the possibility that the ancestor of all paravians may have been arboreal , have been able to glide , or both .
Unlike Archaeopteryx and the non-avialan feathered dinosaurs , who primarily ate meat , recent studies suggest that the first avialans were omnivores .
It is not considered a direct ancestor of birds , though it is possibly closely related to the true ancestor .
The avialan species from this time period include Anchiornis huxleyi , Xiaotingia zhengi , and Aurornis xui .
The well-known early avialan , Archaeopteryx , dates from slightly later Jurassic rocks -LRB- about 155 million years old -RRB- from Germany .
Many of these early avialans shared unusual anatomical features that may be ancestral to modern birds , but were later lost during bird evolution .
Many groups retained primitive characteristics , such as clawed wings and teeth , though the latter were lost independently in a number of avialan groups , including modern birds -LRB- Aves -RRB- .
Enantiornithes occupied a wide array of ecological niches , from sand-probing shorebirds and fish-eaters to tree-dwelling forms and seed-eaters .
Unlike the enantiornithes , which dominated land-based and arboreal habitats , most early euornithes lacked perching adaptations and seem to have included shorebird-like species , waders , and swimming and diving species .
The later included the superficially gull-like Ichthyornis , the Hesperornithiformes , which became so well adapted to hunting fish in marine environments that they lost the ability to fly and became primarily aquatic .
The early euornithes also saw the development of many traits associated with modern birds , like strongly keeled breastbones , toothless , beaked portions of their jaws -LRB- though most non-avian euornithes retained teeth in other parts of the jaws -RRB- .
These two subdivisions are often given the rank of superorder , although Livezey and Zusi assigned them `` cohort '' rank .
The earliest fossil remains of true birds come from the possible galliform Austinornis lentus , dated to about 85 million years ago , but the dates for the actual splits are much debated by scientists .
The Aves are agreed to have evolved in the Cretaceous , and the split between the Galloanseri from other Neognathes occurred before the Cretaceous -- Paleogene extinction event , but there are different opinions about whether the radiation of the remaining Neognathes occurred before or after the extinction of the other dinosaurs .
This disagreement is in part caused by a divergence in the evidence ; molecular dating suggests a Cretaceous radiation , while fossil evidence supports a Cenozoic radiation .
Attempts to reconcile the molecular and fossil evidence have proved controversial , but recent results show that all the extant groups of birds originated from only a small handful of species that survived the Cretaceous -- Paleogene extinction .
The classification of birds is a contentious issue .
More recently , new fossil and molecular evidence is providing an increasingly clear picture of the evolution of modern bird orders .
The most recent effort is drawn above and is based on whole genome sequencing of 48 representative species .
It was earlier thought that this high diversity was the result of higher speciation rates in the tropics , however recent studies found higher speciation rates in the high latitudes that were offset by greater extinction rates than in the tropics .
Others have been accidental , such as the establishment of wild monk parakeets in several North American cities after their escape from captivity .
The skull bones in adults are fused and do not show cranial sutures .
The orbits are large and separated by a bony septum .
The spine has cervical , thoracic , lumbar and caudal regions with the number of cervical -LRB- neck -RRB- vertebrae highly variable and especially flexible , but movement is reduced in the anterior thoracic vertebrae and absent in the later vertebrae .
The ribs are flattened and the sternum is keeled for the attachment of flight muscles except in the flightless bird orders .
The forelimbs are modified into wings .
However , birds such as hummingbirds can be facultatively ammonotelic , excreting most of the nitrogenous wastes as ammonia .
They also excrete creatine , rather than creatinine like mammals .
This material , as well as the output of the intestines , emerges from the bird 's cloaca .
In addition , many species of birds regurgitate pellets .
Males within Palaeognathae -LRB- with the exception of the kiwis -RRB- , the Anseriformes -LRB- with the exception of screamers -RRB- , and in rudimentary forms in Galliformes -LRB- but fully developed in Cracidae -RRB- possess a penis , which is never present in Neoaves .
The length is thought to be related to sperm competition .
When not copulating , it is hidden within the proctodeum compartment within the cloaca , just inside the vent .
The digestive system of birds is unique , with a crop for storage and a gizzard that contains swallowed stones for grinding food to compensate for the lack of teeth .
Some migratory birds have adapted to use protein from many parts of their bodies , including protein from the intestines , as additional energy during migration .
When the bird exhales , the used air flows out of the lung and the stored fresh air from the posterior air sac is simultaneously forced into the lungs .
Thus , a bird 's lungs receive a constant supply of fresh air during both inhalation and exhalation .
The heart itself is divided into a right and left half , each with an atrium and ventricle .
The atrium and ventricles of each side are separated by atrioventricular valves which prevent back flow from one chamber to the next during contraction .
Being myogenic , the heart 's pace is maintained by pacemaker cells found in the sinoatrial node , located on the right atrium .
The sinoatrial node uses calcium to cause a depolarizing signal transduction pathway from the atrium through right and left atrioventricular bundle which communicates contraction to the ventricles .
The avian heart also consists of muscular arches that are made up of thick bundles of muscular layers .
Much like a mammalian heart , the avian heart is composed of endocardial , myocardial and epicardial layers .
The atrium walls tend to be thinner than the ventricle walls , due to the intense ventricular contraction used to pump oxygenated blood throughout the body .
Avian hearts are generally larger than mammalian hearts when compared to body mass .
Birds have a very efficient system for diffusing oxygen into the blood ; birds have a ten times greater surface area to gas exchange volume than mammals .
As a result , birds have more blood in their capillaries per unit of volume of lung than a mammal .
As the arterioles move away from the heart and into individual organs and tissues they are further divided to increase surface area and slow blood flow .
Travelling through the arterioles blood moves into the capillaries where gas exchange can occur .
In the capillary beds blood flow is slowed to allow maximum diffusion of oxygen into the tissues .
Once the blood has become deoxygenated it travels through venules then veins and back to the heart .
Veins , unlike arteries , are thin and rigid as they do not need to withstand extreme pressure .
Once the blood reaches the heart it moves first into the right atrium , then the right ventricle to be pumped through the lungs for further gas exchange of carbon dioxide waste for oxygen .
Oxygenated blood then flows from the lungs through the left atrium to the left ventricle where it is pumped out to the body .
The most developed part of the brain is the one that controls the flight-related functions , while the cerebellum coordinates movement and the cerebrum controls behaviour patterns , navigation , mating and nest building .
Most birds have a poor sense of smell with notable exceptions including kiwis , New World vultures and tubenoses .
The avian visual system is usually highly developed .
Water birds have special flexible lenses , allowing accommodation for vision in air and water .
Some species also have dual fovea .
Birds have specialized light-sensing cells deep in their brains that respond to light without input from eyes or other sensory neurons .
Many birds show plumage patterns in ultraviolet that are invisible to the human eye ; some birds whose sexes appear similar to the naked eye are distinguished by the presence of ultraviolet reflective patches on their feathers .
Male blue tits have an ultraviolet reflective crown patch which is displayed in courtship by posturing and raising of their nape feathers .
Ultraviolet light is also used in foraging -- kestrels have been shown to search for prey by detecting the UV reflective urine trail marks left on the ground by rodents .
The eyelids of a bird are not used in blinking .
Instead the eye is lubricated by the nictitating membrane , a third eyelid that moves horizontally .
Most birds can not move their eyes , although there are exceptions , such as the great cormorant .
The avian ear lacks external pinnae but is covered by feathers , although in some birds , such as the Asio , Bubo and Otus owls , these feathers form tufts which resemble ears .
The jacanas Actophilornis and Irediparra have an expanded , blade-like radius .
The extinct Xenicibis was unique in having an elongate forelimb and massive hand which likely functioned in combat or defence as a jointed club or flail .
Swans , for instance , may strike with the bony spurs and bite when defending eggs or young .
They facilitate flight , provide insulation that aids in thermoregulation , and are used in display , camouflage , and signaling .
There are several types of feathers , each serving its own set of purposes .
The distribution pattern of these feather tracts -LRB- pterylosis -RRB- is used in taxonomy and systematics .
The arrangement and appearance of feathers on the body , called plumage , may vary within species by age , social status , and sex .
Moulting patterns vary across species .
In passerines , flight feathers are replaced one at a time with the innermost primary being the first .
When the fifth of sixth primary is replaced , the outermost tertiaries begin to drop .
After the innermost tertiaries are moulted , the secondaries starting from the innermost begin to drop and this proceeds to the outer feathers -LRB- centrifugal moult -RRB- .
The greater primary coverts are moulted in synchrony with the primary that they overlap .
A small number of species , such as ducks and geese , lose all of their flight feathers at once , temporarily becoming flightless .
As a general rule , the tail feathers are moulted and replaced starting with the innermost pair .
Centripetal moults of tail feathers are however seen in the Phasianidae .
The centrifugal moult is modified in the tail feathers of woodpeckers and treecreepers , in that it begins with the second innermost pair of feathers and finishes with the central pair of feathers so that the bird maintains a functional climbing tail .
The general pattern seen in passerines is that the primaries are replaced outward , secondaries inward , and the tail from center outward .
Before nesting , the females of most bird species gain a bare brood patch by losing feathers close to the belly .
The skin there is well supplied with blood vessels and helps the bird in incubation .
Wing shape and size generally determine a bird species ' type of flight ; many birds combine powered , flapping flight with less energy-intensive soaring flight .
Flightlessness often arises in birds on isolated islands , probably due to limited resources and the absence of land predators .
Though flightless , penguins use similar musculature and movements to `` fly '' through the water , as do auks , shearwaters and dippers .
Birds ' feeding strategies vary by species .
Many birds glean for insects , invertebrates , fruit , or seeds .
Some hunt insects by suddenly attacking from a branch .
Those species that seek pest insects are considered beneficial ` biological control agents ' and their presence encouraged in biological pest control programs .
Kiwis and shorebirds with long bills probe for invertebrates ; shorebirds ' varied bill lengths and feeding methods result in the separation of ecological niches .
Loons , diving ducks , penguins and auks pursue their prey underwater , using their wings or feet for propulsion , while aerial predators such as sulids , kingfishers and terns plunge dive after their prey .
Flamingos , three species of prion , and some ducks are filter feeders .
Geese and dabbling ducks are primarily grazers .
Kleptoparasitism is thought to be a supplement to food obtained by hunting , rather than a significant part of any species ' diet ; a study of great frigatebirds stealing from masked boobies estimated that the frigatebirds stole at most 40 % of their food and on average stole only 5 % .
Most birds scoop water in their beaks and raise their head to let water run down the throat .
Some species , especially of arid zones , belonging to the pigeon , finch , mousebird , button-quail and bustard families are capable of sucking up water without the need to tilt back their heads .
Some desert birds depend on water sources and sandgrouse are particularly well known for their daily congregations at waterholes .
Some birds carry water for chicks at the nest in their crop or regurgitate it along with food .
Feathers being critical to the survival of a bird , require maintenance .
Apart from physical wear and tear , feathers face the onslaught of fungi , ectoparasitic feather mites and birdlice .
While some birds dip into shallow water , more aerial species may make aerial dips into water and arboreal species often make use of dew or rain that collect on leaves .
Birds of arid regions make use of loose soil to dust-bathe .
Many species will spread out their wings and expose them to direct sunlight and this too is thought to help in reducing fungal and ectoparasitic activity that may lead to feather damage .
Many bird species migrate to take advantage of global differences of seasonal temperatures , therefore optimising availability of food sources and breeding habitat .
These migrations vary among the different groups .
Many landbirds , shorebirds , and waterbirds undertake annual long distance migrations , usually triggered by the length of daylight as well as weather conditions .
These birds are characterised by a breeding season spent in the temperate or polar regions and a non-breeding season in the tropical regions or opposite hemisphere .
Migration is highly demanding energetically , particularly as birds need to cross deserts and oceans without refuelling .
Seabirds also undertake long migrations , the longest annual migration being those of sooty shearwaters , which nest in New Zealand and Chile and spend the northern summer feeding in the North Pacific off Japan , Alaska and California , an annual round trip of 64,000 km -LRB- 39,800 mi -RRB- .
Other seabirds disperse after breeding , travelling widely but having no set migration route .
Some bird species undertake shorter migrations , travelling only as far as is required to avoid bad weather or obtain food .
Irruptive species such as the boreal finches are one such group and can commonly be found at a location in one year and absent the next .
This type of migration is normally associated with food availability .
Species may also travel shorter distances over part of their range , with individuals from higher latitudes travelling into the existing range of conspecifics ; others undertake partial migrations , where only a fraction of the population , usually females and subdominant males , migrates .
It is most often triggered by temperature changes and usually occurs when the normal territories also become inhospitable due to lack of food .
Some species may also be nomadic , holding no fixed territory and moving according to weather and food availability .
The ability of birds to return to precise locations across vast distances has been known for some time ; in an experiment conducted in the 1950s a Manx shearwater released in Boston returned to its colony in Skomer , Wales , within 13 days , a distance of 5,150 km -LRB- 3,200 mi -RRB- .
Birds navigate during migration using a variety of methods .
Orientation with the stellar compass depends on the position of the constellations surrounding Polaris .
These displays may signal aggression or submission or may contribute to the formation of pair-bonds .
The most elaborate displays occur during courtship , where `` dances '' are often formed from complex combinations of many possible component movements ; males ' breeding success may depend on the quality of such displays .
While some birds are essentially territorial or live in small family groups , other birds may form large flocks .
This has led to the development of many mixed-species feeding flocks , which are usually composed of small numbers of many species ; these flocks provide safety in numbers but increase potential competition for resources .
The high metabolic rates of birds during the active part of the day is supplemented by rest at other times .
It has been suggested that there may be certain kinds of sleep which are possible even when in flight .
Some birds have also demonstrated the capacity to fall into slow-wave sleep one hemisphere of the brain at a time .
The birds tend to exercise this ability depending upon its position relative to the outside of the flock .
This may allow the eye opposite the sleeping hemisphere to remain vigilant for predators by viewing the outer margins of the flock .
This adaptation is also known from marine mammals .
Roosting sites are often chosen with regard to thermoregulation and safety .
Many sleeping birds bend their heads over their backs and tuck their bills in their back feathers , although others place their beaks among their breast feathers .
Many birds rest on one leg , while some may pull up their legs into their feathers , especially in cold weather .
This physiological adaptation shows in nearly a hundred other species , including owlet-nightjars , nightjars , and woodswallows .
One species , the common poorwill , even enters a state of hibernation .
These species pair for at least the length of the breeding season or -- in some cases -- for several years or until the death of one mate .
Monogamy allows for both paternal care and biparental care , which is especially important for species in which females require males ' assistance for successful brood-rearing .
Such behaviour typically occurs between dominant males and females paired with subordinate males , but may also be the result of forced copulation in ducks and other anatids .
Sperm from multiple males may compete through this mechanism .
For females , possible benefits of extra-pair copulation include getting better genes for her offspring and insuring against the possibility of infertility in her mate .
Some displays , however , are quite elaborate .
Depending on the species , these may include wing or tail drumming , dancing , aerial flights , or communal lekking .
There are many exceptions to this pattern , however ; the ground-nesting nightjars have pale eggs , and camouflage is instead provided by their plumage .
Species that are victims of brood parasites have varying egg colours to improve the chances of spotting a parasite 's egg , which forces female parasites to match their eggs to those of their hosts .
Most species create somewhat elaborate nests , which can be cups , domes , plates , beds scrapes , mounds , or burrows .
Most birds build nests in sheltered , hidden areas to avoid predation , but large or colonial birds -- which are more capable of defence -- may build more open nests .
During nest construction , some species seek out plant matter from plants with parasite-reducing toxins to improve chick survival , and feathers are often used for nest insulation .
The absence of nests is especially prevalent in ground-nesting species where the newly hatched young are precocial .
In monogamous species incubation duties are often shared , whereas in polygamous species one parent is wholly responsible for incubation .
Incubation can be an energetically demanding process ; adult albatrosses , for instance , lose as much as 83 grams -LRB- 2.9 oz -RRB- of body weight per day of incubation .
The warmth for the incubation of the eggs of megapodes comes from the sun , decaying vegetation or volcanic sources .
The length and nature of parental care varies widely amongst different orders and species .
The main purpose of the guard stage is to aid offspring to thermoregulate and protect them from predation .
In some species , both parents care for nestlings and fledglings ; in others , such care is the responsibility of only one sex .
In some species , other members of the same species -- usually close relatives of the breeding pair , such as offspring from previous broods -- will help with the raising of the young .
In birds , however , it is quite common -- more so than in any other vertebrate class .
Though territory and nest site defence , incubation , and chick feeding are often shared tasks , there is sometimes a division of labour in which one mate undertakes all or most of a particular duty .
The point at which chicks fledge varies dramatically .
The amount of parental care after fledging varies ; albatross chicks leave the nest on their own and receive no further help , while other species continue some supplementary feeding after fledging .
Chicks may also follow their parents during their first migration .
After a parasitic bird lays her eggs in another bird 's nest , they are often accepted and raised by the host at the expense of the host 's own brood .
Some brood parasites are adapted to hatch before their host 's young , which allows them to destroy the host 's eggs by pushing them out of the nest or to kill the host 's chicks ; this ensures that all food brought to the nest will be fed to the parasitic chicks .
Commonly occurring sexual dimorphisms such as size and color differences are energetically costly attributes that signal competitive breeding situations .
Sexually selected traits often evolve to become more pronounced in competitive breeding situations until the trait begins to limit the individual 's fitness .
Conflicts between an individual fitness and signaling adaptations ensure that sexually selected ornaments such as plumage coloration and courtship behavior are `` honest '' traits .
Signals must be costly to ensure that only good-quality individuals can present these exaggerated sexual ornaments and behaviors .
However , there are ecological and demographic constraints on extra pair matings .
Female offspring rarely stay at home , dispersing over distances that allow them to breed independently , or to join unrelated groups .
Birds occupy a wide range of ecological positions .
While some birds are generalists , others are highly specialised in their habitat or food requirements .
Even within a single habitat , such as a forest , the niches occupied by different species of birds vary , with some species feeding in the forest canopy , others beneath the canopy , and still others on the forest floor .
Avivores are animals that are specialized at preying on birds .
Birds have frequently reached islands that mammals have not ; on those islands , birds may fulfill ecological roles typically played by larger animals .
Today the plants of New Zealand retain the defensive adaptations evolved to protect them from the extinct moa .
Sometimes , these relationships are mutualistic , like the cooperative honey-gathering among honeyguides and African peoples such as the Borana .
Several bird species have become commercially significant agricultural pests , and some pose an aviation hazard .
Chickens account for much of human poultry consumption , though domesticated turkeys , ducks , and geese are also relatively common .
Many species of birds are also hunted for meat .
The most important birds hunted in North and South America are waterfowl ; other widely hunted birds include pheasants , wild turkeys , quail , doves , partridge , grouse , snipe , and woodcock .
Muttonbirding is also popular in Australia and New Zealand .
Though some hunting , such as that of muttonbirds , may be sustainable , hunting has led to the extinction or endangerment of dozens of species .
Falcons and cormorants have long been used for hunting and fishing , respectively .
Today , such activities are more common either as hobbies , for entertainment and tourism , or for sports such as pigeon racing .
In religion , birds may serve as either messengers or priests and leaders for a deity , such as in the Cult of Makemake , in which the Tangata manu of Easter Island served as chiefs or as attendants , as in the case of Hugin and Munin , the two common ravens who whispered news into the ears of the Norse god Odin .
They may also serve as religious symbols , as when Jonah -LRB- Hebrew : יוֹנָה , dove -RRB- embodied the fright , passivity , mourning , and beauty traditionally associated with doves .
Birds have themselves been deified , as in the case of the common peacock , which is perceived as Mother Earth by the Dravidians of India .
In religious images preserved from the Inca and Tiwanaku empires , birds are depicted in the process of transgressing boundaries between earthly and underground spiritual realms .
Indigenous peoples of the central Andes maintain legends of birds passing to and from metaphysical worlds .
Birds were later used as symbols of power , as in the magnificent Peacock Throne of the Mughal and Persian emperors .
With the advent of scientific interest in birds , many paintings of birds were commissioned for books .
Other English metaphors derive from birds ; vulture funds and vulture investors , for instance , take their name from the scavenging vulture .
Though human activities have allowed the expansion of a few species , such as the barn swallow and European starling , they have caused population decreases or extinction in many other species .
The Qing multi-cultural empire lasted almost three centuries and formed the territorial base for the modern Chinese state .
In the late sixteenth century , Nurhaci , originally a Ming vassal , began organizing Jurchen clans into `` Banners '' , military-social units .
Nurhaci formed these clans into a unified entity , the subjects of which became known collectively as the Manchu people .
By 1636 , his son Hong Taiji began driving Ming forces out of Liaodong and declared a new dynasty , the Qing .
The conquest of China proper was not completed until 1683 under the Kangxi Emperor -LRB- r. 1661 -- 1722 -RRB- .
The Ten Great Campaigns of the Qianlong Emperor from the 1750s to the 1790s extended Qing control into Central Asia .
While the early rulers maintained their Manchu ways , and while their official title was Emperor they were known as khans to the Mongols and patronized Tibetan Buddhism , they governed using Confucian styles and institutions of bureaucratic government .
They retained the imperial examinations to recruit Han Chinese to work under or in parallel with Manchus .
They also adapted the ideals of the tributary system in international relations , and in places such as Taiwan , the Qing so-called internal foreign policy closely resembled colonial policy and control .
The population rose to some 400 million , but taxes and government revenues were fixed at a low rate , virtually guaranteeing eventual fiscal crisis .
Corruption set in , rebels tested government legitimacy , and ruling elites did not change their mindsets in the face of changes in the world system .
Following the Opium War , European powers imposed unequal treaties , free trade , extraterritoriality and treaty ports under foreign control .
In spite of these disasters , in the Tongzhi Restoration of the 1860s , Han Chinese elites rallied to the defense of the Confucian order and the Qing rulers .
New Armies were organized , but the ambitious Hundred Days ' Reform of 1898 was turned back by Empress Dowager Cixi , a ruthless but capable leader .
When , in response to the violently anti-foreign Yihetuan -LRB- `` Boxers '' -RRB- , foreign powers invaded China , the Empress Dowager declared war on them , leading to defeat and the flight of the Imperial Court to Xi'an .
After agreeing to sign the Boxer Protocol the government then initiated unprecedented fiscal and administrative reforms , including elections , a new legal code , and abolition of the examination system .
Sun Yat-sen and other revolutionaries competed with reformers such as Liang Qichao and monarchists such as Kang Youwei to transform the Qing empire into a modern nation .
After the death of Empress Dowager Cixi and the Guangxu Emperor in 1908 , the hardline Manchu court alienated reformers and local elites alike .
`` gold '' -RRB- state in honor both of the 12 -- 13th century Jurchen Jin dynasty and of his Aisin Gioro clan -LRB- Aisin being Manchu for the Chinese 金 -LRB- jīn , `` gold '' -RRB- -RRB- .
There are competing explanations on the meaning of Qīng -LRB- lit .
`` clear '' or `` pure '' -RRB- .
The name may have been selected in reaction to the name of the Ming dynasty -LRB- 明 -RRB- , which consists of the Chinese characters for `` sun '' -LRB- 日 -RRB- and `` moon '' -LRB- 月 -RRB- , both associated with the fire element of the Chinese zodiacal system .
The character Qīng -LRB- 清 -RRB- is composed of `` water '' -LRB- 氵 -RRB- and `` azure '' -LRB- 青 -RRB- , both associated with the water element .
This association would justify the Qing conquest as defeat of fire by water .
Daicing gurun may therefore have meant `` warrior state '' , a pun that was only intelligible to Manchu and Mongol people .
In the later part of the dynasty , however , even the Manchus themselves had forgotten this possible meaning .
The emperors equated the lands of the Qing state -LRB- including present day Northeast China , Xinjiang , Mongolia , Tibet and other areas -RRB- as `` China '' in both the Chinese and Manchu languages , defining China as a multi-ethnic state , and rejecting the idea that `` China '' only meant Han areas .
They used both `` China '' and `` Qing '' to refer to their state in official documents , international treaties -LRB- as the Qing was known internationally as `` China '' or the `` Chinese Empire '' -RRB- and foreign affairs , and `` Chinese language '' -LRB- Dulimbai gurun i bithe -RRB- included Chinese , Manchu , and Mongol languages , and `` Chinese people '' -LRB- 中國之人 Zhōngguó zhī rén ; Manchu : Dulimbai gurun i niyalma -RRB- referred to all subjects of the empire .
In the Chinese-language versions of its treaties and its maps of the world , the Qing government used `` Qing '' and `` China '' interchangeably .
The Manchus are sometimes mistaken for a nomadic people , which they were not .
What was to become the Manchu state was founded by Nurhaci , the chieftain of a minor Jurchen tribe -- the Aisin Gioro -- in Jianzhou in the early 17th century .
Originally a vassal of the Ming emperors , Nurhachi embarked on an intertribal feud in 1582 that escalated into a campaign to unify the nearby tribes .
By 1616 , he had sufficiently consolidated Jianzhou so as to be able to proclaim himself Khan of the Great Jin in reference to the previous Jurchen dynasty .
Nurhachi 's policy towards the Khorchins was to seek their friendship and cooperation against the Ming , securing his western border from a powerful potential enemy .
It was defected Ming Han Chinese armies which conquered southern China for the Qing .
The Manchus ' continued dominance was ensured by an ethnic quota for top bureaucratic appointments .
Hong Taiji 's reign also saw a fundamental change of policy towards his Han Chinese subjects .
Nurhaci had treated Han in Liaodong differently according to how much grain they had , those with less than 5 to 7 sin were treated like chattel while those with more than that amount were rewarded with property .
Hong Taiji instead incorporated them into the Jurchen `` nation '' as full -LRB- if not first-class -RRB- citizens , obligated to provide military service .
This change of policy not only increased Hong Taiji 's manpower and reduced his military dependence on banners not under his personal control , it also greatly encouraged other Han Chinese subjects of the Ming dynasty to surrender and accept Jurchen rule when they were defeated militarily .
Through these and other measures Hong Taiji was able to centralize power unto the office of the Khan , which in the long run prevented the Jurchen federation from fragmenting after his death .
As the Jurchens had traditionally `` elected '' their leader through a council of nobles , the Qing state did not have in place a clear succession system until the reign of the Kangxi Emperor .
Ming government officials fought against each other , against fiscal collapse , and against a series of peasant rebellions .
They were unable to capitalise on the Manchu succession dispute and installation of a minor as emperor .
Shanhai Pass is a pivotal pass of the Great Wall , located fifty miles northeast of Beijing , and for years its defenses kept the Manchus from directly raiding the Ming capital .
Wu Sangui may have been influenced by Li Zicheng 's mistreatment of his family and other wealthy and cultured officials ; it was said that Li also took Wu 's concubine Chen Yuanyuan for himself .
The Manchus , who had positioned themselves as political heir to the Ming emperor by defeating the rebel Li Zicheng , completed the symbolic transition by holding a formal funeral for the Chongzhen Emperor .
The last Ming pretender , Prince Gui , sought refuge with the King of Burma , but was turned over to a Qing expeditionary army commanded by Wu Sangui , who had him brought back to Yunnan province and executed in early 1662 .
This multi-ethnic force in which Manchus were only a minority conquered China for the Qing .
The Qing showed that the Manchus valued military skills in propaganda targeted towards the Ming military to get them to defect to the Qing , since the Ming civilian political system discriminated against the military .
Normally the Manchu Bannermen acted only as reserve forces or in the rear and were used predominantly for quick strikes with maximum impact , so as to minimize ethnic Manchu losses ; instead , the Qing used defected Han Chinese troops to fight as the vanguard during the entire conquest of China .
First , the Manchus had entered `` China proper '' because Dorgon responded decisively to Wu Sangui 's appeal .
Choosing Beijing as the capital had not been a straightforward decision , since no major Chinese dynasty had directly taken over its immediate predecessor 's capital .
However , not all of Dorgon 's policies were equally popular nor easily implemented .
To the Manchus , this policy was a test of loyalty and an aid in distinguishing friend from foe .
For the Han Chinese , however , it was a humiliating reminder of Qing authority that challenged traditional Confucian values .
The Classic of Filial Piety -LRB- Xiaojing -RRB- held that `` a person 's body and hair , being gifts from one 's parents , are not to be damaged . ''
The order triggered strong resistance to Qing rule in Jiangnan and massive killing of ethnic Han Chinese .
It was Han Chinese defectors who carried out massacres against people refusing to wear the queue .
.
At the end of the third massacre , there was hardly any living person left in this city .
Jiangyin also held out against about 10,000 Han Chinese Qing troops for 83 days .
When the city wall was finally breached on 9 October 1645 , the Han Chinese Qing army led by the Han Chinese Ming defector Liu Liangzuo -LRB- 劉良佐 -RRB- , who had been ordered to `` fill the city with corpses before you sheathe your swords , '' massacred the entire population , killing between 74,000 and 100,000 people .
The queue was the only aspect of Manchu culture which the Qing forced on the common Han population .
The Qing required people serving as officials to wear Manchu clothing , but allowed non-official Han civilians to continue wearing Hanfu -LRB- Han clothing -RRB- .
Two months into Shunzhi 's personal rule , Dorgon was not only stripped of his titles , but his corpse was disinterred and mutilated .
More importantly , Dorgon 's symbolic fall from grace also signaled a political purge of his family and associates at court , thus reverting power back to the person of the emperor .
He was succeeded by his third son Xuanye , who reigned as the Kangxi Emperor .
In Fujian , it was Han Bannermen who were the ones carrying out the fighting and killing for the Qing and this disproved the entirely irrelevant claim that alleged fear of the water on part of the Manchus had to do with the coastal evacuation and seaban .
Even though a poem refers to the soldiers carrying out massacres in Fujian as `` barbarian '' , both Han Green Standard Army and Han Bannermen were involved in the fighting for the Qing side and carried out the worst slaughter .
400,000 Green Standard Army soldiers were used against the Three Feudatories besides 200,000 Bannermen .
To prevent a repeat of Dorgon 's dictatorial monopolizing of power during the regency , the Shunzhi Emperor , on his deathbed , hastily appointed four senior cabinet ministers to govern on behalf of his young son .
The four ministers -- Sonin , Ebilun , Suksaha , and Oboi -- were chosen for their long service , but also to counteract each other 's influences .
Most important , the four were not closely related to the imperial family and laid no claim to the throne .
Even though Oboi 's loyalty was never an issue , his personal arrogance and political conservatism led him into an escalating conflict with the young emperor .
In 1669 Kangxi , through trickery , disarmed and imprisoned Oboi -- a significant victory for a fifteen-year-old emperor over a wily politician and experienced commander .
The early Manchu rulers also established two foundations of legitimacy which help to explain the stability of their dynasty .
The first was the bureaucratic institutions and the neo-Confucian culture which they adopted from earlier dynasties .
Manchu rulers and Han Chinese scholar-official elites gradually came to terms with each other .
The examination system offered a path for ethnic Han to become officials .
The Qing used the title of Emperor -LRB- Huangdi -RRB- in Chinese while among Mongols the Qing monarch was referred to as Bogda khan -LRB- wise Khan -RRB- , and referred to as Gong Ma in Tibet .
Qianlong propagated the image of himself as Buddhist sage rulers , patrons of Tibetan Buddhism .
In the Manchu language , the Qing monarch was alternately referred to as either Huwangdi -LRB- Emperor -RRB- or Khan with no special distinction between the two usages .
Missionaries including Tomás Pereira , Martino Martini , Johann Adam Schall von Bell , Ferdinand Verbiest and Antoine Thomas held significant positions as military weapons experts , mathematicians , cartographers , astronomers and advisers to the emperor .
The relationship of trust was however lost in the later Chinese Rites controversy .
Yet controlling the `` Mandate of Heaven '' was a daunting task .
The vastness of China 's territory meant that there were only enough banner troops to garrison key cities forming the backbone of a defense network that relied heavily on surrendered Ming soldiers .
In addition , three surrendered Ming generals were singled out for their contributions to the establishment of the Qing dynasty , ennobled as feudal princes -LRB- 藩王 -RRB- , and given governorships over vast territories in Southern China .
As the years went by , the three feudal lords and their extensive territories became increasingly autonomous .
The young emperor granted his retirement , but denied the heredity of his fief .
In reaction , the two other generals decided to petition for their own retirements to test Kangxi 's resolve , thinking that he would not risk offending them .
Faced with the stripping of their powers , Wu Sangui , later joined by Geng Zhongming and by Shang Kexi 's son Shang Zhixin , felt they had no choice but to revolt .
At the peak of the rebels ' fortunes , they extended their control as far north as the Yangtze River , nearly establishing a divided China .
Wu then hesitated to go further north , not being able to coordinate strategy with his allies , and Kangxi was able to unify his forces for a counterattack led by a new generation of Manchu generals .
Manchu Generals and Bannermen were initially put to shame by the better performance of the Han Chinese Green Standard Army , who fought better than them against the rebels and this was noted by Kangxi , leading him to task Generals Sun Sike , Wang Jinbao , and Zhao Liangdong to lead Green Standard Soldiers to crush the rebels .
Similarly , in northwestern China against Wang Fuchen , the Qing used Han Chinese Green Standard Army soldiers and Han Chinese Generals such as Zhang Liangdong , Wang Jinbao , and Zhang Yong as the primary military forces .
This choice was due to the rocky terrain , which favoured infantry troops over cavalry , to the desire to keep Bannermen in the reserves , and , again , to the belief that Han troops were better at fighting other Han people .
These Han generals achieved victory over the rebels .
Also due to the mountainous terrain , Sichuan and southern Shaanxi were also retaken by the Han Chinese Green Standard Army under Wang Jinbao and Zhao Liangdong in 1680 , with Manchus only participating in dealing with logistics and provisions .
213 Han Chinese Banner companies , and 527 companies of Mongol and Manchu Banners were mobilized by the Qing during the revolt .
400,000 Green Standard Army soldiers were used against the Three Feudatories besides 200,000 Bannermen .
The Kangxi Emperor was able to successfully expel Galdan 's invading forces from these regions , which were then incorporated into the empire .
Zheng Keshuang was awarded the title `` Duke Haicheng '' -LRB- 海澄公 -RRB- and was inducted into the Han Chinese Plain Red Banner of the Eight Banners when he moved to Beijing .
Several Ming princes had accompanied Koxinga to Taiwan in 1661-1662 , including the Prince of Ningjing Zhu Shugui and Prince Zhu Honghuan -LRB- 朱弘桓 -RRB- , son of Zhu Yihai , where they lived in the Kingdom of Tungning .
The Qing sent the 17 Ming princes still living on Taiwan in 1683 back to mainland China where they spent the rest of their lives in exile since their lives were spared from execution .
Zheng 's former soldiers on Taiwan like the rattan shield troops were also inducted into the Eight Banners and used by the Qing against Russian Cossacks at Albazin .
The 1689 Treaty of Nerchinsk was China 's first formal treaty with a European power and kept the border peaceful for the better part of two centuries .
After Galdan 's death , his followers , as adherents to Tibetan Buddhism , attempted to control the choice of the next Dalai Lama .
Kangxi dispatched two armies to Lhasa , the capital of Tibet , and installed a Dalai Lama sympathetic to the Qing .
In the later years of Kangxi 's reign , Yongzheng and his brothers had fought , and there were rumours that he had usurped the throne -LRB- most of the rumours believe that Yongzheng 's brother Yingzhen -LRB- Kangxi 's 14th son -RRB- is the real successor of Kangxi Emperor , the reason why Yingzhen failed to sit on the throne is because Yongzheng and his confidant Keduo Long tampered the content of Kangxi 's testament at the night when Kangxi passed away -RRB- , a charge for which there is little evidence .
In fact , his father had trusted him with delicate political issues and discussed state policy with him .
In the words of one recent historian , he was `` severe , suspicious , and jealous , but extremely capable and resourceful , '' and in the words of another , turned out to be an `` early modern state-maker of the first order . ''
He moved rapidly .
Next , he moved to control the government .
He expanded his father 's system of Palace Memorials which brought frank and detailed reports on local conditions directly to the throne without being intercepted by the bureaucracy , and created a small Grand Council of personal advisors which eventually grew into the emperor 's de facto cabinet for the rest of the dynasty .
He shrewdly filled key positions with Manchu and Han Chinese officials who depended on his patronage .
The increased revenues were to be used for `` money to nourish honesty '' among local officials and for local irrigation , schools , roads , and charity .
Although these reforms were effective in the north , in the south and lower Yangzi valley , where Kangxi had wooed the elites , there were long established networks of officials and landowners .
Yongzheng dispatched experienced Manchu commissioners to penetrate the thickets of falsified land registers and coded account books , but they were met with tricks , passivity , and even violence .
The fiscal crisis persisted .
Later the Qianlong Emperor bestowed the title Marquis of Extended Grace posthumously on Zhu Zhuliang in 1750 , and the title passed on through twelve generations of Ming descendants until the end of the Qing dynasty .
Yongzheng also inherited diplomatic and strategic problems .
Yongzheng then turned to that situation , where the Zunghars threatened to re-emerge , and to the southwest , where local Miao chieftains resisted Qing expansion .
These campaigns drained the treasury but established the emperor 's control of the military and military finance .
Qianlong 's reign saw the launch of several ambitious cultural projects , including the compilation of the Siku Quanshu , or Complete Repository of the Four Branches of Literature .
Nevertheless , Qianlong used Literary Inquisition to silence opposition .
The accusation of individuals began with the emperor 's own interpretation of the true meaning of the corresponding words .
If the emperor decided these were derogatory or cynical towards the dynasty , persecution would begin .
China also began suffering from mounting overpopulation during this period .
Soon all available farmland was used up , forcing peasants to work ever-smaller and more intensely worked plots .
The Qianlong Emperor once bemoaned the country 's situation by remarking `` The population continues to grow , but the land does not . ''
The emperor decreed for the first time that Han Chinese civilians were forbidden to settle .
Mongols were forbidden by the Qing from crossing the borders of their banners , even into other Mongol Banners and from crossing into neidi -LRB- the Han Chinese 18 provinces -RRB- and were given serious punishments if they did in order to keep the Mongols divided against each other to benefit the Qing .
Han Chinese farmers were resettled from north China by the Qing to the area along the Liao River in order to restore the land to cultivation .
Wasteland was reclaimed by Han Chinese squatters in addition to other Han who rented land from Manchu landlords .
Qianlong allowed Han Chinese peasants suffering from drought to move into Manchuria despite him issuing edicts in favor of banning them from 1740 -- 1776 .
The dynasty was confronted with newly developing concepts of the international system and state to state relations .
Since China 's economy was essentially self-sufficient , the country had little need to import goods or raw materials from the Europeans , so the usual way of payment was through silver .
The Daoguang Emperor , concerned both over the outflow of silver and the damage that opium smoking was causing to his subjects , ordered Lin Zexu to end the opium trade .
Lin confiscated the stocks of opium without compensation in 1839 , leading Britain to send a military expedition the following year .
The First Opium War revealed the outdated state of the Chinese military .
British soldiers , using advanced muskets and artillery , easily outmaneuvered and outgunned Qing forces in ground battles .
It revealed many inadequacies in the Qing government and provoked widespread rebellions against the already hugely unpopular regime .
Slavery , concubinage , arranged marriage , opium smoking , footbinding , judicial torture , and the worship of idols were all banned .
However , success and subsequent authority and power led to internal feuds , defections and corruption .
In addition , British and French troops , equipped with modern weapons , had come to the assistance of the Qing imperial army .
It was not until 1864 that Qing armies under Zeng Guofan succeeded in crushing the revolt .
The rebellion not only posed the most serious threat towards Qing rulers ; it was also `` bloodiest civil war of all time . ''
Between 20 and 30 million people died during its fourteen-year course from 1850 to 1864 .
After the outbreak of this rebellion , there were also revolts by the Muslims and Miao people of China against the Qing dynasty , most notably in the Dungan Revolt -LRB- 1862 -- 77 -RRB- in the northwest and the Panthay Rebellion -LRB- 1856 -- 1873 -RRB- in Yunnan .
China 's income fell sharply during the wars as vast areas of farmland were destroyed , millions of lives were lost , and countless armies were raised and equipped to fight the rebels .
Meanwhile , the humiliated emperor died the following year at Rehe .
Zeng Guofan , in alliance with Prince Gong , sponsored the rise of younger officials such as Li Hongzhang , who put the dynasty back on its feet financially and instituted the Self-Strengthening Movement .
The dynasty lost control of peripheral territories bit by bit .
By 1883 , France was in full control of the region and had reached the Chinese border .
The Sino-French War began with a surprise attack by the French on the Chinese southern fleet at Fuzhou .
After that the Chinese declared war on the French .
A French invasion of Taiwan was halted and the French were defeated on land in Tonkin at the Battle of Bang Bo .
However Japan threatened to enter the war against China due to the Gapsin Coup and China chose to end the war with negotiations .
The war ended in 1885 with the Treaty of Tientsin -LRB- 1885 -RRB- and the Chinese recognition of the French protectorate in Vietnam .
Meanwhile , new but not exactly modern Chinese armies suppressed the midcentury rebellions , bluffed Russia into a peaceful settlement of disputed frontiers in Central Asia , and defeated the French forces on land in the Sino-French War -LRB- 1884 -- 85 -RRB- .
But the defeat of the fleet , and the resulting threat to steamship traffic to Taiwan , forced China to conclude peace on unfavorable terms . ''
The Treaty of Shimonoseki recognized Korean independence and ceded Taiwan and the Pescadores to Japan .
The terms might have been harsher , but when Japanese citizen attacked and wounded Li Hongzhang , an international outcry shamed the Japanese into revising them .
The original agreement stipulated the cession of Liaodong Peninsula to Japan , but Russia , with its own designs on the territory , along with Germany and France , in what was known as the Triple Intervention , successfully put pressure on the Japanese to abandon the peninsula .
She , the Empress Dowager Ci'an -LRB- who had been Xianfeng 's empress -RRB- , and Prince Gong -LRB- a son of the Daoguang Emperor -RRB- , staged a coup that ousted several regents for the boy emperor .
Between 1861 and 1873 , she and Ci'an served as regents , choosing the reign title `` Tongzhi '' -LRB- ruling together -RRB- .
In the spring of 1881 , Ci'an suddenly died , aged only forty-three , leaving Cixi as sole regent .
In response , Germany used the murders as a pretext for a naval occupation of Jiaozhou Bay .
The occupation prompted a `` scramble for concessions '' in 1898 , which included the German lease of Jiazhou Bay , the Russian acquisition of Liaodong , and the British lease of the New Territories of Hong Kong .
The emperor issued a series of edicts and plans were made to reorganize the bureaucracy , restructure the school system , and appoint new officials .
Opposition from the bureaucracy was immediate and intense .
Yet many of the plans stayed in place , and the goals of reform were implanted .
Cixi declared war on all of these nations , only to lose control of Beijing after a short , but hard-fought campaign .
The victorious allies drew up scores of demands on the Qing government , including compensation for their expenses in invading China and execution of complicit officials .
By the early 20th century , mass civil disorder had begun in China , and it was growing continuously .
Rumors held that she or Yuan Shikai ordered trusted eunuchs to poison the Guangxu Emperor , and an autopsy conducted nearly a century later confirmed lethal levels of arsenic in his corpse .
This was followed by the dismissal of General Yuan Shikai from his former positions of power .
In April 1911 Zaifeng created a cabinet in which there were two vice-premiers .
Nonetheless , this cabinet was also known by contemporaries as `` The Royal Cabinet '' because among the thirteen cabinet members , five were members of the imperial family or Aisin Gioro relatives .
This brought a wide range of negative opinions from senior officials like Zhang Zhidong .
Many provinces soon began `` separating '' from Qing control .
Seeing a desperate situation unfold , the Qing government brought Yuan Shikai back to military power .
He took control of his Beiyang Army to crush the revolution in Wuhan at the Battle of Yangxia .
After taking the position of Prime Minister and creating his own cabinet , Yuan Shikai went as far as to ask for the removal of Zaifeng from the regency .
This removal later proceeded with directions from Empress Dowager Longyu .
He reasoned that going to war would be unreasonable and costly , especially when noting that the Qing government had a goal for constitutional monarchy .
Similarly , Sun Yat-sen 's government wanted a republican constitutional reform , both aiming for the benefit of China 's economy and populace .
The unorganized political and economic systems combined with a widespread criticism of Chinese culture led to questioning and doubt about the future .
After the invasion by the Soviet Union , Manchukuo collapsed in 1945 .
Civil appointments ranged from attendant to the emperor or a Grand Secretary in the Forbidden City -LRB- highest -RRB- to being a prefectural tax collector , deputy jail warden , deputy police commissioner or tax examiner .
Military appointments ranged from being a field marshal or chamberlain of the imperial bodyguard to a third class sergeant , corporal or a first or second class private .
The institutions which had been inherited from the Ming formed the core of the Qing `` Outer Court , '' which handled routine matters and was located in the southern part of the Forbidden City .
-LSB- g -RSB- It emerged in the 1720s under the reign of the Yongzheng Emperor as a body charged with handling Qing military campaigns against the Mongols , but it soon took over other military and administrative duties and served to centralize authority under the crown .
The Grand Councillors -LSB- h -RSB- served as a sort of privy council to the emperor .
The Han Chinese appointee was required to do the substantive work and the Manchu to ensure Han loyalty to Qing rule .
The distinction between Han Chinese and Manchus extended to their court costumes .
This institution was established to supervise the administration of Tibet and the Mongol lands .
As the empire expanded , it took over administrative responsibility of all minority ethnic groups living in and around the empire , including early contacts with Russia -- then seen as a tribute nation .
The office had the status of a full ministry and was headed by officials of equal rank .
However , appointees were at first restricted only to candidates of Manchu and Mongol ethnicity , until later open to Han Chinese as well .
The office was originally intended to be temporary and was staffed by officials seconded from the Grand Council .
However , as dealings with foreigners became increasingly complicated and frequent , the office grew in size and importance , aided by revenue from customs duties which came under its direct jurisdiction .
There was also another government institution called Imperial Household Department which was unique to the Qing dynasty .
Relations with the Salt Superintendents and salt merchants , such as those at Yangzhou , were particularly lucrative , especially since they were direct , and did not go through absorptive layers of bureaucracy .
The department was manned by booi , -LSB- o -RSB- or `` bondservants , '' from the Upper Three Banners .
By the 19th century , it managed the activities of at least 56 subagencies .
In addition , many surrounding countries , such as Korea -LRB- Joseon dynasty -RRB- , Vietnam frequently paid tribute to China during much of this period .
Khanate of Kokand were forced to submit as protectorate and pay tribute to the Qing dynasty in China between 1774 and 1798 .
The provincial bureaucracy continued the Yuan and Ming practice of three parallel lines , civil , military , and censorate , or surveillance .
The lowest unit was the county , overseen by a county magistrate .
The position of viceroy or governor-general -LRB- 總督 , zongdu -RRB- was the highest rank in the provincial administration .
The Viceroy of Zhili , who was responsible for the area surrounding the capital Beijing , is usually considered as the most honorable and powerful viceroy among the eight .
Imperial commissioners and garrisons were sent to Mongolia and Tibet to oversee their affairs .
Qinghai was also put under direct control of the Qing court .
Han migrants were at first forbidden from permanently settling in the Tarim Basin but were the ban was lifted after the invasion by Jahangir Khoja in the 1820s .
Manchuria was originally separated from China proper by the Inner Willow Palisade , a ditch and embankment planted with willows intended to restrict the movement of the Han Chinese , as the area was off-limits to civilian Han Chinese until the government started colonizing the area , especially since the 1860s .
However , Qing policy changed with the establishment of Xinjiang province in 1884 .
The Qing court sent forces to defeat Yaqub Beg and Xinjiang was reconquered , and then the political system of China proper was formally applied onto Xinjiang .
The Kumul Khanate , which was incorporated into the Qing empire as a vassal after helping Qing defeat the Zunghars in 1757 , maintained its status after Xinjiang turned into a province through the end of the dynasty in the Xinhai Revolution up until 1930 .
The British agreed not to annex Tibetan territory or to interfere in the administration of Tibet , while China engaged not to permit any other foreign state to interfere with the territory or internal administration of Tibet .
Furthermore , similar to Xinjiang which was converted into a province earlier , the Qing government also turned Manchuria into three provinces in the early 20th century , officially known as the `` Three Northeast Provinces '' , and established the post of Viceroy of the Three Northeast Provinces to oversee these provinces , making the total number of regional viceroys to nine .
They were commanded by hereditary Manchu princes descended from Nurhachi 's immediate family , known informally as the `` Iron cap princes '' .
Together they formed the ruling council of the Manchu nation as well as high command of the army .
Nurhachi 's son Hong Taiji expanded the system to include mirrored Mongol and Han Banners .
After capturing Beijing in 1644 , the relatively small Banner armies were further augmented by the Green Standard Army , made up of those Ming troops who had surrendered to the Qing , which eventually outnumbered Banner troops three to one .
They maintained their Ming era organization and were led by a mix of Banner and Green Standard officers .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The years leading up to the conquest increased the number of Han Chinese under Manchu rule , leading Hong Taiji to create the Eight Han Banners -LRB- zh -RRB- , and around the time of the Qing takeover of Beijing , their numbers rapidly swelled .
Han also numerically dominated the Banners up until the mid 18th century .
This led to a change from Han majority to a Manchu majority within the Banner system , and previous Han Bannermen garrisons in southern China such as at Fuzhou , Zhenjiang , Guangzhou , were replaced by Manchu Bannermen in the purge , which started in 1754 .
The turnover by Qianlong most heavily impacted Han banner garrisons stationed in the provinces while it less impacted Han Bannermen in Beijing , leaving a larger proportion of remaining Han Bannermen in Beijing than the provinces .
Han Bannermen 's status was decreased from that point on with Manchu Banners gaining higher status .
Han Bannermen numbered 75 % in 1648 Shunzhi 's reign , 72 % in 1723 Yongzheng 's reign , but decreased to 43 % in 1796 during the first year of Jiaqing 's reign , which was after Qianlong 's purge .
The mass discharge was known as the Disbandment of the Han Banners -LRB- zh -RRB- .
Qianlong directed most of his ire at those Han Bannermen descended from defectors who joined the Qing after the Qing passed through the Great Wall at Shanhai Pass in 1644 , deeming their ancestors as traitors to the Ming and therefore untrustworthy , while retaining Han Bannermen who were descended from defectors who joined the Qing before 1644 in Liaodong and marched through Shanhai pass , also known as those who `` followed the Dragon through the pass '' -LRB- 從龍入關 ; cong long ru guan -RRB- .
Shortly thereafter , a Taiping expeditionary force penetrated as far north as the suburbs of Tianjin , the imperial heartlands .
In desperation the Qing court ordered a Chinese official , Zeng Guofan , to organize regional and village militias into an emergency army called tuanlian .
The Xiang Army was a hybrid of local militia and a standing army .
It was given professional training , but was paid for out of regional coffers and funds its commanders -- mostly members of the Chinese gentry -- could muster .
The Xiang Army and its successor , the Huai Army , created by Zeng Guofan 's colleague and mentee Li Hongzhang , were collectively called the `` Yong Ying '' -LRB- Brave Camp -RRB- .
Zeng Guofan had no prior military experience .
Qi Jiguang 's doctrine was based on Neo-Confucian ideas of binding troops ' loyalty to their immediate superiors and also to the regions in which they were raised .
However , the success of the Yongying system led to its becoming a permanent regional force within the Qing military , which in the long run created problems for the beleaguered central government .
First , the Yongying system signaled the end of Manchu dominance in Qing military establishment .
Finally , the nature of Yongying command structure fostered nepotism and cronyism amongst its commanders , who laid the seeds of regional warlordism in the first half of the 20th century .
By the late 19th century , the most conservative elements within the Qing court could no longer ignore China 's military weakness .
The advent of modern weaponry resulting from the European Industrial Revolution had rendered China 's traditionally trained and equipped army and navy obsolete .
Losing the First Sino-Japanese War of 1894 -- 1895 was a watershed .
The Japanese victory occurred a mere three decades after the Meiji Restoration set a feudal Japan on course to emulate the Western nations in their economic and technological achievements .
People in this period were also remarkably on the move .
There is evidence suggesting that the empire 's rapidly expanding population was geographically mobile on a scale , which , in term of its volume and its protracted and routinized nature , was unprecedented in Chinese history .
Indeed , the Qing government did far more to encourage mobility than to discourage it .
Parties to the latter would include the empire 's increasingly large and mobile manual workforce , as well as its densely overlapping internal diaspora of local-origin-based merchant groups .
It would also included the patterned movement of Qing subjects overseas , largely to Southeastern Asia , in search of trade and other economic opportunities .
Apart from the estates of the officials , the comparatively minuscule aristocracy , and the degree-holding literati , there also existed a major division among ordinary Chinese between commoners and people with inferior status .
Qing law explicitly stated that the traditional four occupational groups of scholars , farmers , artisans and merchants were `` good '' , or having a status of commoners .
On the other hand , slaves or bondservants , entertainers -LRB- including prostitutes and actors -RRB- , and those low-level employees of government officials were the `` mean people '' .
Mean people were considered legally inferior to commoners and suffered unequal treatments , forbidden to take the imperial examination .
In the following century , markets continued to expand as in the late Ming period , but with more trade between regions , a greater dependence on overseas markets and a greatly increased population .
After the re-opening of the southeast coast , which had been closed in the late 17th century , foreign trade was quickly re-established , and was expanding at 4 % per annum throughout the latter part of the 18th century .
The government broadened land ownership by returning land that had been sold to large landowners in the late Ming period by families unable to pay the land tax .
The administration of the Grand Canal was made more efficient , and transport opened to private merchants .
Wary of the power of wealthy merchants , Qing rulers limited their trading licenses and usually refused them permission to open new mines , except in poor areas .
New species of rice from Southeast Asia led to a huge increase in production .
Merchant guilds proliferated in all of the growing Chinese cities and often acquired great social and even political influence .
Rich merchants with official connections built up huge fortunes and patronized literature , theater and the arts .
Textile and handicraft production boomed .
The Kangxi and Qianlong Emperors , for instance , embraced Chinese traditions both to control them and to proclaim their own legitimacy .
Court painters made new versions of the Song masterpiece , Zhang Zeduan 's Along the River During the Qingming Festival whose depiction of a prosperous and happy realm demonstrated the beneficence of the emperor .
The emperors undertook tours of the south and commissioned monumental scrolls to depict the grandeur of the occasion .
Imperial patronage also encouraged the industrial production of ceramics and Chinese export porcelain .
Yet the most impressive aesthetic works were done among the scholars and urban elite .
Literature grew to new heights in the Qing period .
The poetry of the Qing dynasty is a lively field of research , being studied -LRB- along with the poetry of the Ming dynasty -RRB- for its association with Chinese opera , developmental trends of Classical Chinese poetry , the transition to a greater role for vernacular language , and for poetry by women in Chinese culture .
The Qing dynasty was a period of much literary collection and criticism , and many of the modern popular versions of Classical Chinese poems were transmitted through Qing dynasty anthologies , such as the Quantangshi and the Three Hundred Tang Poems .
Cuisine aroused a cultural pride in the accumulated richness of a long and varied past .
The Manchu Han Imperial Feast originated at the court .
Nevertheless , culinary traditionalists such as Yuan Mei lambasted the opulent culinary rituals of the Manchu Han Imperial Feast , saying that it is cause in part by '' ... the vulgar habits of bad chefs '' and that `` Display this trite are useful only for welcoming new relations through one 's gates or when the boss comes to visit . ''
-LRB- 皆惡廚陋習 。 只可用之於新親上門 ， 上司入境 -RRB-
Indigenous peoples are commonly known in Canada as Aboriginal peoples , which include First Nations , Inuit , and Métis peoples .
These early Paleo-Indians spread throughout the Americas , diversifying into many hundreds of culturally distinct nations and tribes .
This unifying concept , codified in law , religion , and politics , was not originally accepted by indigenous peoples but has been embraced by many over the last two centuries .
Some , such as the Quechuan languages , Aymara , Guaraní , Mayan languages , and Nahuatl , count their speakers in millions .
Like most cultures , over time , cultures specific to many indigenous peoples have evolved to incorporate traditional aspects , but also cater to modern needs .
Others were contemporary with this period , and are also known from historical accounts of the time .
A few , such as the Mayan , Olmec , Mixtec , and Nahua peoples , had their own written records .
The loss of lives was exacerbated by conflict between colonists and indigenous people .
Colonists also frequently perpetrated massacres on the indigenous groups and enslaved them .
According to the U.S. Bureau of the Census -LRB- 1894 -RRB- , the North American Indian Wars of the 19th century cost the lives of about 19,000 whites and 30,000 Native Americans .
Two months later , after consultation with the Audencia of Santo Domingo , Enriquillo was offered any part of the island to live in peace .
Various theories for the decline of the Native American populations emphasize epidemic diseases , conflicts with Europeans , and conflicts among warring tribes .
Smallpox was only the first epidemic .
Typhus -LRB- probably -RRB- in 1546 , influenza and smallpox together in 1558 , smallpox again in 1589 , diphtheria in 1614 , measles in 1618 -- all ravaged the remains of Inca culture .
As it had done elsewhere , the virus wiped out entire population groups of Native Americans .
During the 1770s , smallpox killed at least 30 % of the West Coast Native Americans .
The 1775 -- 82 North American smallpox epidemic and 1837 Great Plains smallpox epidemic brought devastation and drastic population depletion among the Plains Indians .
Some of these animals escaped and began to breed and increase their numbers in the wild .
Over 99 % of all modern cultivated potatoes worldwide are descendants of a subspecies indigenous to south-central Chile , Solanum tuberosum ssp .
According to George Raudzens , `` It is clear that in pre-Columbian times some groups struggled to survive and often suffered food shortages and famines , while others enjoyed a varied and substantial diet . ''
It made travel easier and facilitated the growth of herbs and berry-producing plants , which were important for both food and medicines .
Although Spaniards initially taught indigenous scribes alphabetic writing , the tradition became self-perpetuating at the local level .
The tuning of these flutes is not precise and depends on the length of the wood used and the hand span of the intended player , but the finger holes are most often around a whole step apart and , at least in Northern California , a flute was not used if it turned out to have an interval close to a half step .
Contributions include pottery , paintings , jewellery , weavings , sculptures , basketry , carvings , and beadwork .
The largest indigenous ethnic groups are : Quechua , about 2.5 million people ; Aymara , 2.0 million ; Chiquitano , 181,000 ; Guaraní , 126,000 ; and Mojeño , 69,000 .
Some 124,000 belong to smaller indigenous groups .
That march successfully pressured the national government to sign the ILO Convention 169 and to begin the still-ongoing process of recognizing and titling indigenous territories .
The 1994 Law of Popular Participation granted `` grassroots territorial organizations '' that are recognized by the state certain rights to govern local areas .
A vote on further autonomy will take place in referendums which are expected to be held in December 2009 .
The Inuit had more limited interaction with European settlers during that early period .
Aboriginal Right to Self-Government provides opportunity to manage historical , cultural , political , health care and economic control aspects within first people 's communities .
These attempts reached a climax in the late 19th and early 20th centuries with forced integration .
Relations with the new Chilean Republic were good until the Chilean state decided to occupy their lands .
Their land was opened to settlement by Chileans and Europeans .
Conflict over Mapuche land rights continues to the present .
Linguistic evidence suggests that the Salascan and the Saraguro may have been the descendants of Bolivian ethnic groups transplanted to Ecuador as mitimaes .
The Pipil had no precious mineral resources , but they did have rich and fertile land that was good for farming .
The Spaniards were disappointed not to find gold or jewels in El Salvador as they had in other lands like Guatemala or Mexico , but upon learning of the fertile land in El Salvador , they attempted to conquer it .
After fierce battles , the Pipil successfully fought off the Spanish army led by Pedro de Alvarado along with their Mexican Indian allies -LRB- the Tlaxcalas -RRB- , sending them back to Guatemala .
After many other attacks with an army reinforced with Guatemalan Indian allies , the Spanish were able to conquer Cuzcatlan .
After further attacks , the Spanish also conquered the Lenca people .
Today many Pipil and other indigenous populations live in the many small towns of El Salvador like Izalco , Panchimalco , Sacacoyo , and Nahuizalco .
The law includes all indigenous languages of the Americas regardless of origin ; that is , it includes the indigenous languages of ethnic groups non-native to the territory .
As such the National Commission for the Development of Indigenous Peoples recognizes the language of the Kickapoo , who immigrated from the United States , and recognizes the languages of the Guatemalan indigenous refugees .
Their territory extended from Cape Camarón , Honduras , to Rio Grande , Nicaragua along the Mosquito Coast .
There is a native Miskito language , but large groups speak Miskito Coast Creole , Spanish , Rama and other languages .
Many are Christians .
Traditional Miskito society was highly structured with a defined political structure .
Instead , the power was split between himself , a governor , a general , and by the 1750s , an admiral .
Historical information on kings is often obscured by the fact that many of the kings were semi-mythical .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Tribes have established their own criteria for membership , which are often based on blood quantum , lineal descent , or residency .
Some California and Southwestern tribes , such as the Kumeyaay , Cocopa , Pascua Yaqui and Apache span both sides of the US -- Mexican border .
Athabascan , Tlingit , Haida , Tsimshian , Iñupiat , Blackfeet , Nakota , Cree , Anishinaabe , Huron , Lenape , Mi ` kmaq , Penobscot , and Haudenosaunee , among others live in both Canada and the US .
The most important indigenous groups are the Ye ` kuana , the Wayuu , the Pemon and the Warao .
Autosomal `` atDNA '' markers are also used , but differ from mtDNA or Y-DNA in that they overlap significantly .
The paternal lineages of Altaians mostly belong to the subclades of haplogroup P-M45 -LRB- xR1a 38-93 % ; xQ1a 4-32 % -RRB- .
Professor Kelly Graf said ,
It is the world 's only contiguous Eurafrasian nation .
Egypt is a Mediterranean country .
About half of Egypt 's residents live in urban areas , with most spread across the densely populated centres of greater Cairo , Alexandria and other major cities in the Nile Delta .
During the Neolithic era , several predynastic cultures developed independently in Upper and Lower Egypt .
The earliest known Lower Egyptian site , Merimda , predates the Badarian by about seven hundred years .
Stronger Nile floods and stabilisation of government , however , brought back renewed prosperity for the country in the Middle Kingdom c. 2040 BC , reaching a peak during the reign of Pharaoh Amenemhat III .
They were driven out by an Upper Egyptian force led by Ahmose I , who founded the Eighteenth Dynasty and relocated the capital from Memphis to Thebes .
The first historically attested expression of monotheism came during this period as Atenism .
Frequent contacts with other nations brought new ideas to the New Kingdom .
A few temporarily successful revolts against the Persians marked the fifth century BC , but Egypt was never able to permanently overthrow the Persians .
Nevertheless , Hellenistic culture continued to thrive in Egypt well after the Muslim conquest .
Early in this period , Egyptians began to blend their new faith with indigenous beliefs and practices , leading to various Sufi orders that have flourished to this day .
These earlier rites had survived the period of Coptic Christianity .
Education and training of the new soldiers was not an option ; the new concepts were furthermore enforced by isolation .
It was with the help of this newly reborn martial unit that Muhammad Ali imposed his rule over Egypt .
Its construction led to enormous debt to European banks , and caused popular discontent because of the onerous taxation it required .
Within three years this led to the imposition of British and French controllers who sat in the Egyptian cabinet , and , `` with the financial power of the bondholders behind them , were the real power in the Government . ''
In 1936 , the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty was concluded .
Continued instability due to remaining British influence and increasing political involvement by the king led to the dissolution of the parliament in a military coup d'état known as the 1952 Revolution .
During most of its existence , the United Arab Republic was also in a loose confederation with North Yemen -LRB- or the Mutawakkilite Kingdom of Yemen -RRB- , known as the United Arab States .
In 1959 , the All-Palestine Government of the Gaza Strip , an Egyptian client state , was absorbed into the United Arab Republic under the pretext of Arab union , and was never restored .
On 26 May Nasser declared , `` The battle will be a general one and our basic objective will be to destroy Israel '' .
Fewer than half of all primary-school-age children attended school , most of them being boys .
Nasser 's policies changed this .
Land reform and distribution , the dramatic growth in university education , and government support to national industries greatly improved social mobility and flattened the social curve .
From academic year 1953-54 through 1965-66 , overall public school enrolments more than doubled .
Millions of previously poor Egyptians , through education and jobs in the public sector , joined the middle class .
He launched the Infitah economic reform policy , while clamping down on religious and secular opposition .
Dessouki also stated that `` the real center of power in Egypt is the military '' .
Participation was low with only 38.6 % of registered voters participating although this was higher than the 33 % who voted in a referendum during Morsi 's tenure .
The poll , held between 26 and 28 May 2014 , resulted in a landslide victory for el-Sisi .
Sisi was sworn into office as President of Egypt on 8 June 2014 .
Even though the military-backed authorities extended voting to a third day , the 46 % turnout was lower than the 52 % turnout in the 2012 election .
South of Cairo , rainfall averages only around 2 to 5 mm -LRB- 0.1 to 0.2 in -RRB- per year and at intervals of many years .
On a very thin strip of the northern coast the rainfall can be as high as 410 mm -LRB- 16.1 in -RRB- , mostly between October and March .
Frost is also known in mid-Sinai and mid-Egypt .
For some major groups , for example lichen-forming fungi and nematode worms , the number was not known .
Apart from small and well-studied groups like amphibians , birds , fish , mammals and reptiles , the many of those numbers are likely to increase as further species are recorded from Egypt .
For the fungi , including lichen-forming species , for example , subsequent work has shown that over 2200 species have been recorded from Egypt , and the final figure of all fungi actually occurring in the country is expected to be much higher .
Elections were last held between November 2011 and January 2012 which was later dissolved .
The next parliamentary election will be held within 6 months of the constitution 's ratification on 18 January 2014 .
Originally , the parliament was to be formed before the president was elected , but interim president Adly Mansour pushed the date .
The Egyptian presidential election , 2014 , took place on 26 -- 28 May 2014 .
Under the constitution , there is a guarantee of gender equality and absolute freedom of thought .
The military retains the ability to appoint the national Minister of Defence for the next 8 years .
The United States Commission on International Religious Freedom , a bipartisan independent agency of the US government , has placed Egypt on its watch list of countries that require close monitoring due to the nature and extent of violations of religious freedom engaged in or tolerated by the government .
Intolerance of Bahá ' ís and non-orthodox Muslim sects , such as Sufis , Shi'a and Ahmadis , also remains a problem .
Egypt 's authorities do not release figures on death sentences and executions , despite repeated requests over the years by human rights organisations .
The judgment was condemned as a violation of international law .
After Morsi was ousted by the military , the judiciary system aligned itself with the new government , actively suopporting the repression of Muslim Brotherhood members .
In December 2014 the judge Mohammed Nagi Shahata , notorious for his fierceness in passing on death sentences , condemened to the capital penalty 188 members of the Muslim Brotherhood , for assaulting a police station .
In 1989 , Egypt was designated as a major non-NATO ally of the United States .
There have been recent attempts , however , to normalise relations between the two , with both governments frequently calling for mutual support in the fight against regional and international terrorism .
The Armed Forces ' inventory includes equipment from different countries around the world .
Relations with China have also improved considerably .
The Arab League briefly moved from Egypt to Tunis in 1978 to protest the Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty , but it later returned to Cairo in 1989 .
Egypt 's ceasefire and truce brokering efforts in Gaza have hardly been challenged following Israel 's evacuation of its settlements from the strip in 2005 , despite increasing animosity towards the Hamas government in Gaza following the ouster of Mohamed Morsi , and despite recent attempts by countries like Turkey and Qatar to take over this role .
A rapidly growing population , limited arable land , and dependence on the Nile all continue to overtax resources and stress the economy .
Oil and gas are produced in the western desert regions , the Gulf of Suez , and the Nile Delta .
Egypt has huge reserves of gas , estimated at 2,180 cubic kilometres -LRB- 520 cu mi -RRB- , and LNG up to 2012 exported to many countries .
Egypt is counting on top liquid natural gas -LRB- LNG -RRB- exporter Qatar to obtain additional gas volumes in summer , while encouraging factories to plan their annual maintenance for those months of peak demand , said EGPC chairman , Tarek El Barkatawy .
In its annual report , the International Monetary Fund -LRB- IMF -RRB- has rated Egypt as one of the top countries in the world undertaking economic reforms .
Some major economic reforms undertaken by the government since 2003 include a dramatic slashing of customs and tariffs .
Corruption is often cited by Egyptians as the main impediment to further economic growth .
Some of these companies are the Xceed Contact Center , Raya , E Group Connections and C3 .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The Akba Gulf beaches also provide facilities for practising sea sports .
Safaga tops the Red Sea zone with its beautiful location on the Suez Gulf .
Also , Egypt possesses the largest oil refinery capacity in Africa 726,000 bbl/d -LRB- in 2012 -RRB- .
The northern terminus is Port Said and the southern terminus is Port Tawfiq at the city of Suez .
Ismailia lies on its west bank , 3 km -LRB- 1.9 mi -RRB- from the half-way point .
It consists of the northern access channel of 22 km -LRB- 14 mi -RRB- , the canal itself of 162.25 km -LRB- 100.82 mi -RRB- and the southern access channel of 9 km -LRB- 5.6 mi -RRB- .
The canal is a single lane with passing places in the `` Ballah By-Pass '' and the Great Bitter Lake .
The current south of the lakes changes with the tide at Suez .
About one half of the population is connected to sanitary sewers .
Poor operation of facilities , such as water and wastewater treatment plants , as well as limited government accountability and transparency , are also issues .
-LSB- nb 1 -RSB- The once-vibrant and ancient Greek and Jewish communities in Egypt have almost disappeared , with only a small number remaining in the country , but many Egyptian Jews visit on religious or other occasions and tourism .
Arabic was adopted by the Egyptians after the Arab invasion of Egypt .
Egypt emerged as a centre of politics and culture in the Muslim world .
It is estimated that 15 million Egyptians follow Native Sufi orders , with the Sufi leadership asserting that the numbers are much greater as many Egyptian Sufis are not officially registered with a Sufi order .
Other native Egyptian Christians are adherents of the Coptic Catholic Church , the Evangelical Church of Egypt and various other Protestant denominations .
Individuals , particularly Baha'is and atheists , wishing to include their religion -LRB- or lack thereof -RRB- on their mandatory state issued identification cards are denied this ability -LRB- see Egyptian identification card controversy -RRB- , and are put in the position of either not obtaining required identification or lying about their faith .
The Egyptians were one of the first major civilisations to codify design elements in art and architecture .
It is considered to be the first synthetic pigment .
Egyptian civilisation is renowned for its colossal pyramids , temples and monumental tombs .
Modern and contemporary Egyptian art can be as diverse as any works in the world art scene , from the vernacular architecture of Hassan Fathy and Ramses Wissa Wassef , to Mahmoud Mokhtar 's sculptures , to the distinctive Coptic iconography of Isaac Fanous .
Egyptian literature traces its beginnings to ancient Egypt and is some of the earliest known literature .
It is an important cultural element in the life of Egypt .
Egyptian novelist Naguib Mahfouz was the first Arabic-language writer to win the Nobel Prize in Literature .
Egyptian women writers include Nawal El Saadawi , well known for her feminist activism , and Alifa Rifaat who also writes about women and tradition .
Egyptian cinema became a regional force with the coming of sound .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Egypt is considered the leading country in the field of cinema in the Middle East .
Actors from all over the Arab World seek to appear in the Egyptian cinema for the sake of fame .
The Cairo International Film Festival has been rated as one of 11 festivals with a top class rating worldwide by the International Federation of Film Producers ' Associations .
It has been an integral part of Egyptian culture since antiquity .
Egyptians used music instruments since then .
Egypt has one of the oldest civilisations in the world .
In addition , ful medames -LRB- mashed fava beans -RRB- is one of the most popular dishes .
Al Ahly is the most successful club of the 20th century in the African continent according to CAF , closely followed by their rivals Zamalek SC .
Al Ahly was named in 2000 by the Confederation of African Football as the `` African Club of the Century '' .
Egypt has hosted several international competitions .
Ahmed set a new world record Friday when he reached a depth of more than 1,000 feet .
Early Christian basilicas from the 4th century onwards were decorated with wall and ceiling mosaics .
Mythological subjects , or scenes of hunting or other pursuits of the wealthy , were popular as the centrepieces of a larger geometric design , with strongly emphasized borders .
Both of these themes were widely copied .
The peristyle , the imperial apartments and the thermae were also decorated with ornamental and mythological mosaics .
The most important scenes there depicted Orpheus , Alexander the Great 's Hunt and the Four Seasons .
The mosaics show a warrior in combat with a deer , four young men wrestling a wild bull to the ground , and a gladiator resting in a state of fatigue , staring at his slain opponent .
The mosaics decorated the walls of a cold plunge pool in a bath house within a Roman villa .
The Rotunda of Galerius in Thessaloniki , converted into a Christian church during the course of the 4th century , was embellished with very high artistic quality mosaics .
Only fragments survive of the original decoration , especially a band depicting saints with hands raised in prayer , in front of complex architectural fantasies .
In the following century Ravenna , the capital of the Western Roman Empire , became the center of late Roman mosaic art -LRB- see details in Ravenna section -RRB- .
Saint Victor is depicted in the center of the golden dome , while figures of saints are shown on the walls before a blue background .
The low spandrels give space for the symbols of the four Evangelists .
The vaults of the small , cross-shaped structure are clad with mosaics on blue background .
The central motif above the crossing is a golden cross in the middle of the starry sky .
The mosaics depicted the storm , portraits of members of the western and eastern imperial family and the bishop of Ravenna , Peter Chrysologus .
Outstanding examples of Byzantine mosaic art are the later phase mosaics in the Basilica of San Vitale and Basilica of Sant ` Apollinare Nuovo .
Superimposed on this scheme are two large tablets , tabulae ansatae , carrying inscriptions .
This anonymous dedicatory inscription is a public demonstration of the benefactors ' humility and an acknowledgement of God 's omniscience .
5th century mosaics can be found over the triumphal arch and in the nave of the basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore .
The 27 surviving panels of the nave are the most important mosaic cycle in Rome of this period .
Two other important 5th century mosaics are lost but we know them from 17th-century drawings .
At Sant ` Andrea in Catabarbara -LRB- 468 -- 483 , destroyed in 1686 -RRB- Christ appeared in the center , flanked on either side by three Apostles .
Four streams flowed from the little mountain supporting Christ .
The composition probably remained unchanged : Christ flanked by male and female saints , seated on a hill while lambs drinking from a stream at its feet .
Another great work of Pope Leo , the apse mosaic of Santa Susanna , depicted Christ with the Pope and Charlemagne on one side , and SS .
Susanna and Felicity on the other .
It was plastered over during a renovation in 1585 .
The figures , animals , plants all are entirely classical but they are scattered before a plain background .
Some fragments survive from the mosaics of this vaulted room .
There were similar crosses in the apses of the Hagia Sophia Church in Thessaloniki and in the Church of the Dormition in Nicaea .
The altar is surmounted by a mosaic image of Christ .
In the main altar one can see the mosaic of the Exhaltation of Adam .
In the apse the Ascension of Christ .
The Annunciation occupies the two pillars next to the altar . ''
Above the principal door from the narthex we can see an Emperor kneeling before Christ -LRB- late 9th or early 10th century -RRB- .
Above the door from the southwest vestibule to the narthex another mosaic shows the Theotokos with Justinian and Constantine .
Justinian I is offering the model of the church to Mary while Constantine is holding a model of the city in his hand .
Both emperors are beardless -- this is an example for conscious archaization as contemporary Byzantine rulers were bearded .
The empress with her long braided hair and rosy cheeks is especially capturing .
The adjacent portrait of Emperor Alexios I Komnenos on a pier -LRB- from 1122 -RRB- is similarly personal .
The imperial mausoleum of the Komnenos dynasty , the Pantokrator Monastery was certainly decorated with great mosaics but these were later destroyed .
The lack of Komnenian mosaics outside the capital is even more apparent .
A striking technical innovation of the Komnenian period was the production of very precious , miniature mosaic icons .
The Louvre Transfiguration is a very fine example from the late 12th century .
In the dome is the traditional stern Pantokrator , with prophets and cherubim below .
The esonarthex has two fluted domes , specially created to provide the ideal setting for the mosaic images of the ancestors of Christ .
The southern one is called the Dome of the Pantokrator while the northern one is the Dome of the Theotokos .
The most important panel of the esonarthex depicts Theodore Metochites wearing a huge turban , offering the model of the church to Christ .
The walls of both narthexes are decorated with mosaic cycles from the life of the Virgin and the life of Christ .
A similar mosaic , the Coronation of the Virgin , decorates the apse of Santa Maria Maggiore .
It is a work of Jacopo Torriti from 1295 .
The apse mosaic of San Crisogono is attributed to Pietro Cavallini , the greatest Roman painter of the 13th century .
Six scenes from the life of Mary in Santa Maria in Trastevere were also executed by Cavallini in 1290 .
These mosaics are praised for their realistic portrayal and attempts of perspective .
The church belonged to the Order of the Trinitarians which was devoted to ransoming Christian slaves .
Such a natural representation of a seascape was known only from ancient works of art .
Best examples of Sicilian mosaic art are the Cappella Palatina of Roger II , the Martorana church in Palermo and the cathedrals of Cefalù and Monreale .
The iconography of the mosaics in the presbytery is similar to Cefalu while the pictures in the nave are almost the same as the narrative scenes in the Cappella Palatina .
The scenes depict biblical characters , warrior kings , medieval beasts , allegories of the months and working activity .
The decoration of the church was finished only in the 16th century .
The mosaics were executed in the 1220s .
The apse of the San Cipriano Church in Murano was decorated with an impressive golden mosaic from the early 13th century showing Christ enthroned with Mary , St John and the two patron saints , Cipriano and Cipriana .
According to chronicler Leo of Ostia the Greek artists decorated the apse , the arch and the vestibule of the basilica .
`` The abbot in his wisdom decided that great number of young monks in the monastery should be thoroughly initiated in these arts '' -- says the chronicler about the role of the Greeks in the revival of mosaic art in medieval Italy .
A mosaic panel was unearthed which was dated to the 9th century .
It somewhat incongruously uses cubes of gilded glass and deep green marble , probably taken from antique pavements .
More fragments were found on the site of Saint-Croix at Poitiers which might be from the 6th or 9th century .
It was probably a work of Venetian or Ravennese craftsmen , executed in the first decades of the 11th century .
The Golden Gate of the St. Vitus Cathedral in Prague got its name from the golden 14th-century mosaic of the Last Judgement above the portal .
More substantial fragments were preserved from the 12th-century mosaic decoration of the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem .
The mosaics in the nave are arranged in five horizontal bands with the figures of the ancestors of Christ , Councils of the Church and angels .
In the apses the Annunciation , the Nativity , Adoration of the Magi and Dormition of the Blessed Virgin can be seen .
The panels depict real or fantastic animal , floral , solar and geometric representations .
Other experts claim that it was part of the later Catholic monastery on the site because it shows the signs of strong Italianate influence .
The Madaba Map is the oldest surviving cartographic depiction of the Holy Land .
The largest and most detailed element of the topographic depiction is Jerusalem , at the center of the map .
The map is enriched with many naturalistic features , like animals , fishing boats , bridges and palm trees
In the apse we can see the Transfiguration of Jesus on a golden background .
The apse is surrounded with bands containing medallions of apostles and prophets , and two contemporary figure , `` Abbot Longinos '' and `` John the Deacon '' .
The present remains do not do justice to the original richness of the city .
Populating the vine 's branches are peacocks , ducks , storks , pigeons , an eagle , a partridge , and a parrot in a cage .
The inscription reads : `` For the memory and salvation of all those Armenians whose name the Lord knows . ''
Beneath a corner of the mosaic is a small , natural cave which contained human bones dating to the 5th or 6th centuries .
They were laid down in the Umayyad era , after a devastating earthquake in 659 .
Two six pointed stars and a red chalice are the most important surviving features .
In the first half of the 6th century the mosaics of the northern aisle and the eastern end of the southern aisle were installed .
On the central panel hunting and fishing scenes are depicted while another panel illustrates the most important cities of the region .
The frame of the mosaic is especially decorative .
It overlays another , damaged , mosaic floor of the earlier -LRB- 587 -RRB- `` Church of Bishop Sergius . ''
Another four churches were excavated nearby with traces of mosaic decoration .
The craft has also been popular in early medieval Rus , inherited as part of the Byzantine tradition .
Naturally the more important surfaces in the interior were decorated with golden mosaics .
In the dome we can see the traditional stern Pantokrator supported by angels .
Between the 12 windows of the drum were apostles and the four evangelists on the pendentives .
The apse is dominated by an orant Theotokos with a Deesis in three medallions above .
Below is a Communion of the Apostles .
The use of mosaic in Gelati attests to some Byzantine influence in the country and was a demonstration of the imperial ambition of the Bagrationids .
The mosaic covered church could compete in magnificence with the churches of Constantinople .
Gelati is one of few mosaic creations which survived in Georgia but fragments prove that the early churches of Pitsunda and Tsromi were also decorated with mosaic as well as other , lesser known sites .
The destroyed 6th century mosaic floors in the Pitsunda Cathedral have been inspired by Roman prototypes .
In Tsromi the tesserae are still visible on the walls of the 7th-century church but only faint lines hint at the original scheme .
In the center of the floor the zodiac wheel was depicted .
Along the sides of the mosaic are strips depicting Biblical scenes , such as the binding of Isaac , as well as traditional rituals , including a burnt sacrifice and the offering of fruits and grains .
The central panel is geometric while the western one is seriously damaged but it has been suggested that it depicted Daniel in the lion 's den .
The Roman synagogue in Ein Gedi was remodeled in the Byzantine era and a more elaborate mosaic floor was laid down above the older white panels .
The usual geometric design was enriched with birds in the center .
A further portion of the floor was divided by medallions formed by vine leaves , each of which contains an animal : a lioness suckling her cub , a giraffe , peacocks , panthers , bears , a zebra and so on .
It is very similar to that of the synagogue at Maon -LRB- Menois -RRB- and the Christian church at Shellal , suggesting that the same artist most probably worked at all three places .
Another Samaritan synagogue with a mosaic floor was located in Bet She'an -LRB- excavated in 1960 -RRB- .
The ban on human or animal images was more strictly observed by the Samaritans than their Jewish neighbours in the same town -LRB- see above -RRB- .
One of the inscriptions was written in Samaritan script .
The mosque was built between 706 and 715 .
The caliph obtained 200 skilled workers from the Byzantine Emperor to decorate the building .
This is evidenced by the partly Byzantine style of the decoration .
The mosaics of the inner courtyard depict Paradise with beautiful trees , flowers and small hill towns and villages in the background .
The mosaics include no human figures , which makes them different from the otherwise similar contemporary Byzantine works .
It is thought that the mosque used to have the largest gold mosaic in the world , at over 4 m2 .
The main panel depicts a large tree and underneath it a lion attacking a deer -LRB- right side -RRB- and two deers peacefully grazing -LRB- left side -RRB- .
The panel probably represents good and bad governance .
Mosaics with classical geometric motifs survived in the bath area of the 8th-century Umayyad palace complex in Anjar , Lebanon .
The best preserved panel at Hallabat is divided by a Tree of Life flanked by `` good '' animals on one side and `` bad '' animals on the other .
Among the Hallabat representations are vine scrolls , grapes , pomegranates , oryx , wolves , hares , a leopard , pairs of partridges , fish , bulls , ostriches , rabbits , rams , goats , lions and a snake .
They cover much of the floor of a finely decorated building that probably served as the palace of a local governor .
The Qastal mosaics depict geometrical patterns , trees , animals , fruits and rosettes .
Except for the open courtyard , entrance and staircases , the floors of the entire palace were covered in mosaics .
The decoration is composed of colorful floral arabesques and wide bands of Arab calligraphy .
The mosaics were purported to evoke the glamour of the Great Mosque in Damascus , which was lost for the Umayyad family .
Although he is the most prominent , other street and urban artists do work in Mosaic styles as well .
When the mosaic is complete , a similar medium is placed atop it .
The piece is then turned over , the original underlying material is carefully removed , and the piece is installed as in the indirect method described above .
In comparison to the indirect method , this is a complex system to use and requires great skill on the part of the operator , to avoid damaging the work .
The first documentary evidence of this comes from early in the life of the first university .
Today this is claimed as the origin of `` academic freedom '' .
The number of universities signing the Magna Charta Universitatum continues to grow , drawing from all parts of the world .
It is possible , however , that the development of cathedral schools into universities was quite rare , with the University of Paris being an exception .
Later they were also founded by Kings -LRB- University of Naples Federico II , Charles University in Prague , Jagiellonian University in Kraków -RRB- or municipal administrations -LRB- University of Cologne , University of Erfurt -RRB- .
Many historians state that universities and cathedral schools were a continuation of the interest in learning promoted by monasteries .
Some scholars believe that these works represented one of the most important document discoveries in Western intellectual history .
This became the primary mission of lecturers , and the expectation of students .
The university culture developed differently in northern Europe than it did in the south , although the northern -LRB- primarily Germany , France and Great Britain -RRB- and southern universities -LRB- primarily Italy -RRB- did have many elements in common .
Outside of these commonalities , great differences separated north and south , primarily in subject matter .
There were distinct differences in the quality of instruction in these areas which were congruent with their focus , so scholars would travel north or south based on their interests and means .
There was also a difference in the types of degrees awarded at these universities .
Italian universities awarded primarily doctorates .
The distinction can be attributed to the intent of the degree holder after graduation -- in the north the focus tended to be on acquiring teaching positions , while in the south students often went on to professional positions .
The structure of northern universities tended to be modeled after the system of faculty governance developed at the University of Paris .
Southern universities tended to be patterned after the student-controlled model begun at the University of Bologna .
Among the southern universities , a further distinction has been noted between those of northern Italy , which followed the pattern of Bologna as a `` self-regulating , independent corporation of scholars '' and those of southern Italy and Iberia , which were `` founded by royal and imperial charter to serve the needs of government . ''
George Makdisi and others , however , argue that the European university has no parallel in the medieval Islamic world .
Other scholars regard the university as uniquely European in origin and characteristics .
Other scholars see this argument as overstated .
In the 15th century , twenty-eight new ones were created , with another eighteen added between 1500 and 1625 .
This number does not include the numerous universities that disappeared , or institutions that merged with other universities during this time .
It should be noted that the identification of a university was not necessarily obvious during the Early Modern period , as the term is applied to a burgeoning number of institutions .
In fact , the term `` university '' was not always used to designate a higher education institution .
In Mediterranean countries , the term studium generale was still often used , while `` Academy '' was common in Northern European countries .
The propagation of universities was not necessarily a steady progression , as the 17th century was rife with events that adversely affected university expansion .
War , plague , famine , regicide , and changes in religious power and structure often adversely affected the societies that provided support for universities .
Internal strife within the universities themselves , such as student brawling and absentee professors , acted to destabilize these institutions as well .
Universities were also reluctant to give up older curricula , and the continued reliance on the works of Aristotle defied contemporary advancements in science and the arts .
There were also universities that combined these models , using the collegiate model but having a centralized organization .
The importance of humanism for changing this state-of-affairs can not be underestimated .
Once humanist professors joined the university faculty , they began to transform the study of grammar and rhetoric through the studia humanitatis .
Other scholars within the university were affected by the humanist approaches to learning and their linguistic expertise in relation to ancient texts , as well as the ideology that advocated the ultimate importance of those texts .
The critical mindset imparted by humanism was imperative for changes in universities and scholarship .
For instance , Andreas Vesalius was educated in a humanist fashion before producing a translation of Galen , whose ideas he verified through his own dissections .
Philipp Melanchthon cited the works of Erasmus as a highly influential guide for connecting theology back to original texts , which was important for the reform at Protestant universities .
Galileo Galilei , who taught at the Universities of Pisa and Padua , and Martin Luther , who taught at the University of Wittenberg -LRB- as did Melanchthon -RRB- , also had humanist training .
The task of the humanists was to slowly permeate the university ; to increase the humanist presence in professorships and chairs , syllabi and textbooks so that published works would demonstrate the humanistic ideal of science and scholarship .
The emergence of classical texts brought new ideas and led to a more creative university climate -LRB- as the notable list of scholars above attests to -RRB- .
This disposition toward knowledge manifested in not simply the translation and propagation of ancient texts , but also their adaptation and expansion .
There are several major exceptions on tuition fees .
They review financial requests and budget proposals and then allocate funds for each university in the system .
They also approve new programs of instruction and cancel or make changes in existing programs .
In addition , they plan for the further coordinated growth and development of the various institutions of higher education in the state or country .
However , many public universities in the world have a considerable degree of financial , research and pedagogical autonomy .
Private universities are privately funded and generally have broader independence from state policies .
An example is the Academy of European Law , which offers training in European law to lawyers , judges , barristers , solicitors , in-house counsel and academics .
A national university is generally a university created or run by a national state but at the same time represents a state autonomic institution which functions as a completely independent body inside of the same state .
The British also established universities worldwide , and higher education became available to the masses not only in Europe .
Other historians find incongruity in the proposition that the very place where the vast number of the scholars that influenced the scientific revolution received their education should also be the place that inhibits their research and the advancement of science .
It was the case that the academic foundations remaining from the Middle Ages were stable , and they did provide for an environment that fostered considerable growth and development .
However , university professors still utilized some autonomy , at least in the sciences , to choose epistemological foundations and methods .
There are many examples which belie the commonly perceived intransigence of universities .
Regardless of the way the tension between universities , individual scientists , and the scientific revolution itself is perceived , there was a discernible impact on the way that university education was constructed .
Although the connection between humanism and the scientific discovery may very well have begun within the confines of the university , the connection has been commonly perceived as having been severed by the changing nature of science during the scientific revolution .
Priests married , raised families , and led politically active lives .
Julius Caesar became pontifex maximus before he was elected consul .
The augurs read the will of the gods and supervised the marking of boundaries as a reflection of universal order , thus sanctioning Roman expansionism as a matter of divine destiny .
Roman religion was thus practical and contractual , based on the principle of do ut des , `` I give that you might give . ''
For ordinary Romans , religion was a part of daily life .
Neighborhood shrines and sacred places such as springs and groves dotted the city .
Women , slaves , and children all participated in a range of religious activities .
Inscriptions throughout the Empire record the side-by-side worship of local and Roman deities , including dedications made by Romans to local gods .
The monotheistic rigor of Judaism posed difficulties for Roman policy that led at times to compromise and the granting of special exemptions , but sometimes to intractable conflict .
For example , religious disputes helped cause the First Jewish -- Roman War and the Bar Kokhba revolt .
So-called `` emperor worship '' expanded on a grand scale the traditional Roman veneration of the ancestral dead and of the Genius , the divine tutelary of every individual .
This was the context for Rome 's conflict with Christianity , which Romans variously regarded as a form of atheism and novel superstitio .
Tullus Hostilius and Ancus Marcius instituted the fetial priests .
There were gods of the upper heavens , gods of the underworld and a myriad of lesser deities between .
At different times and in different places , the sphere of influence , character and functions of a divine being could expand , overlap with those of others , and be redefined as Roman .
Several versions of a semi-official , structured pantheon were developed during the political , social and religious instability of the Late Republican era .
A conceptual tendency toward triads may be indicated by the later agricultural or plebeian triad of Ceres , Liber and Libera , and by some of the complementary threefold deity-groupings of Imperial cult .
Other major and minor deities could be single , coupled , or linked retrospectively through myths of divine marriage and sexual adventure .
In this spirit , a provincial Roman citizen who made the long journey from Bordeaux to Italy to consult the Sibyl at Tibur did not neglect his devotion to his own goddess from home :
Some of the most ancient and popular festivals incorporated ludi -LRB- `` games , '' such as chariot races and theatrical performances -RRB- , with examples including those held at Palestrina in honour of Fortuna Primigenia during Compitalia , and the Ludi Romani in honour of Liber .
Other public festivals were not required by the calendar , but occasioned by events .
Additional festivals and games celebrated Imperial accessions and anniversaries .
Others , such as the traditional Republican Secular Games to mark a new era -LRB- saeculum -RRB- , became imperially funded to maintain traditional values and a common Roman identity .
That the spectacles retained something of their sacral aura even in late antiquity is indicated by the admonitions of the Church Fathers that Christians should not take part .
In his Fasti , a long-form poem covering Roman holidays from January to June , Ovid presents a unique look at Roman antiquarian lore , popular customs , and religious practice that is by turns imaginative , entertaining , high-minded , and scurrilous ; not a priestly account , despite the speaker 's pose as a vates or inspired poet-prophet , but a work of description , imagination and poetic etymology that reflects the broad humor and burlesque spirit of such venerable festivals as the Saturnalia , Consualia , and feast of Anna Perenna on the Ides of March , where Ovid treats the assassination of the newly deified Julius Caesar as utterly incidental to the festivities among the Roman people .
Accurate naming was vital for tapping into the desired powers of the deity invoked , hence the proliferation of cult epithets among Roman deities .
Public prayers -LRB- prex -RRB- were offered loudly and clearly by a priest on behalf of the community .
Public religious ritual had to be enacted by specialists and professionals faultlessly ; a mistake might require that the action , or even the entire festival , be repeated from the start .
The historian Livy reports an occasion when the presiding magistrate at the Latin festival forgot to include the `` Roman people '' among the list of beneficiaries in his prayer ; the festival had to be started over .
Ceres and other underworld goddesses of fruitfulness were sometimes offered pregnant female animals ; Tellus was given a pregnant cow at the Fordicidia festival .
Demigods and heroes , who belonged to the heavens and the underworld , were sometimes given black-and-white victims .
Robigo -LRB- or Robigus -RRB- was given red dogs and libations of red wine at the Robigalia for the protection of crops from blight and red mildew .
The `` contract '' with Jupiter is exceptionally detailed .
All due care would be taken of the animals .
If any died or were stolen before the scheduled sacrifice , they would count as already sacrificed , since they had already been consecrated .
In the imperial period , sacrifice was withheld following Trajan 's death because the gods had not kept the Emperor safe for the stipulated period .
The exta of bovine victims were usually stewed in a pot -LRB- olla or aula -RRB- , while those of sheep or pigs were grilled on skewers .
Livy avoids the word `` sacrifice '' in connection with this bloodless human life-offering ; Plutarch does not .
Its religious dimensions and purpose remain uncertain .
Pliny saw the ending of human sacrifice conducted by the druids as a positive consequence of the conquest of Gaul and Britain .
He offered daily cult to his lares and penates , and to his di parentes/divi parentes at his domestic shrines and in the fires of the household hearth .
In rural estates , bailiffs seem to have been responsible for at least some of the household shrines -LRB- lararia -RRB- and their deities .
Household cults had state counterparts .
Excessive devotion , fearful grovelling to deities and the improper use or seeking of divine knowledge were superstitio .
The official deities of the state were identified with its lawful offices and institutions , and Romans of every class were expected to honour the beneficence and protection of mortal and divine superiors .
The difference between public and private cult is often unclear .
Individuals or collegial associations could offer funds and cult to state deities .
Some rites of the domus -LRB- household -RRB- were held in public places but were legally defined as privata in part or whole .
Public cults required greater knowledge and expertise .
Twelve lesser flamines were each dedicated to a single deity , whose archaic nature is indicated by the relative obscurity of some .
Flamines were constrained by the requirements of ritual purity ; Jupiter 's flamen in particular had virtually no simultaneous capacity for a political or military career .
By the late Republican era , the flamines were supervised by the pontifical collegia .
Religious law was collegial and traditional ; it informed political decisions , could overturn them , and was difficult to exploit for personal gain .
Cult donations were the property of the deity , whose priest must provide cult regardless of shortfalls in public funding -- this could mean subsidy of acolytes and all other cult maintenance from personal funds .
For those who had reached their goal in the Cursus honorum , permanent priesthood was best sought or granted after a lifetime 's service in military or political life , or preferably both : it was a particularly honourable and active form of retirement which fulfilled an essential public duty .
For a freedman or slave , promotion as one of the Compitalia seviri offered a high local profile , and opportunities in local politics ; and therefore business .
In Rome , the same Imperial cult role was performed by the Arval Brethren , once an obscure Republican priesthood dedicated to several deities , then co-opted by Augustus as part of his religious reforms .
The Arvals offered prayer and sacrifice to Roman state gods at various temples for the continued welfare of the Imperial family on their birthdays , accession anniversaries and to mark extraordinary events such as the quashing of conspiracy or revolt .
Every January 3 they consecrated the annual vows and rendered any sacrifice promised in the previous year , provided the gods had kept the Imperial family safe for the contracted time .
Upon entering her office , a Vestal was emancipated from her father 's authority .
A Vestal 's dress represented her status outside the usual categories that defined Roman women , with elements of both virgin bride and daughter , and Roman matron and wife .
The Vestals embody the profound connection between domestic cult and the religious life of the community .
When the Christian emperor Gratian refused the office of pontifex maximus , he took steps toward the dissolution of the order .
In Rome , the central references for the establishment of an augural templum appear to have been the Via Sacra -LRB- Sacred Way -RRB- and the pomerium .
Divine disapproval could arise through unfit sacrifice , errant rites -LRB- vitium -RRB- or an unacceptable plan of action .
If an unfavourable sign was given , the magistrate could repeat the sacrifice until favourable signs were seen , consult with his augural colleagues , or abandon the project .
Magistrates could use their right of augury -LRB- ius augurum -RRB- to adjourn and overturn the process of law , but were obliged to base their decision on the augur 's observations and advice .
For Cicero , himself an augur , this made the augur the most powerful authority in the Late Republic .
By his time -LRB- mid 1st century BC -RRB- augury was supervised by the college of pontifices , whose powers were increasingly woven into the magistracies of the cursus honorum .
Haruspicy was also used in public cult , under the supervision of the augur or presiding magistrate .
They also interpreted omens , prodigies and portents , and formulated their expiation .
Being of independent means , they would be better motivated to maintain a pure , religious practice for the public good .
The motives of private haruspices -- especially females -- and their clients were officially suspect : none of this seems to have troubled Marius , who employed a Syrian prophetess .
The discovery of an androgynous four-year-old child was expiated by its drowning and the holy procession of 27 virgins to the temple of Juno Regina , singing a hymn to avert disaster : a lightning strike during the hymn rehearsals required further expiation .
Persons of low or negligible status might receive simple burial , with such grave goods as relatives could afford .
The dead consumed their portion in the flames of the pyre , Ceres her portion through the flame of her altar , and the family at the site of the cremation .
The ashes -LRB- or body -RRB- were entombed or buried .
On the eighth day of mourning , the family offered further sacrifice , this time on the ground ; the shade of the departed was assumed to have passed entirely into the underworld .
Other funerary and commemorative practices were very different .
The Christian Church fostered the veneration of saintly relics , and inscriptions marked the day of death as a transition to `` new life '' .
A small building behind housed the legionary standards , the divine images used in religious rites and in the Imperial era , the image of the ruling emperor .
In one camp , this shrine is even called Capitolium .
The most important camp-offering appears to have been the suovetaurilia performed before a major , set battle .
A ram , a boar and a bull were ritually garlanded , led around the outer perimeter of the camp -LRB- a lustratio exercitus -RRB- and in through a gate , then sacrificed : Trajan 's column shows three such events from his Dacian wars .
As in Rome , whatever gods he served in his own time seem to have been his own business ; legionary forts and vici included shrines to household gods , personal deities and deities otherwise unknown .
The near ubiquitous legionary shrines to Mithras of the later Imperial era were not part of official cult until Mithras was absorbed into Solar and Stoic Monism as a focus of military concordia and Imperial loyalty .
Before the battle , Decius is granted a prescient dream that reveals his fate .
When he offers sacrifice , the victim 's liver appears `` damaged where it refers to his own fortunes '' .
Otherwise , the haruspex tells him , the sacrifice is entirely acceptable to the gods .
In a prayer recorded by Livy , Decius commits himself and the enemy to the dii Manes and Tellus , charges alone and headlong into the enemy ranks , and is killed ; his action cleanses the sacrificial offering .
The efforts of military commanders to channel the divine will were on occasion less successful .
Roman women were present at most festivals and cult observances .
Because women enter the public record less frequently than men , their religious practices are less known , and even family cults were headed by the paterfamilias .
Juno , Diana , Lucina , and specialized divine attendants presided over the life-threatening act of giving birth and the perils of caring for a baby at a time when the infant mortality rate was as high as 40 percent .
The boundaries between religio and superstitio are perhaps indefinite .
In the everyday world , many individuals sought to divine the future , influence it through magic , or seek vengeance with help from `` private '' diviners .
So were divinatory techniques such as astrology when used for illicit , subversive or magical purposes .
`` Egyptian rites '' were particularly suspect : Augustus banned them within the pomerium to doubtful effect ; Tiberius repeated and extended the ban with extreme force in AD 19 .
Despite several Imperial bans , magic and astrology persisted among all social classes .
In the late 1st century AD , Tacitus observed that astrologers `` would always be banned and always retained at Rome '' .
Apuleius , defending himself against accusations of casting magic spells , defined the magician as `` in popular tradition -LRB- more vulgari -RRB- ... someone who , because of his community of speech with the immortal gods , has an incredible power of spells -LRB- vi cantaminum -RRB- for everything he wishes to . ''
Burial grounds and isolated crossroads were among the likely portals .
By this she invokes Tacita , the `` Silent One '' of the underworld .
Around 250 defixiones have been recovered just from Roman Britain , in both urban and rural settings .
Some seek straightforward , usually gruesome revenge , often for a lover 's offense or rejection .
Others appeal for divine redress of wrongs , in terms familiar to any Roman magistrate , and promise a portion of the value -LRB- usually small -RRB- of lost or stolen property in return for its restoration .
Women had no vote .
`` In a very real sense the senate was the caretaker of the Romans ' relationship with the divine , just as it was the caretaker of their relationship with other humans '' .
They resorted to strikes and violence to break the oppressive patrician monopolies of high office , public priesthood , and knowledge of civil and religious law .
The religious calendars and laws were eventually made public .
Plebeian tribunes were appointed , with sacrosanct status and the right of veto in legislative debate .
In principle , the augural and pontifical colleges were now open to plebeians .
In reality , the patrician and to a lesser extent , plebeian nobility dominated religious and civil office throughout the Republican era and beyond .
Official consternation at these enthusiastic , unofficial Bacchanalia cults was expressed as moral outrage at their supposed subversion , and was followed by ferocious suppression .
Much later , a statue of Marsyas , the silen of Dionysus flayed by Apollo , became a focus of brief symbolic resistance to Augustus ' censorship .
Augustus himself claimed the patronage of Venus and Apollo ; but his settlement appealed to all classes .
In the middle Republican era , even Scipio 's tentative hints that he might be Jupiter 's special protege sat ill with his colleagues .
Politicians of the later Republic were less equivocal ; both Sulla and Pompey claimed special relationships with Venus .
Julius Caesar went further , and claimed her as his ancestress .
Likewise , political candidates could sponsor temples , priesthoods and the immensely popular , spectacular public ludi and munera whose provision became increasingly indispensable to the factional politics of the Late Republic .
These are supposedly the first Roman deities whose images were adorned , as if noble guests , at their own inaugural banquet .
The introduction of new or equivalent deities coincided with Rome 's most significant aggressive and defensive military forays .
Further Greek influences on cult images and types represented the Roman Penates as forms of the Greek Dioscuri .
The military-political adventurers of the Later Republic introduced the Phrygian goddess Ma -LRB- identified with Roman Bellona , the Egyptian mystery-goddess Isis and Persian Mithras . -RRB-
Just as Rome itself claimed the favour of the gods , so did some individual Romans .
Augustus obtained the pax deorum , maintained it for the rest of his reign and adopted a successor to ensure its continuation .
This remained a primary religious and social duty of emperors .
Newly municipal Sabratha built a Capitolium near its existing temple to Liber Pater and Serapis .
Romanisation offered distinct political and practical advantages , especially to local elites .
All the known effigies from the 2nd century AD forum at Cuicul are of emperors or Concordia .
Major cult centres to `` non-Roman '' deities continued to prosper : notable examples include the magnificent Alexandrian Serapium , the temple of Aesculapeus at Pergamum and Apollo 's sacred wood at Antioch .
Military settlement within the empire and at its borders broadened the context of Romanitas .
Towards the end of his life , he cautiously allowed cult to his numen .
Provincial Cult centres offered the amenities and opportunities of a major Roman town within a local context ; bathhouses , shrines and temples to Roman and local deities , amphitheatres and festivals .
In the early Imperial period , the promotion of local elites to Imperial priesthood gave them Roman citizenship .
As a divus , he could receive much the same honours as any other state deity -- libations of wine , garlands , incense , hymns and sacrificial oxen at games and festivals .
What he did in return for these favours is unknown , but literary hints and the later adoption of divus as a title for Christian Saints suggest him as a heavenly intercessor .
In Rome , official cult to a living emperor was directed to his genius ; a small number refused this honour and there is no evidence of any emperor receiving more than that .
In the crises leading up to the Dominate , Imperial titles and honours multiplied , reaching a peak under Diocletian .
Diaspora Jews had much in common with the overwhelmingly Hellenic or Hellenised communities that surrounded them .
By the Augustan era , the city of Rome was home to several thousand Jews .
In some periods under Roman rule , Jews were legally exempt from official sacrifice , under certain conditions .
During the various Imperial crises of the 3rd century , `` contemporaries were predisposed to decode any crisis in religious terms '' , regardless of their allegiance to particular practices or belief systems .
Christianity drew its traditional base of support from the powerless , who seemed to have no religious stake in the well-being of the Roman State , and therefore threatened its existence .
The majority of Rome 's elite continued to observe various forms of inclusive Hellenistic monism ; Neoplatonism in particular accommodated the miraculous and the ascetic within a traditional Graeco-Roman cultic framework .
Decius ' edict appealed to whatever common mos maiores might reunite a politically and socially fractured Empire and its multitude of cults ; no ancestral gods were specified by name .
The fulfillment of sacrificial obligation by loyal subjects would define them and their gods as Roman .
Christian apologists interpreted his disgraceful capture and death as divine judgement .
Origen discussed theological issues with traditionalist elites in a common Neoplatonist frame of reference -- he had written to Decius ' predecessor Philip the Arab in similar vein -- and Hippolytus recognised a `` pagan '' basis in Christian heresies .
The Christian churches were disunited ; Paul of Samosata , Bishop of Antioch was deposed by a synod of 268 for `` dogmatic reasons -- his doctrine on the human nature of Christ was rejected -- and for his lifestyle , which reminded his brethren of the habits of the administrative elite '' .
The reasons for his deposition were widely circulated among the churches .
Meanwhile , Aurelian -LRB- 270-75 -RRB- appealed for harmony among his soldiers -LRB- concordia militum -RRB- , stabilised the Empire and its borders and successfully established an official , Hellenic form of unitary cult to the Palmyrene Sol Invictus in Rome 's Campus Martius .
In 295 , a certain Maximilian refused military service ; in 298 Marcellus renounced his military oath .
At some time around 302 , a report of ominous haruspicy in Diocletian 's domus and a subsequent -LRB- but undated -RRB- dictat of placatory sacrifice by the entire military triggered a series of edicts against Christianity .
Others complied .
`` This meant an ofﬁcial recognition of their importance in the religious world of the Roman empire , although one of the tetrarchs , Maximinus Daia , still oppressed Christians in his part of the empire up to 313 . ''
Constantine successfully balanced his own role as an instrument of the pax deorum with the power of the Christian priesthoods in determining what was -LRB- in traditional Roman terms -RRB- auspicious - or in Christian terms , what was orthodox .
He may have officially ended -- or attempted to end -- blood sacrifices to the genius of living emperors but his Imperial iconography and court ceremonial outstripped Diocletian 's in their supra-human elevation of the Imperial hierarch .
His later direct intervention in Church affairs proved a political masterstroke .
At the time , there were many varying opinions about Christian doctrine , and no centralized way of enforcing orthodoxy .
Later , Philostorgius criticized Christians who offered sacrifice at statues of the divus Constantine .
Constantine nevertheless took great pains to assuage traditionalist and Christian anxieties .
Christianity became increasingly popular .
His attempt to restore an Augustan form of principate , with himself as primus inter pares ended with his death in 363 in Persia , after which his reforms were reversed or abandoned .
Ambrose , the influential Bishop of Milan and future saint , wrote urging the rejection of Symmachus 's request for tolerance .
Yet Theodosius accepted comparison with Hercules and Jupiter as a living divinity in the panegyric of Pacatus , and despite his active dismantling of Rome 's traditional cults and priesthoods could commend his heirs to its overwhelmingly Hellenic senate in traditional Hellenic terms .
The site allows users to upload , view , rate , share , and comment on videos , and it makes use of WebM , H. 264/MPEG -4 AVC , and Adobe Flash Video technology to display a wide variety of user-generated and corporate media video .
Karim did not attend the party and denied that it had occurred , but Chen commented that the idea that YouTube was founded after a dinner party `` was probably very strengthened by marketing ideas around creating a story that was very digestible '' .
The site grew rapidly , and in July 2006 the company announced that more than 65,000 new videos were being uploaded every day , and that the site was receiving 100 million video views per day .
It is estimated that in 2007 YouTube consumed as much bandwidth as the entire Internet in 2000 .
The 10-minute limit was increased to 15 minutes in July 2010 .
With this new feature , YouTube began a switchover to H. 264/MPEG -4 AVC as its default video compression format .
The YouTube Flash player can display stereoscopic content interleaved in rows , columns or a checkerboard pattern , side-by-side or anaglyph using a red/cyan , green/magenta or blue/yellow combination .
Embedding , rating , commenting and response posting can be disabled by the video owner .
Numerous third-party web sites , applications and browser plug-ins allow users to download YouTube videos .
In February 2009 , YouTube announced a test service , allowing some partners to offer video downloads for free or for a fee paid through Google Checkout .
In June 2012 , Google sent cease and desist letters threatening legal action against several websites offering online download and conversion of YouTube videos .
YouTube videos can be viewed on devices including Apple TV , iPod Touch and the iPhone .
In July 2010 , the mobile version of the site was relaunched based on HTML5 , avoiding the need to use Adobe Flash Player and optimized for use with touch screen controls .
The mobile version is also available as an app for the Android platform .
YouTube is also available as an app on Xbox Live .
On November 15 , 2012 , Google launched an official app for the Wii , allowing users to watch YouTube videos from the Wii channel .
An app is also available for Wii U and Nintendo 3DS , and videos can be viewed on the Wii U Internet Browser using HTML5 .
It offers advertising-free streaming , access to exclusive content , background and offline video playback on mobile devices , and access to the Google Play Music `` All Access '' service .
Independent content creators have built grassroots followings numbering in the thousands at very little cost or effort , while mass retail and radio promotion proved problematic .
Concurrently , old media celebrities moved into the website at the invitation of a YouTube management that witnessed early content creators accruing substantial followings , and perceived audience sizes potentially larger than that attainable by television .
In 2013 Forbes ' Katheryn Thayer asserted that digital-era artists ' work must not only be of high quality , but must elicit reactions on the YouTube platform and social media .
Anderson asserted that it 's not far-fetched to say that online video will dramatically accelerate scientific advance , and that video contributors may be about to launch `` the biggest learning cycle in human history . ''
In February 2014 , U.S. President Obama held a meeting at the White House with leading YouTube content creators to not only promote awareness of Obamacare but more generally to develop ways for government to better connect with the `` YouTube Generation '' .
In 2013 it nearly doubled and estimated to hit 5.6 billion dollars according to eMarketer , others estimated 4.7 billion ,
In January 2010 , YouTube introduced an online film rentals service , which is available only to users in the US , Canada and the UK as of 2010 .
According to TubeMogul , in 2013 a pre-roll advertisement on YouTube -LRB- one that is shown before the video starts -RRB- cost advertisers on average $ 7.60 per 1000 views .
Usually no more than half of eligible videos have a pre-roll advertisement , due to a lack of interested advertisers .
In May 2013 , Nintendo began enforcing its copyright ownership and claiming the advertising revenue from video creators who posted screenshots of its games .
The use of Content ID to remove material automatically has led to controversy in some cases , as the videos have not been checked by a human for fair use .
YouTube responded by stating :
Some of the comments on YouTube make you weep for the future of humanity just for the spelling alone , never mind the obscenity and the naked hatred '' .
The changes are in large part an attempt to address the frequent criticisms of the quality and tone of YouTube comments .
The new system restored the ability to include URLs in comments , which had previously been removed due to problems with abuse .
on his YouTube channel to express his negative opinion of the change .
Writing in the Newsday blog Silicon Island , Chase Melvin noted that `` Google + is nowhere near as popular a social media network as Facebook , but it 's essentially being forced upon millions of YouTube users who do n't want to lose their ability to comment on videos '' and `` Discussion forums across the Internet are already bursting with outcry against the new comment system '' .
In the same article Melvin goes on to say :
In cases where the entire site is banned due to one particular video , YouTube will often agree to remove or limit access to that video in order to restore service .
In a statement to the Financial Times in June 2014 , Robert Kyncl confirmed that YouTube would block the content of labels who do not negotiate deals to be included in the paid service `` to ensure that all content on the platform is governed by its new contractual terms . ''
However , YouTube itself has not confirmed the deal .
Despite a common background , the groups ' views on religious toleration were mixed .
The Dutch colony of New Netherland established the Dutch Reformed Church and outlawed all other worship , though enforcement was sparse .
Religious conformity was desired partly for financial reasons : the established Church was responsible for poverty relief , putting dissenting churches at a significant disadvantage .
Section 10 .
The signers indicated their `` desire therefore in this case not to judge lest we be judged , neither to condemn least we be condemned , but rather let every man stand or fall to his own Master . ''
Stuyvesant fined the petitioners and threw them in prison until they recanted .
However , John Bowne allowed the Quakers to meet in his home .
Bowne was arrested , jailed , and sent to the Netherlands for trial ; the Dutch court exonerated Bowne .
He also observed that when `` church and state are separate , the effects are happy , and they do not at all interfere with each other : but where they have been confounded together , no tongue nor pen can fully describe the mischiefs that have ensued . ''
Years before the ratification of the Constitution , Madison contended `` Because if Religion be exempt from the authority of the Society at large , still less can it be subject to that of the Legislative Body . ''
After retiring from the presidency , Madison wrote of `` total separation of the church from the state . '' ''
In a letter to Edward Livingston Madison further expanded , `` We are teaching the world the great truth that Govts .
do better without Kings & Nobles than with them .
The merit will be doubled by the other lesson that Religion flourishes in greater purity , without than with the aid of Govt . ''
Madison 's original draft of the Bill of Rights had included provisions binding the States , as well as the Federal Government , from an establishment of religion , but the House did not pass them .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Writing for the majority , Justice Stephen Johnson Field cited Jefferson 's Letter to the Danbury Baptists to state that `` Congress was deprived of all legislative power over mere opinion , but was left free to reach actions which were in violation of social duties or subversive of good order . ''
Some chose to support more than one church .
An oath had also been imposed on the militia during the French and Indian War requiring them to abjure the pretensions of the Pope , which may or may not have been applied during the Revolution .
Three central concepts were derived from the 1st Amendment which became America 's doctrine for church-state separation : no coercion in religious matters , no expectation to support a religion against one 's will , and religious liberty encompasses all religions .
However , the Anti-Federalists were unsuccessful in persuading the House of Representatives to drop the clause from the first amendment .
We must go elsewhere , therefore , to ascertain its meaning , and nowhere more appropriately , we think , than to the history of the times in the midst of which the provision was adopted . ''
The court found that the leaders in advocating and formulating the constitutional guarantee of religious liberty were James Madison and Thomas Jefferson .
Citing Jefferson , the court concluded that `` The First Amendment has erected a wall between church and state .
We could not approve the slightest breach . ''
Rutledge , on behalf of the four dissenting justices , took the position that the majority had indeed permitted a violation of the wall of separation in this case : `` Neither so high nor so impregnable today as yesterday is the wall raised between church and state by Virginia 's great statute of religious freedom and the First Amendment , now made applicable to all the states by the Fourteenth . ''
In fact , the undertones of the opinion , advocating complete and uncompromising separation of Church from State , seem utterly discordant with its conclusion yielding support to their commingling in educational matters . ''
-LRB- The prayer required by the New York State Board of Regents prior to the Court 's decision consisted of : `` Almighty God , we acknowledge our dependence upon Thee , and we beg Thy blessings upon us , our parents , our teachers , and our country .
Amen . '' -RRB-
As the Court stated :
The overriding fact is that Arkansas ' law selects from the body of knowledge a particular segment which it proscribes for the sole reason that it is deemed to conflict with a particular religious doctrine ; that is , with a particular interpretation of the Book of Genesis by a particular religious group . ''
Some relationship between government and religious organizations is inevitable , '' the court wrote .
`` Judicial caveats against entanglement must recognize that the line of separation , far from being a `` wall , '' is a blurred , indistinct , and variable barrier depending on all the circumstances of a particular relationship . ''
-LRB- The decision in Lemon v. Kurtzman hinged upon the conclusion that the government benefits were flowing disproportionately to Catholic schools , and that Catholic schools were an integral component of the Catholic Church 's religious mission , thus the policy involved the state in an `` excessive entanglement '' with religion . -RRB-
Failure to meet any of these criteria is a proof that the statute or policy in question violates the Establishment Clause .
In reaction to the case , Elk Grove Unified School District v. Newdow , both houses of Congress passed measures reaffirming their support for the pledge , and condemning the panel 's ruling .
Some of the intermingling between church and state include religious references in official contexts , and such other founding documents as the United States Declaration of Independence , which references the idea of a `` Creator '' and `` Nature 's God '' , though these references did not ultimately appear in the Constitution nor do they mention any particular religious view of a `` Creator '' or `` Nature 's God . ''
These states are Texas , Massachusetts , Maryland , North Carolina , Pennsylvania , South Carolina , and Tennessee .
In some cases these beliefs -LRB- or oaths -RRB- were historically required of jurors and witnesses in court .
While mainline Protestant denominations are more inclined towards strict separation of church and state , much evangelical opinion has now largely deserted that position .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Beyond that , individuals are free to decide how they want to believe and fill in their own creeds and express their conscience .
Anglicanism is sometimes considered to be independent from Protestantism .
Protestantism spread in Europe during the 16th century .
There were also reformational efforts throughout continental Europe known as the Radical Reformation -- a response to perceived corruption in both the Roman Catholic Church and the expanding Magisterial Reformation led by Luther and various other reformers -- which gave rise to Anabaptist , Moravian , and other Pietistic movements .
-LSB- t -RSB- The movement is more divided theologically and ecclesiastically than either Eastern Orthodoxy or Roman Catholicism , lacking both structural unity and central human authority .
During the Reformation , the term was hardly used outside of the German politics .
Nowadays , this word is still preferred among some of the historical Protestant denominations , above all the ones in the German-speaking area such as the EKD .
The German word evangelisch means Protestant , and is different from the German evangelikal , which refers to churches shaped by Evangelicalism .
Though argued from scripture , and hence logically consequent to sola scriptura , this is the guiding principle of the work of Luther and the later reformers .
He advocated an interpretation of the Gospel that led to conflicts with the Roman Catholic Church .
He strongly advocated his reformist Bohemian religious denomination .
After his execution , a revolt erupted .
After the expulsion of its Bishop in 1526 , and the unsuccessful attempts of the Bern reformer William Farel , Calvin was asked to use the organisational skill he had gathered as a student of law to discipline the `` fallen city '' of Geneva .
His Ordinances of 1541 involved a collaboration of Church affairs with the City council and consistory to bring morality to all areas of life .
Calvin continued to take an interest in the French religious affairs from his base in Geneva .
He regularly trained pastors to lead congregations there .
This established the preconditions for a series of conflicts , known as the French Wars of Religion .
The wars only concluded when Henry IV of France issued the Edict of Nantes , promising official toleration of the Protestant minority , but under highly restricted conditions .
Roman Catholicism remained the official state religion , and the fortunes of French Protestants gradually declined over the next century , culminating in Louis XIV 's Edict of Fontainebleau which revoked the Edict of Nantes and made Roman Catholicism the sole legal religion once again .
In response to the Edict of Fontainebleau , Frederick William I , Elector of Brandenburg declared the Edict of Potsdam , giving free passage to Huguenot refugees .
In the late 17th century many Huguenots fled to England , the Netherlands , Prussia , Switzerland , and the English and Dutch overseas colonies .
A significant community in France remained in the Cévennes region .
Zwingli was a scholar and preacher , who in 1518 moved to Zurich .
Although the two movements agreed on many issues of theology , some unresolved differences kept them separate .
The two men could not come to any agreement due to their disputation over one key doctrine .
Reformers in the Church of England alternated between sympathies for ancient Catholic tradition and more Reformed principles , gradually developing into a tradition considered a middle way -LRB- via media -RRB- between the Roman Catholic and Protestant traditions .
The English Reformation followed a particular course .
The different character of the English Reformation came primarily from the fact that it was driven initially by the political necessities of Henry VIII .
Following a brief Roman Catholic restoration during the reign of Mary I , a loose consensus developed during the reign of Elizabeth I .
The compromise was uneasy and was capable of veering between extreme Calvinism on the one hand and Roman Catholicism on the other .
It was relatively successful until the Puritan Revolution or English Civil War in the 17th century .
It resulted from powerful preaching that gave listeners a sense of deep personal revelation of their need of salvation by Jesus Christ .
Pulling away from ritual , ceremony , sacramentalism and hierarchy , it made Christianity intensely personal to the average person by fostering a deep sense of spiritual conviction and redemption , and by encouraging introspection and a commitment to a new standard of personal morality .
It gained momentum by 1800 .
It gathered strength from the postmillennial belief that the Second Coming of Christ would occur after mankind had reformed the entire earth .
From there it spread around the world , carried by those who experienced what they believed to be miraculous moves of God there .
These Pentecost-like manifestations have steadily been in evidence throughout the history , such as seen in the two Great Awakenings .
Several scholars have argued for a link between the rise of secularism and Protestantism , attributing it to the wide-ranging freedom in the Protestant countries .
This is made evident in the prominence of Luther , Calvin , and Zwingli as leaders of the reform movements in their respective areas of ministry .
Some Protestant denominations are less accepting of other denominations , and the basic orthodoxy of some is questioned by most of the others .
Individual denominations also have formed over very subtle theological differences .
Other denominations are simply regional or ethnic expressions of the same beliefs .
The early members of this movement did not accept the name Anabaptist , claiming that since infant baptism was unscriptural and null and void , the baptizing of believers was not a re-baptism but in fact their first real baptism .
-LSB- aa -RSB- While most Anabaptists adhered to a literal interpretation of the Sermon on the Mount , which precluded taking oaths , participating in military actions , and participating in civil government , some who practiced re-baptism felt otherwise .
-LSB- ab -RSB- They were thus technically Anabaptists , even though conservative Amish , Mennonites , and Hutterites and some historians tend to consider them as outside of true Anabaptism .
Anabaptist reformers of the Radical Reformation are diveded into Radical and the so-called Second Front .
Some important Radical Reformation theologians were John of Leiden , Thomas Müntzer , Kaspar Schwenkfeld , Sebastian Franck , Menno Simons .
Anglicanism comprises the Church of England and churches which are historically tied to it or hold similar beliefs , worship practices and church structures .
Many of the new Anglican formularies of the mid-16th century corresponded closely to those of contemporary Reformed tradition .
In accordance with his reading of the New Testament , he rejected baptism of infants and instituted baptism only of believing adults .
In the mid-18th century , the First Great Awakening increased Baptist growth in both New England and the South .
The Second Great Awakening in the South in the early 19th century increased church membership , as did the preachers ' lessening of support for abolition and manumission of slavery , which had been part of the 18th-century teachings .
Less commonly , it can refer to the individual teaching of Calvin himself .
The particulars of Calvinist theology may be stated in a number of ways .
This evangelical movement originated as a revival within the 18th-century Church of England and became a separate Church following Wesley 's death .
Methodism is traditionally low church in liturgy , although this varies greatly between individual congregations ; the Wesleys themselves greatly valued the Anglican liturgy and tradition .
There are many other Protestant denominations that do not fit neatly into the mentioned branches , and are far smaller in membership .
Brethren generally see themselves not as a denomination , but as a network , or even as a collection of overlapping networks , of like-minded independent churches .
Many Friends view themselves as members of a Christian denomination .
There are also Christian movements which cross denominational lines and even branches , and can not be classified on the same level previously mentioned forms .
Some of those movements are active exclusively within Protestantism , some are Christian-wide .
Among leaders and major figures of the Evangelical Protestant movement were John Wesley , George Whitefield , Jonathan Edwards , Billy Graham , Harold John Ockenga , John Stott and Martyn Lloyd-Jones .
Other Charismatic movement leaders in New Zealand include Bill Subritzky .
A very large annual conference regarding that matter was held in Minneapolis .
in Lakeville , and North Heights in St. Paul .
The next generation of Lutheran charismatics cluster around the Alliance of Renewal Churches .
In church polity , some advocated for separation from all other Christians , in favor of autonomous gathered churches .
Many of their families contributed to the development of intellectual elites in their countries .
Colleges and universities were founded .
The Protestant concept of God and man allows believers to use all their God-given faculties , including the power of reason .
That means that they are allowed to explore God 's creation and , according to Genesis 2:15 , make use of it in a responsible and sustainable way .
Thus a cultural climate was created that greatly enhanced the development of the humanities and the sciences .
Another consequence of the Protestant understanding of man is that the believers , in gratitude for their election and redemption in Christ , are to follow God 's commandments .
Therefore , craftsmen , industrialists , and other businessmen were able to reinvest the greater part of their profits in the most efficient machinery and the most modern production methods that were based on progress in the sciences and technology .
As a result , productivity grew , which led to increased profits and enabled employers to pay higher wages .
In this way , the economy , the sciences , and technology reinforced each other .
Protestantism has had an important influence on science .
Protestant values encouraged scientific research by allowing science to identify God 's influence on the world -- his creation -- and thus providing a religious justification for scientific research .
In the Middle Ages , the Church and the worldly authorities were closely related .
Luther 's doctrine of the priesthood of all believers upgraded the role of laymen in the church considerably .
This system was taken over by the other reformed churches .
He appreciated the advantages of democracy : `` It is an invaluable gift , if God allows a people to freely elect its own authorities and overlords . ''
Calvin also thought that earthly rulers lose their divine right and must be put down when they rise up against God .
Thus he and his followers resisted political absolutism and paved the way for the rise of modern democracy .
Besides England , the Netherlands were , under Calvinist leadership , the freest country in Europe in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries .
In seventeenth-century England , the most important persons and events in this process were the English Civil War , Oliver Cromwell , John Milton , John Locke , the Glorious Revolution , the English Bill of Rights , and the Act of Settlement .
The Mayflower Compact was a social contract .
In his view , faith was a free work of the Holy Spirit and could , therefore , not be forced on a person .
Their thinking influenced John Milton and John Locke 's stance on tolerance .
Under the leadership of Baptist Roger Williams , Congregationalist Thomas Hooker , and Quaker William Penn , respectively , Rhode Island , Connecticut , and Pennsylvania combined democratic constitutions with freedom of religion .
These colonies became safe havens for persecuted religious minorities , including Jews .
The United States Declaration of Independence , the United States Constitution , and the American Bill of Rights with its fundamental human rights made this tradition permanent by giving it a legal and political framework .
All major Protestant churches were represented in the First and Second Continental Congresses .
In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries , the American democracy became a model for numerous other countries and regions throughout the world -LRB- e.g. , Latin America , Japan , and Germany -RRB- .
The strongest link between the American and French Revolutions was Marquis de Lafayette , an ardent supporter of the American constitutional principles .
The French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen was mainly based on Lafayette 's draft of this document .
The United Nations Declaration and Universal Declaration of Human Rights also echo the American constitutional tradition .
Some of the philosophers of the English , Scottish , German , and Swiss Enlightenment - Thomas Hobbes , John Locke , John Toland , David Hume , Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz , Christian Wolff , Immanuel Kant , and Jean-Jacques Rousseau - had Protestant backgrounds .
As all persons were created equally free , all governments needed `` the consent of the governed . ''
Also , other human rights were advocated for by some Protestants .
He also founded the Red Cross .
Protestants have founded hospitals , homes for disabled or elderly people , educational institutions , organizations that give aid to developing countries , and other social welfare agencies .
Contrary to how the Protestant Reformers were often characterized , the concept of a catholic or universal Church was not brushed aside during the Protestant Reformation .
On the contrary , the visible unity of the catholic or universal church was seen by the Protestant reformers as an important and essential doctrine of the Reformation .
Its origins lay in the recognition of the need for cooperation on the mission field in Africa , Asia and Oceania .
There are also ecumenical bodies at regional , national and local levels across the globe ; but schisms still far outnumber unifications .
This is understandable , since there is no compelling authority within them .
Various estimates put the percentage of Protestants in relation to the total number of world 's Christians at 33 % , 36 % , 36.7 % , and 40 % , while in relation to the world 's population at 11.6 % and 13 % .
In European countries which were most profoundly influenced by the Reformation , Protestantism still remains the most practiced religion .
Over the last several decades , religious practice has been declining as secularization has increased .
Clarke and Beyer estimate that Protestants constituted 15 % of all Europeans in 2009 , while Noll claims that less than 12 % of them lived in Europe in 2010 .
Changes in worldwide Protestantism over the last century have been significant .
That caused Protestantism to be called a primarily non-Western religion .
According to one source , Protestants constituted respectively 2.5 % , 2 % , 0.5 % of Latin Americans , Africans and Asians .
In 2000 , percentage of Protestants on mentioned continents was 17 % , more than 27 % and 5.5 % , respectively .
Almost as many lived in each of Nigeria and China as in all of Europe .
China is home to world 's largest Protestant minority .
-LSB- af -RSB-
The city has a unique status in Brazil , as it is an administrative division rather than a legal municipality like other cities in Brazil .
Building Brasília was part of Juscelino 's `` fifty years of prosperity in five '' plan .
Oscar Niemeyer , a close friend , was the chief architect of most public buildings and Roberto Burle Marx was the landscape designer .
Until the 1980s , the governor of the Federal District was appointed by the Federal Government , and the laws of Brasília were issued by the Brazilian Federal Senate .
The Federal District does not have a Judicial Power of its own .
The Judicial Power which serves the Federal District also serves federal territories .
Currently , Brazil does not have any territories , therefore , for now the courts serve only cases from the Federal District .
The average temperature is 20.6 °C -LRB- 69.1 °F -RRB- .
Average temperatures from September through March are a consistent 22 °C -LRB- 72 °F -RRB- .
Brasília has two universities , three university centers , and many private colleges .
On 31 May 1970 , the Cathedral 's structure was finished , and only the 70 m -LRB- 229.66 ft -RRB- diameter of the circular area were visible .
Niemeyer 's project of Cathedral of Brasília is based in the hyperboloid of revolution which sections are asymmetric .
A series of low-lying annexes -LRB- largely hidden -RRB- flank both ends .
Between the federal and civic buildings on the Monumental Axis is the city 's cathedral , considered by many to be Niemeyer 's finest achievement -LRB- see photographs of the interior -RRB- .
The parabolically shaped structure is characterized by its 16 gracefully curving supports , which join in a circle 115 feet -LRB- 35 meters -RRB- above the floor of the nave ; stretched between the supports are translucent walls of tinted glass .
The nave is entered via a subterranean passage rather than conventional doorways .
Other notable buildings are Buriti Palace , Itamaraty Palace , the National Theater , and several foreign embassies that creatively embody features of their national architecture .
Both low-cost and luxury housing were built by the government in the Brasília .
These cities , with the exception of Gama and Sobradinho were not planned .
As the city has matured , some of these have gained adornments , and many have been improved by landscaping , giving some observers a sense of `` humanized '' spaciousness .
Industries connected with construction , food processing , and furnishings are important , as are those associated with publishing , printing , and computer software .
Besides being the political center , Brasília is an important economic center .
The main economic activity of the federal capital results from its administrative function .
Its industrial planning is studied carefully by the Government of the Federal District .
Brasília has also been the focus of modern-day literature .
According to Don Bosco 's prophecy : `` Between parallels 15 and 20 , around a lake which shall be formed ; A great civilization will thrive , and that will be the Promised Land . ''
One of the first structures built in the republic 's new capital city , the `` Alvorada '' lies on a peninsula at the margins of Lake Paranoá .
The viewer has an impression of looking at a glass box , softly landed on the ground with the support of thin external columns .
The auditorium , kitchen , laundry , medical center , and administration offices are at basement level .
The rooms used by the presidency for official receptions are on the landing .
The second floor has four suites , two apartments , and various private rooms which make up the residential part of the palace .
The building also has a library , a heated Olympic-sized swimming pool , a music room , two dining rooms and various meeting rooms .
A chapel and heliport are in adjacent buildings .
It is located at the Praça dos Três Poderes in Brasília .
As the seat of government , the term `` Planalto '' is often used as a metonym for the executive branch of government .
The main working office of the President of the Republic is in the Palácio do Planalto .
The President and his or her family do not live in it , rather in the official residence , the Palácio da Alvorada .
Besides the President , senior advisors also have offices in the `` Planalto , '' including the Vice-President of Brazil and the Chief of Staff .
The other Ministries are along the Esplanada dos Ministérios .
The idea was to project an image of simplicity and modernity using fine lines and waves to compose the columns and exterior structures .
Four other adjacent buildings are also part of the complex .
This makes for a large number of takeoffs and landings and it is not unusual for flights to be delayed in the holding pattern before landing .
The airport is located about 11 km -LRB- 6.8 mi -RRB- from the central area of Brasília , outside the metro system .
The area outside the airport 's main gate is lined with taxis as well as several bus line services which connect the airport to Brasília 's central district .
The airport is serviced by domestic and regional airlines -LRB- TAM , GOL , Azul , WebJET , Trip and Avianca -RRB- , in addition to a number of international carriers .
In 2012 , Brasília 's International Airport was won by the InfrAmerica consortium , formed by the Brazilian engineering company ENGEVIX and the Argentine Corporacion America holding company , with a 50 % stake each .
During the 25-year concession , the airport may be expanded to up to 40 million passengers a year .
The group invested R$ 750 million in the project .
The airport 's entrance have a new rooftop cover and a new access road .
Furthermore , a VIP room was created on Terminal 1 's third floor .
Brasília has direct flights to all states of Brazil and direct international flights to Atlanta , Buenos Aires , Lisbon , Miami , Panama City , and Paris .
Chan won the Gustav Lindenthal Medal for this project at the 2003 International Bridge Conference in Pittsburgh due to '' ... outstanding achievement demonstrating harmony with the environment , aesthetic merit and successful community participation '' .
The main purpose of the metro is to serve cities , such as Samambaia , Taguatinga and Ceilândia , as well as Guará and Águas Claras .
The Central Bus Station also contains a main metro station .
A new bus station was opened in July 2010 .
Important Greek industries include tourism and shipping .
The Greek Merchant Navy is the largest in the world , with Greek-owned vessels accounting for 15 % of global deadweight tonnage as of 2013 .
The increased demand for international maritime transportation between Greece and Asia has resulted in unprecedented investment in the shipping industry .
Greece is a member of the International Monetary Fund and of the World Trade Organization , and ranked 34th on Ernst & Young 's Globalization Index 2011 .
After negotiating the biggest debt restructuring in history with the private sector , Greece reduced its sovereign debt burden to $ 280 billion -LRB- 137 % of GDP -RRB- in the first quarter of 2012 .
These conditions had enabled Greek as well as many other European governments to spend beyond their means , while meeting the deficit targets of the European Union and the monetary union guidelines .
In order to secure the funding , Greece was required to adopt harsh austerity measures to bring its deficit under control .
An additional equivalent of 27.45 % of the world 's tanker dwt is on order , with another 12.7 % of bulk carriers also on order .
OTE owns several subsidiaries across the Balkans , including Cosmote , Greece 's top mobile telecommunications provider , Cosmote Romania and Albanian Mobile Communications .
Thessaloniki was the European Youth Capital in 2014 .
Greece has rail connections with Bulgaria , the Republic of Macedonia and Turkey .
A total of three suburban railway systems -LRB- Proastiakos -RRB- are in operation -LRB- in Athens , Thessaloniki and Patras -RRB- , while one metro system is operational in Athens with another under construction .
Since then , Piraeus has grown to become the Mediterranean 's third-largest port thanks to heavy investment by Chinese logistics giant COSCO .
In 2013 and for several months , Greece produced more than 20 % of its electricity from renewable energy sources and hydroelectric power plants .
Greece met the criteria as shown in its 1999 annual public account .
On 1 January 2001 , Greece joined the eurozone , with the adoption of the euro at the fixed exchange rate 340.75 to $ 1 .
But in fact , the Greek economy suffered a prolonged high unemployemnt .
Unlike in Westminster style legislatures or as with the Senate Majority Leader , the House Majority Leader 's duties and prominence vary depending upon the style and power of the Speaker of the House .
Unlike the Majority Leader , the Minority Leader is on the ballot for Speaker of the House during the convening of the Congress .
Starting with Republican Nicholas Longworth in 1925 , and continued through the Democrats ' control of the House from 1931 to 1995 , save for Republican majorities in 1947 -- 49 and 1953 -- 55 , all majority leaders have directly ascended to the Speakership brought upon by the retirement of the incumbent .
For instance , when the Republicans gained the majority in the House after the 2010 elections , Eric Cantor succeeded Boehner as Majority Leader .
Despite this , Cantor and his successor , Kevin McCarthy , have been reckoned as the second-ranking Republicans in the House , since Boehner is still reckoned as the leader of the House Republicans .
However , there have been some exceptions .
When the Majority Leader 's party loses control of the House , and if the Speaker and Majority Leader both remain in the leadership hierarchy , convention suggests that they would become the Minority Leader and Minority Whip , respectively .
From an institutional perspective , the rules of the House assign a number of specific responsibilities to the minority leader .
He is required to be alert and vigilant in defense of the minority 's rights .
It is his function and duty to criticize constructively the policies and programs of the majority , and to this end employ parliamentary tactics and give close attention to all proposed legislation . ''
Decades went by before anything like the modern two-party congressional system emerged on Capitol Hill with official titles for those who were its official leaders .
However , from the beginning days of Congress , various House members intermittently assumed the role of `` opposition leader . ''
In 1828 , a foreign observer of the House offered this perspective on the absence of formal party leadership on Capitol Hill :
Thirty-six competed in 1839 , ninety-seven in 1849 , ninety-one in 1859 , and 138 in 1855 . ''
With so many candidates competing for the speakership , it is not at all clear that one of the defeated lawmakers then assumed the mantle of `` minority leader . ''
The defeated candidates were not automatically looked to for leadership . ''
However , this assertion is subject to dispute .
On December 3 , 1883 , the House elected Democrat John G. Carlisle of Kentucky as Speaker .
Republicans placed in nomination for the speakership J. Warren Keifer of Ohio , who was Speaker the previous Congress .
Clearly , Keifer was not the Republicans ' minority leader .
Keifer received `` the empty honor of the minority nomination .
But with it came a sting -- for while this naturally involves the floor leadership , he was deserted by his -LSB- partisan -RSB- associates and his career as a national figure terminated ingloriously . ''
-LSB- A -RSB- lthough Keifer was the minority 's candidate for Speaker , Reed became its acknowledged leader , and ever after , so long as he served in the House , remained the most conspicuous member of his party .
Another scholar contends that the minority leader position emerged even before 1883 .
`` It is hard to believe that House partisans would place a man in the speakership when in the majority , and nominate him for this office when in the minority , and not look to him for legislative guidance . ''
This was not the case , according to some observers , with respect to ex-Speaker Keifer .
This era was `` marked by strong partisan attachments , resilient patronage-based party organizations , and ... high levels of party voting in Congress . ''
Republicans have not always followed this leadership succession pattern .
In 1919 , for instance , Republicans bypassed James R. Mann , R-IL , who had been minority leader for eight years , and elected Frederick Gillett , R-MA , to be Speaker .
Despite the variability of these factors , there are a number of institutional obligations associated with this position .
Others have devolved upon the position in other ways .
Worth emphasis is that there are limits on the institutional role of the minority leader , because the majority party exercises disproportionate influence over the agenda , partisan ratios on committees , staff resources , administrative operations , and the day-to-day schedule and management of floor activities .
In addition , the minority leader has a number of other institutional functions .
The minority leader has a number of formal and informal party responsibilities .
Formally , the rules of each party specify certain roles and responsibilities for their leader .
For example , under Democratic rules for the 106th Congress , the minority leader may call meetings of the Democratic Caucus .
Examples of other assignments are making `` recommendations to the Speaker on all Democratic Members who shall serve as conferees '' and nominating party members to the Committees on Rules and House Administration .
Republican rules identify generally comparable functions for their top party leader .
He is instrumental in devising and implementing his party 's strategy on the floor with respect to promoting or opposing legislation .
He is kept constantly informed as to the status of legislative business and as to the sentiment of his party respecting particular legislation under consideration .
Provide Campaign Assistance .
`` The amount of time that -LSB- Minority Leader -RSB- Gephardt is putting in to help the DCCC -LSB- Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee -RSB- is unheard of , '' noted a Democratic lobbyist .
`` No DCCC chairman has ever had that kind of support . ''
Devise Minority Party Strategies .
Among the variable strategies available to the minority party , which can vary from bill to bill and be used in combination or at different stages of the lawmaking process , are the following :
A look at one minority leadership strategy -- partisan opposition -- may suggest why it might be employed in specific circumstances .
By stalling action on the majority party 's agenda , the minority leader may be able to launch a campaign against a `` do-nothing Congress '' and convince enough voters to put his party back in charge of the House .
Promote and Publicize the Party 's Agenda .
Despite the minority leader 's restricted ability to set the House 's agenda , there are still opportunities for him to raise minority priorities .
As a GOP minority leader once said , the challenges he confronted are to `` keep our people together , and to look for votes on the other side . ''
Minority leaders may engage in numerous activities to publicize their party 's priorities and to criticize the opposition 's .
They must also be prepared `` to debate on the floor , ad lib , no notes , on a moment 's notice , '' remarked Minority Leader Michel .
In brief , minority leaders are key strategists in developing and promoting the party 's agenda and in outlining ways to neutralize the opposition 's arguments and proposals .
Confer With the White House .
In general , minority leaders will often work to advance the goals and aspirations of their party 's President in Congress .
President Ronald Reagan 's 1981 policy successes in the Democratic controlled House was due in no small measure to Minority Leader Michel 's effectiveness in wooing so-called `` Reagan Democrats '' to support , for instance , the Administration 's landmark budget reconciliation bill .
There are occasions , of course , when minority leaders will fault the legislative initiatives of their President .
On an administration proposal that could adversely affect his district , Michel stated that he might `` abdicate my leadership role -LSB- on this issue -RSB- since I ca n't harmonize my own views with the administration 's . ''
Minority Leader Gephardt , as another example , has publicly opposed a number of President Clinton 's legislative initiatives from `` fast track '' trade authority to various budget issues .
As Ford explained :
`` We used a technique of laying our program out in general debate , '' he said .
And if we lost on the motion to recommit , our Republican members had a choice : They could vote against the Johnson program and say we did our best to come up with a better alternative .
Or they could vote for it and make the same argument .
Usually we lost ; but when you 're only 140 out of 435 , you do n't expect to win many .
Gephardt added that `` inclusion and empowerment of the people on the line have to be done to get the best performance '' from the minority party .
Within the House Republican Conference , the chief deputy whip is the highest appointed position and often a launching pad for future positions in the House Leadership .
Historically , the name Armenian has come to internationally designate this group of people .
It was first used by neighbouring countries of ancient Armenia .
In his trilingual Behistun Inscription dated to 517 BC , Darius I the Great of Persia refers to Urashtu -LRB- in Babylonian -RRB- as Armina -LRB- in Old Persian ; Armina -LRB- -RRB- and Harminuya -LRB- in Elamite -RRB- .
Each of the aforementioned nations and tribes participated in the ethnogenesis of the Armenian people .
Under Ashurbanipal -LRB- 669 -- 627 BC -RRB- , the Assyrian empire reached the Caucasus Mountains -LRB- modern Armenia , Georgia and Azerbaijan -RRB- .
He assumes that they migrated from there southeast through the Caucasus with the Armenians remaining after Batumi while the pre-Greeks proceeded westwards along the southern coast of the Black Sea .
The imperial reign of Tigranes the Great is thus the span of time during which Armenia itself conquered areas populated by other peoples .
In the late Parthian period , Armenia was a predominantly Zoroastrian-adhering land , but by the Christianisation , previously predominant Zoroastrianism and paganism in Armenia gradually declined .
This event ushered the Golden Age of Armenia , during which many foreign books and manuscripts were translated to Armenian by Mesrop 's pupils .
Armenia lost its sovereignty again in 428 AD to the rivalling Byzantine and Sassanid Persian empires , until the Muslim conquest of Persia overran also the regions in which Armenians lived .
They settled in large numbers in Cilicia , an Anatolian region where Armenians were already established as a minority since Roman times .
In 1080 , they founded an independent Armenian Principality then Kingdom of Cilicia , which became the focus of Armenian nationalism .
The Armenians developed close social , cultural , military , and religious ties with nearby Crusader States , but eventually succumbed to Mamluk invasions .
From the early 16th century , both Western Armenia and Eastern Armenia fell under Iranian Safavid rule .
Owing to the century long Turco-Iranian geo-political rivalry that would last in Western Asia , significant parts of the region were frequently fought over between the two rivalling empires .
Western Armenia however , remained in Ottoman hands .
-LRB- See Recognition of the Armenian Genocide -RRB-
They , as well as the Armenians of Iran and Russia speak the Eastern dialect of the Armenian language .
The country itself is secular as a result of Soviet domination , but most of its citizens identify themselves as Apostolic Armenian Christian .
Small Armenian trading and religious communities have existed outside of Armenia for centuries .
There are also remnants of formerly populous communities in India , Myanmar , Thailand , Belgium , Portugal , Italy , Poland , Austria , Hungary , Bulgaria , Romania , Serbia , Ethiopia , Sudan and Egypt .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Within the diasporan Armenian community , there is an unofficial classification of the different kinds of Armenians .
In diverse communities -LRB- such as in Canada and the U.S. -RRB- where many different kinds of Armenians live together , there is a tendency for the different groups to cluster together .
During its later political eclipses , Armenia depended on the church to preserve and protect its unique identity .
However , the continuous upheavals , which characterized the political scenes of Armenia , made the political power move to safer places .
The Church center moved as well to different locations together with the political authority .
The Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia had close ties to European Crusader States .
Later on , the deteriorating situation in the region led the bishops of Armenia to elect a Catholicos in Etchmiadzin , the original seat of the Catholicosate .
The primacy of honor of the Catholicosate of Etchmiadzin has always been recognized by the Catholicosate of Cilicia .
There are other numerous Armenian churches belonging to Protestant denominations of all kinds .
This period of time is often viewed as the Golden Age of Armenian literature .
The book covers the time-frame from the formation of the Armenian people to the fifth century AD .
The nineteenth century beheld a great literary movement that was to give rise to modern Armenian literature .
This period of time , during which Armenian culture flourished , is known as the Revival period -LRB- Zartonki sherchan -RRB- .
Most of them adopted the newly created Eastern or Western variants of the Armenian language depending on the targeted audience , and preferred them over classical Armenian -LRB- grabar -RRB- .
This period ended after the Hamidian massacres , when Armenians experienced turbulent times .
As Armenian history of the 1920s and of the Genocide came to be more openly discussed , writers like Paruyr Sevak , Gevork Emin , Silva Kaputikyan and Hovhannes Shiraz began a new era of literature .
The early churches were mostly simple basilicas , but some with side apses .
By the time of the Arab invasion , most of what we now know as classical Armenian architecture had formed .
Many new cities and churches were built during this time , including a new capital at Lake Van and a new Cathedral on Akdamar Island to match .
The Cathedral of Ani was also completed during this dynasty .
During Soviet rule , Armenian athletes rose to prominence winning plenty of medals and helping the USSR win the medal standings at the Olympics on numerous occasions .
The Armenian Genocide caused widespread emigration that led to the settlement of Armenians in various countries in the world .
Armenians kept to their traditions and certain diasporans rose to fame with their music .
This style preserved the folk songs and dances of Western Armenia , and many artists also played the contemporary popular songs of Turkey and other Middle Eastern countries from which the Armenians emigrated .
Later , stemming from the Middle Eastern Armenian diaspora and influenced by Continental European -LRB- especially French -RRB- pop music , the Armenian pop music genre grew to fame in the 60s and 70s with artists such as Adiss Harmandian and Harout Pamboukjian performing to the Armenian diaspora and Armenia .
Ruben Hakobyan -LRB- Ruben Sasuntsi -RRB- is a well recognized Armenian ethnographic and patriotic folk singer who has achieved widespread national recognition due to his devotion to Armenian folk music and exceptional talent .
In the Armenian diaspora , Armenian revolutionary songs are popular with the youth .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- These songs encourage Armenian patriotism and are generally about Armenian history and national heroes .
Prominent Karabakh carpet weavers there were men too .
The rug mentioned in the Kaptavan inscriptions is composed of three arches , `` covered with vegatative ornaments '' , and bears an artistic resemblance to the illuminated manuscripts produced in Artsakh .
Armenians enjoy many different native and foreign foods .
Fruits play a large part in the Armenian diet .
Apricots -LRB- Prunus armeniaca , also known as Armenian Plum -RRB- have been grown in Armenia for centuries and have a reputation for having an especially good flavor .
Peaches are popular as well , as are grapes , figs , pomegranates , and melons .
Preserves are made from many fruits , including cornelian cherries , young walnuts , sea buckthorn , mulberries , sour cherries , and many others .
They prefer to use their own translation , the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures , although their literature occasionally quotes and cites other translations .
They believe that the destruction of the present world system at Armageddon is imminent , and that the establishment of God 's kingdom over the earth is the only solution for all problems faced by humanity .
Adherents commonly refer to their body of beliefs as `` the truth '' and consider themselves to be `` in the truth '' .
They consider secular society to be morally corrupt and under the influence of Satan , and most limit their social interaction with non-Witnesses .
Congregational disciplinary actions include disfellowshipping , their term for formal expulsion and shunning .
Baptized individuals who formally leave are considered disassociated and are also shunned .
Disfellowshipped and disassociated individuals may eventually be reinstated if deemed repentant .
During the course of his ministry , Russell disputed many beliefs of mainstream Christianity including immortality of the soul , hellfire , predestination , the fleshly return of Jesus Christ , the Trinity , and the burning up of the world .
Beginning in 1878 Russell and Barbour jointly edited a religious journal , Herald of the Morning .
In June 1879 the two split over doctrinal differences , and in July , Russell began publishing the magazine Zion 's Watch Tower and Herald of Christ 's Presence , stating that its purpose was to demonstrate that the world was in `` the last days , '' and that a new age of earthly and human restitution under the reign of Christ was imminent .
By about 1900 , Russell had organized thousands of part - and full-time colporteurs , and was appointing foreign missionaries and establishing branch offices .
By the 1910s , Russell 's organization maintained nearly a hundred `` pilgrims , '' or traveling preachers .
Russell engaged in significant global publishing efforts during his ministry , and by 1912 , he was the most distributed Christian author in the United States .
He identified the religious movement as `` Bible Students , '' and more formally as the International Bible Students Association .
His election was disputed , and members of the Board of Directors accused him of acting in an autocratic and secretive manner .
The divisions between his supporters and opponents triggered a major turnover of members over the next decade .
The book , published as the posthumous work of Russell , was a compilation of his commentaries on the Bible books of Ezekiel and Revelation , plus numerous additions by Bible Students Clayton Woodworth and George Fisher .
Rutherford centralized organizational control of the Watch Tower Society .
Disappointed by the changes , tens of thousands of defections occurred during the first half of Rutherford 's tenure , leading to the formation of several Bible Student organizations independent of the Watch Tower Society , most of which still exist .
By mid-1919 , as many as one in seven of Russell-era Bible Students had ceased their association with the Society , and as many as two-thirds by the end of the 1920s .
The name was chosen to distinguish his group of Bible Students from other independent groups that had severed ties with the Society , as well as symbolize the instigation of new outlooks and the promotion of fresh evangelizing methods .
He organized large international assemblies , instituted new training programs for members , and expanded missionary activity and branch offices throughout the world .
In 1995 , Jehovah 's Witnesses abandoned the idea that Armageddon must occur during the lives of the generation that was alive in 1914 and in 2013 changed their teaching on the `` generation '' .
There is no election for membership ; new members are selected by the existing body .
Until late 2012 , the Governing Body described itself as the representative and `` spokesman '' for God 's `` faithful and discreet slave class '' -LRB- approximately 10,000 self-professed `` anointed '' Jehovah 's Witnesses -RRB- .
At the 2012 Annual Meeting of the Watch Tower Society , the `` faithful and discreet slave '' was defined as referring to the Governing Body only .
It appoints all branch committee members and traveling overseers , after they have been recommended by local branches , with traveling overseers supervising circuits of congregations within their jurisdictions .
Traveling overseers appoint local elders and ministerial servants , and while branch offices may appoint regional committees for matters such as Kingdom Hall construction or disaster relief .
Ministerial servants -- appointed in a similar manner to elders -- fulfill clerical and attendant duties , but may also teach and conduct meetings .
The Society also teaches that members of the Governing Body are helped by the holy spirit to discern `` deep truths '' , which are then considered by the entire Governing Body before it makes doctrinal decisions .
Adherents are told to have `` complete confidence '' in the leadership , avoid skepticism about what is taught in the Watch Tower Society 's literature , and `` not advocate or insist on personal opinions or harbor private ideas when it comes to Bible understanding . ''
They believe that references in the Bible to the Archangel Michael , Abaddon -LRB- Apollyon -RRB- , and the Word all refer to Jesus .
It is said to have been the focal point of Jesus ' ministry on earth .
This development will mark the beginning of the `` great tribulation '' .
After Armageddon , God will extend his heavenly kingdom to include earth , which will be transformed into a paradise similar to the Garden of Eden .
After Armageddon , most of those who had died before God 's intervention will gradually be resurrected during `` judgment day '' lasting for one thousand years .
This judgment will be based on their actions after resurrection rather than past deeds .
At the end of the thousand years , Christ will hand all authority back to God .
Then a final test will take place when Satan is released to mislead perfect mankind .
Those who fail will be destroyed , along with Satan and his demons .
They thus depart from the mainstream Christian belief that the `` second coming '' of Matthew 24 refers to a single moment of arrival on earth to judge humans .
The meetings are largely devoted to study of Watch Tower Society literature and the Bible .
The format of the meetings is established by the religion 's headquarters , and the subject matter for most meetings is the same worldwide .
Congregations meet for two sessions each week comprising five distinct meetings that total about three-and-a-half hours , typically gathering mid-week -LRB- three meetings -RRB- and on the weekend -LRB- two meetings -RRB- .
Twice each year , Witnesses from a number of congregations that form a `` circuit '' gather for a one-day assembly .
Larger groups of congregations meet once a year for a three-day `` regional convention '' , usually at rented stadiums or auditoriums .
Their most important and solemn event is the commemoration of the `` Lord 's Evening Meal '' , or `` Memorial of Christ 's Death '' on the date of the Jewish Passover .
Witnesses are taught they are under a biblical command to engage in public preaching .
They are instructed to devote as much time as possible to their ministry and are required to submit an individual monthly `` Field Service Report '' .
Contact with disfellowshipped individuals is limited to direct family members living in the same home , and with congregation elders who may invite disfellowshipped persons to apply for reinstatement ; formal business dealings may continue if contractually or financially obliged .
The practice of shunning may also serve to deter other members from dissident behavior .
Expelled individuals may eventually be reinstated to the congregation if deemed repentant by elders in the congregation in which the disfellowshipping was enforced .
Reproof is a lesser form of discipline given formally by a judicial committee to a baptized Witness who is considered repentant of serious sin ; the reproved person temporarily loses conspicuous privileges of service , but suffers no restriction of social or spiritual fellowship .
Marking , a curtailing of social but not spiritual fellowship , is practiced if a baptized member persists in a course of action regarded as a violation of Bible principles but not a serious sin .
-LSB- note 4 -RSB-
Although they do not take part in politics , they respect the authority of the governments under which they live .
They feel that these and many other customs have pagan origins or reflect a nationalistic or political spirit .
Witnesses are told that spontaneous giving at other times can help their children to not feel deprived of birthdays or other celebrations .
They do not salute or pledge allegiance to flags or sing national anthems or patriotic songs .
Members are directed to refuse blood transfusions , even in `` a life-or-death situation '' .
Since the mid-1990s , the number of peak publishers has increased from 4.5 million to 8.2 million .
In the same year , they conducted `` Bible studies '' with over 9.7 million individuals , including those conducted by Witness parents with their children .
Other characteristics of the classification include likelihood of friction with secular authorities , reluctance to co-operate with other religious organizations , a high rate of membership turnover , a low rate of doctrinal change , and strict uniformity of beliefs among members .
In Canada , Jehovah 's Witnesses were interned in camps along with political dissidents and people of Chinese and Japanese descent .
In the former Soviet Union , about 9,300 Jehovah 's Witnesses were deported to Siberia as part of Operation North in April 1951 .
Those who openly disagree with official teachings are condemned as `` apostates '' who are `` mentally diseased '' .
Some publications also claimed that God has used Jehovah 's Witnesses and the International Bible Students as a modern-day prophet .
Failed predictions have led to the alteration or abandonment of some doctrines .
Chryssides further states , `` it is therefore simplistic and naïve to view the Witnesses as a group that continues to set a single end-date that fails and then devise a new one , as many counter-cultists do . ''
The religion has been criticized for its `` two witness rule '' for church discipline , based on its application of scriptures at Deuteronomy 19:15 and Matthew 18:15 -17 , which requires sexual abuse to be substantiated by secondary evidence if the accused person denies any wrongdoing .
A former member of the church 's headquarters staff , Barbara Anderson , says the policy effectively requires that there be another witness to an act of molestation , `` which is an impossibility '' .
The Watch Tower Society 's policy is that elders inform authorities when required by law to do so , but otherwise leave that action up to the victim and his or her family .
In 1951 , he became the first Supreme Commander of NATO .
He gave strong financial support to the new nation of South Vietnam .
He also condemned the Soviet invasion during the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 but took no action .
Near the end of his term , his efforts to set up a summit meeting with the Soviets collapsed because of the U-2 incident .
Chores were regularly assigned and rotated among all the children , and misbehavior was met with unequivocal discipline , usually from David .
The Eisenhower home served as the local meeting hall from 1896 to 1915 , though Eisenhower never joined the International Bible Students .
While speaking of himself in 1948 , Eisenhower said he was `` one of the most deeply religious men I know '' though unattached to any `` sect or organization '' .
They made a pact to take alternate years at college while the other worked to earn the tuitions .
Edgar asked for a second year , Dwight consented and worked for a second year .
At that time , a friend `` Swede '' Hazlet was applying to the Naval Academy and urged Dwight to apply to the school , since no tuition was required .
The Eisenhowers had two sons .
Coincidentally , John graduated from West Point on D-Day , June 6 , 1944 .
He married Barbara Jean Thompson on June 10 , 1947 .
John and Barbara had four children : David , Barbara Ann , Susan Elaine and Mary Jean .
John died on December 21 , 2013 .
Roberts also advised Eisenhower on tax aspects of publishing his memoirs , which proved financially lucrative .
With his excellent memory and ability to focus , Eisenhower was skilled at card games .
Eisenhower recorded West Point classmates ' poker losses for payment after graduation , and later stopped playing because his opponents resented having to pay him .
Though Eisenhower and his tank crews never saw combat , he displayed excellent organizational skills , as well as an ability to accurately assess junior officers ' strengths and make optimal placements of personnel .
Once again his spirits were raised when the unit under his command received orders overseas to France .
His schooling continued , focused on the nature of the next war and the role of the tank in it .
From 1920 , Eisenhower served under a succession of talented generals -- Fox Conner , John J. Pershing , Douglas MacArthur and George Marshall .
Conner 's comment on Eisenhower was , '' -LSB- He -RSB- is one of the most capable , efficient and loyal officers I have ever met . ''
He then served as a battalion commander at Fort Benning , Georgia , until 1927 .
During the late 1920s and early 1930s , Eisenhower 's career in the post-war army stalled somewhat , as military priorities diminished ; many of his friends resigned for high-paying business jobs .
Historians have concluded that this assignment provided valuable preparation for handling the challenging personalities of Winston Churchill , George S. Patton , George Marshall , and General Montgomery during World War II .
Eisenhower later emphasized that too much had been made of the disagreements with MacArthur , and that a positive relationship endured .
While in Manila , Mamie suffered a life-threatening stomach ailment but recovered fully .
Although his administrative abilities had been noticed , on the eve of the U.S. entry into World War II he had never held an active command above a battalion and was far from being considered by many as a potential commander of major operations .
He returned to Washington on June 3 with a pessimistic assessment , stating he had an `` uneasy feeling '' about Chaney and his staff .
The word `` expeditionary '' was dropped soon after his appointment for security reasons .
French cooperation was deemed necessary to the campaign , and Eisenhower encountered a `` preposterous situation '' with the multiple rival factions in France .
The Allied leaders were `` thunderstruck '' by this from a political standpoint , though none of them had offered Eisenhower guidance with the problem in the course of planning the operation .
Eisenhower was severely criticized for the move .
Eisenhower did not take action to prevent the arrest and extrajudicial execution of Bonnier de La Chapelle by associates of Darlan acting without authority from either Vichy or the Allies , considering it a criminal rather than a military matter .
He became more adroit in such matters in later campaigns .
The Eighth Army had advanced across the Western Desert from the east and was ready for the start of the Tunisia Campaign .
Eisenhower , as well as the officers and troops under him , had learned valuable lessons in their previous operations , and their skills had all strengthened in preparation for the next most difficult campaign against the Germans -- a beach landing assault .
He also insisted that the British give him exclusive command over all strategic air forces to facilitate Overlord , to the point of threatening to resign unless Churchill relented , as he did .
Many prematurely considered that victory in Europe would come by summer 's end -- however the Germans did not capitulate for almost a year .
He was ever mindful of the inevitable loss of life and suffering that would be experienced on an individual level by the troops under his command and their families .
It has been called one of the great speeches of history :
Once the coastal assault had succeeded , Eisenhower insisted on retaining personal control over the land battle strategy , and was immersed in the command and supply of multiple assaults through France on Germany .
Eisenhower worked tirelessly to address the demands of the rival commanders to optimize Allied forces , often by giving them tactical , though sometimes ineffective , latitude ; many historians conclude this delayed the Allied victory in Europe .
In this and the previous high commands he held , Eisenhower showed his great talents for leadership and diplomacy .
Although he had never seen action himself , he won the respect of front-line commanders .
German defenses continued to deteriorate on both the eastern front with the Soviets and the western front with the Allies .
The British backed down , but then wanted Eisenhower to move into Czechoslovakia for political reasons .
Washington refused to support Churchill 's plan to use Eisenhower 's army for political maneuvers against Moscow .
Upon discovery of the Nazi concentration camps , he ordered camera crews to document evidence of the atrocities in them for use in the Nuremberg Trials .
Eisenhower followed the orders laid down by the Joint Chiefs of Staff -LRB- JCS -RRB- in directive JCS 1067 , but softened them by bringing in 400,000 tons of food for civilians and allowing more fraternization .
In response to the devastation in Germany , including food shortages and an influx of refugees , he arranged distribution of American food and medical equipment .
His actions reflected the new American attitudes of the German people as Nazi victims not villains , while aggressively purging the ex-Nazis .
Eisenhower was convinced in 1946 that the Soviet Union did not want war and that friendly relations could be maintained ; he strongly supported the new United Nations and favored its involvement in the control of atomic bombs .
Second , I hated to see our country be the first to use such a weapon . ''
Initially , Eisenhower was characterized by hopes for cooperation with the Soviets .
Invited by Bolesław Bierut and decorated with the highest military decoration , he was shocked by the scale of destruction in the city .
However , by mid-1947 , as East -- West tensions over economic recovery in Germany and the Greek Civil War escalated , Eisenhower gave up and agreed with a containment policy to stop Soviet expansion .
Believing that a general should not participate in politics , one author later wrote that `` figuratively speaking , -LSB- Eisenhower -RSB- kicked his political-minded visitor out of his office '' .
As the election approached , other prominent citizens and politicians from both parties urged Eisenhower to run for president .
Eisenhower maintained no political party affiliation during this time .
The assignment was described as not being a good fit in either direction .
Critics regarded it as one of the finest U.S. military memoirs , and it was a major financial success as well .
This ruling saved Eisenhower about $ 400,000 .
`` Whatever General Eisenhower knows about economics , he has learned at the study group meetings , '' one Aid to Europe member claimed .
The effort was a long struggle ; Eisenhower had to be convinced that political circumstances had created a genuine duty for him to offer himself as a candidate , and that there was a mandate from the populace for him to be their President .
Eisenhower defeated Taft for the nomination , having won critical delegate votes from Texas .
Eisenhower 's campaign was noted for the simple but effective slogan , `` I Like Ike '' .
It was essential to his success that Eisenhower express opposition to Roosevelt 's policy at Yalta and against Truman 's policies in Korea and China -- matters in which he had once participated .
In defeating Taft for the nomination , it became necessary for Eisenhower to appease the right wing Old Guard of the Republican Party ; his selection of Richard M. Nixon as the Vice-President on the ticket was designed in part for that purpose .
Nixon also provided a strong anti-communist presence as well as some youth to counter Ike 's more advanced age .
Two controversies during the campaign tested him and his staff , but did not affect the campaign .
Nixon spoke out adroitly to avoid potential damage , but the matter permanently alienated the two candidates .
Due to a complete estrangement between the two as a result of campaigning , Truman and Eisenhower had minimal discussions about the transition of administrations .
The cabinet was notable for its lack of personal friends , office seekers , or experienced government administrators .
He also upgraded the role of the National Security Council in planning all phases of the Cold War .
Throughout his presidency , Eisenhower adhered to a political philosophy of dynamic conservatism .
Eisenhower was publicly noncommittal about Nixon 's repeating as the Vice President on his ticket ; the question was an especially important one in light of his heart condition .
The level of campaigning was curtailed out of health considerations .
He was assigned as an observer for the mission , which involved sending a convoy of U.S. Army vehicles coast to coast .
The U.N. speech was well received but the Soviets never acted upon it , due to an overarching concern for the greater stockpiles of nuclear weapons in the U.S. arsenal .
In 1955 American nuclear arms policy became one aimed primarily at arms control as opposed to disarmament .
Russian leader Nikita Khrushchev dismissed the proposal out of hand .
That year the loss of North Vietnam to the communists and the rejection of his proposed European Defence Community -LRB- EDC -RRB- were serious defeats , but he remained optimistic in his opposition to the spread of communism , saying `` Long faces do n't win wars '' .
In 1954 Eisenhower wanted to increase surveillance inside the Soviet Union .
Columbine II is the only presidential aircraft to have ever been sold to the public and is the only remaining presidential aircraft left unrestored and not on public display .
He then launched a national campaign that funded not just space exploration but a major strengthening of science and higher education .
In late 1952 Eisenhower went to Korea and discovered a military and political stalemate .
His earlier military reputation in Europe was effective with the Chinese .
The armistice and boundary remain in effect today , with American soldiers stationed there to guarantee it .
Eisenhower had the insight to realize that unlimited war in the nuclear age was unthinkable , and limited war unwinnable .
He publicly disavowed his allies at the United Nations , and used financial and diplomatic pressure to make them withdraw from Egypt .
Eisenhower stated prophetically that `` this war would absorb our troops by divisions . ''
Ambrose argues that Eisenhower , by not participating in the Geneva agreement , had kept the U.S out of Vietnam ; nevertheless , with the formation of SEATO , he had in the end put the U.S. back into the conflict .
This was due to North Vietnam 's support of `` uprisings '' in the south and concern the nation would fall .
Four days after Powers disappeared , the Eisenhower Administration had NASA issue a very detailed press release noting that an aircraft had `` gone missing '' north of Turkey .
It speculated that the pilot might have fallen unconscious while the autopilot was still engaged , and falsely claimed that `` the pilot reported over the emergency frequency that he was experiencing oxygen difficulties . ''
Therefore , Khrushchev would not take part in the summit .
Up until this event , Eisenhower felt he had been making progress towards better relations with the Soviet Union .
Although both acts were much weaker than subsequent civil rights legislation , they constituted the first significant civil rights acts since 1875 .
Martin Luther King Jr. wrote to Eisenhower to thank him for his actions , writing `` The overwhelming majority of southerners , Negro and white , stand firmly behind your resolute action to restore law and order in Little Rock '' .
This prevented Eisenhower from openly condemning Joseph McCarthy 's highly criticized methods against communism .
This position drew criticism from a number of corners .
Eisenhower was urged to respond directly and specify the various measures he had taken to purge the government of communists .
Ike 's denial of McCarthy 's access to his staff reduced McCarthy 's hearings to rants about trivial matters , and contributed to his ultimate downfall .
There were exceptions , Leonard W. Hall , for example , who as chairman of the Republican National Committee tried to open the administration 's eyes to the political facts of life , with occasional success .
However , these exceptions were not enough to right the balance . ''
Whittaker was unsuited for the role and soon retired .
He was probably the first president to release information about his health and medical records while in office .
On September 24 , 1955 , while vacationing in Colorado , he had a serious heart attack that required six weeks ' hospitalization , during which time Nixon , Dulles , and Sherman Adams assumed administrative duties and provided communication with the President .
Instead of eliminating him as a candidate for a second term as President , his physician recommended a second term as essential to his recovery .
The stroke had caused an aphasia .
To treat the intestinal block , surgeons bypassed about ten inches of his small intestine .
His scheduled meeting with Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru was postponed so he could recover from surgery at his farm in Gettysburg , Pennsylvania .
He was still recovering from this operation during the Suez Crisis .
Eisenhower 's health issues forced him to give up smoking and make some changes to his dietary habits , but he still indulged in alcohol .
During a visit to England he complained of dizziness and had to have his blood pressure checked on August 29 , 1959 ; however , before dinner at Chequers on the next day his doctor General Howard Snyder recalled Eisenhower `` drank several gin-and-tonics , and one or two gins on the rocks ... three or four wines with the dinner '' .
The last three years of Eisenhower 's second term in office were ones of relatively good health .
Eventually after leaving the White House , he suffered several additional and ultimately crippling heart attacks .
He told friends , `` I will do almost anything to avoid turning my chair and country over to Kennedy . ''
He actively campaigned for Nixon in the final days , although he may have done Nixon some harm .
When asked by reporters at the end of a televised press conference to list one of Nixon 's policy ideas he had adopted , Eisenhower joked , `` If you give me a week , I might think of one .
I do n't remember . ''
Kennedy 's campaign used the quote in one of its campaign commercials .
In his farewell speech , Eisenhower raised the issue of the Cold War and role of the U.S. armed forces .
The following day his body was moved to the Washington National Cathedral 's Bethlehem Chapel , where he lay in repose for 28 hours .
On March 30 , his body was brought by caisson to the United States Capitol , where he lay in state in the Capitol Rotunda .
That evening , Eisenhower 's body was placed onto a train en route to Abilene , Kansas , the last time a funeral train has been used as part of funeral proceedings of an American president .
The president 's body was buried as a General of the Army .
His only medals worn were : the Army Distinguished Service Medal with three oak leaf clusters , the Navy Distinguished Service Medal , and the Legion of Merit .
Eisenhower is buried alongside his son Doud , who died at age 3 in 1921 .
In the immediate years after Eisenhower left office , his reputation declined .
The design also incorporates location , date , and/or significant event .
The Eisenhower appreciation medals are part of the Presidential Medal of Appreciation Award Medal Series .
Not wanting to offend the president , the club 's chairman , Clifford Roberts , immediately adjourned the meeting rather than reject the request .
Many bridges and tunnels link the Bronx to the island and borough of Manhattan to the west over and under the narrow Harlem River , as well as three longer bridges south over the East River to the borough of Queens .
In the 19th and 20th centuries , the Bronx received many immigrant groups as it was transformed into an urban community , first from various European countries -LRB- particularly Ireland , Germany and Italy -RRB- and later from the Caribbean region -LRB- particularly Puerto Rico , Jamaica and the Dominican Republic -RRB- , as well as African American migrants from the American South .
Since then the communities have shown significant redevelopment starting in the late 1980s before picking up pace in the 1990s into today .
He became the first recorded European settler in the area now known as the Bronx .
Dutch and English settlers referred to the area as Bronck 's Land .
The American poet William Bronk was a descendant of Pieter Bronck , either Jonas Bronck 's son or his younger brother .
The Bronx is referred to , both legally and colloquially , with a definite article , as the Bronx .
The use of the definite article is attributed to the style of referring to rivers .
Another explanation for the use of the definite article in the borough 's name is that the original form of the name was a possessive or collective one referring to the family , as in visiting The Broncks , The Bronck 's or The Broncks ' .
Control over the bridges across the Harlem River plagued the period of British colonial rule .
The consolidation of the Bronx into New York City proceeded in two stages .
City Island , a nautical community , voted to join the city in 1896 .
The Great Depression and post World War II years saw a slowing of growth leading into an eventual decline .
In addition , French , German , Polish and other immigrants moved into the borough .
The Jewish population also increased notably during this time .
Many synagogues still stand in the Bronx , but most have been converted to other uses .
The burning of buildings was predominantly in the poorest communities , like the South Bronx .
The IRT White Plains Road Line -LRB- 2 5 trains -RRB- began to show an increase in riders .
Chains such as Marshalls , Staples , and Target opened stores in the Bronx .
The borough has experienced substantial new building construction since 2002 .
In the first six months of 2007 alone total investment in new residential development was $ 965 million and 5,187 residential units were scheduled to be completed .
Much of the new development is springing up in formerly vacant lots across the South Bronx .
Under consideration for future development is the construction of a platform over the New York City Subway 's Concourse Yard adjacent to Lehman College .
The Bronx is almost entirely situated on the North American mainland .
Directly north of the Bronx are -LRB- from west to east -RRB- the adjoining Westchester County communities of Yonkers , Mount Vernon , Pelham Manor and New Rochelle .
-LRB- There is also a short southern land boundary with Marble Hill in the Borough of Manhattan , over the filled-in former course of the Spuyten Duyvil Creek .
Marble Hill 's postal ZIP code , telephonic Area Code and fire service , however , are shared with the Bronx and not Manhattan . -RRB-
The northern side of the borough includes the largest park in New York City -- Pelham Bay Park , which includes Orchard Beach -- and the fourth largest , Van Cortlandt Park , which is west of Woodlawn Cemetery and borders Yonkers .
Also in the northern Bronx , Wave Hill , the former estate of George W. Perkins -- known for a historic house , gardens , changing site-specific art installations and concerts -- overlooks the New Jersey Palisades from a promontory on the Hudson in Riverdale .
The East Bronx has older tenement buildings , low income public housing complexes , and multifamily homes , as well as single family homes .
Like other neighborhoods in New York City , the South Bronx has no official boundaries .
The South Bronx has many high-density apartment buildings , low income public housing complexes , and multi-unit homes .
The South Bronx has some of the poorest neighborhoods in the country , as well as very high crime areas .
There are three primary shopping centers in the Bronx : The Hub , Gateway Center and Southern Boulevard .
It is primarily located inside the neighborhood of Melrose but also lines the northern border of Mott Haven .
It is the site of both maximum traffic and architectural density .
The Hub is part of Bronx Community Board 1 .
The center has earned itself a LEED `` Silver '' designation in its design .
The Bronx street grid is irregular .
The U.S. Census considers the Bronx to be the most diverse area in the country .
There is an 89.7 percent chance that any two residents , chosen at random , would be of different race or ethnicity .
In total , 55.98 % -LRB- 706,783 -RRB- of the Bronx 's population age five and older spoke a language at home other than English .
A Garifuna-speaking community from Honduras and Guatemala also makes the Bronx its home .
Out of all five boroughs , the Bronx has the lowest number and percentage of white residents .
The majority of the non-Hispanic European American population is of Italian and Irish descent .
People of Italian descent numbered over 55,000 individuals and made up 3.9 % of the population .
People of Irish descent numbered over 43,500 individuals and made up 3.1 % of the population .
German Americans and Polish Americans made up 1.4 % and 0.8 % of the population respectively .
At the 2009 American Community Survey , Black Americans made the second largest group in the Bronx after Hispanics and Latinos .
In addition , over 319,000 people were of various Hispanic and Latino groups , such as Dominican , Salvadoran , and so on .
These groups collectively represented 22.9 % of the population .
At the 2010 Census , 53.5 % of Bronx 's population was of Hispanic , Latino , or Spanish origin -LRB- they may be of any race -RRB- .
Asian Americans are a small but sizable minority in the borough .
Roughly 13,600 Indians call the Bronx home , along with 9,800 Chinese , 6,540 Filipinos , 2,260 Vietnamese , 2,010 Koreans , and 1,100 Japanese .
Multiracial Americans are also a sizable minority in the Bronx .
People of mixed African American and Native American heritage number over 1,220 members and form 0.1 % of the population .
Each borough president had a powerful administrative role derived from having a vote on the New York City Board of Estimate , which was responsible for creating and approving the city 's budget and proposals for land use .
The Bronx has often shown striking differences from other boroughs in elections for Mayor .
Education in the Bronx is provided by a large number of public and private institutions , many of which draw students who live beyond the Bronx .
There are also several public charter schools .
-LRB- The respective state and national percentages were -LSB- NY -RSB- 79.1 % & 27.4 % and -LSB- US -RSB- 80.4 % & 24.4 % . -RRB-
Many public high schools are located in the borough including the elite Bronx High School of Science , Celia Cruz Bronx High School of Music , DeWitt Clinton High School , High School for Violin and Dance , Bronx Leadership Academy 2 , Bronx International High School , the School for Excellence , the Morris Academy for Collaborative Study , Wings Academy for young adults , The Bronx School for Law , Government and Justice , Validus Preparatory Academy , The Eagle Academy For Young Men , Bronx Expeditionary Learning High School , Bronx Academy of Letters , Herbert H. Lehman High School and High School of American Studies .
Among the reasons cited for the changes were poor graduation rates and concerns about safety .
Hip Hop first emerged in the South Bronx in the early 1970s .
As hip hop 's popularity grew , performers began speaking -LRB- `` rapping '' -RRB- in sync with the beats , and became known as MCs or emcees .
Some artists from elsewhere in New York City have begun to converge on the area , and housing prices have nearly quadrupled in the area since 2002 .
However rising prices directly correlate to a housing shortage across the city and the entire metro area .
Many of its exhibitions are on themes of special interest to the Bronx .
However , this intention was thwarted by a combination of ethnic antagonism , aesthetic controversy and political struggles over the institutional control of public art .
In 2007 , Christopher Gray of The New York Times described it as `` a writhing composition in white Tyrolean marble depicting Lorelei , the mythical German figure , surrounded by mermaids , dolphins and seashells . ''
The river is also straddled by the New York Botanical Gardens , its neighbor , the Bronx Zoo , and a little further south , on the west shore , Bronx River Art Center .
Four non-profit news outlets , Norwood News , Mount Hope Monitor , Mott Haven Herald and The Hunts Point Express serve the borough 's poorer communities .
Co-op City was the first area in the Bronx , and the first in New York beyond Manhattan , to have its own cable television provider .
Mid-20th century movies set in the Bronx portrayed densely settled , working-class , urban culture .
Starting in the 1970s , the Bronx often symbolized violence , decay , and urban ruin .
The line entered the pop-consciousness with Game Two of the 1977 World Series , when a fire broke out near Yankee Stadium as the team was playing the Los Angeles Dodgers .
Numerous fires had previously broken out in the Bronx prior to this fire .
As the fire was captured on live television , announcer Howard Cosell is wrongly remembered to have said something like , `` There it is , ladies and gentlemen : the Bronx is burning '' .
Historians of New York City frequently point to Cosell 's remark as an acknowledgement of both the city and the borough 's decline .
They are set in the heart of the Bronx , showing apartment life and the then-landmark Krums ice cream parlor .
The 2005 video game adaptation features levels called Pelham , Tremont , and `` Gunhill '' -LRB- a play off the name Gun Hill Road -RRB- .
This theme lends itself to the title of The Bronx Is Burning , an eight-part ESPN TV mini-series -LRB- 2007 -RRB- about the New York Yankees ' drive to winning baseball 's 1977 World Series .
The TV series emphasizes the boisterous nature of the team , led by manager Billy Martin , catcher Thurman Munson and outfielder Reggie Jackson , as well as the malaise of the Bronx and New York City in general during that time , such as the blackout , the city 's serious financial woes and near bankruptcy , the arson for insurance payments , and the election of Ed Koch as mayor .
The movie 's title is from the nickname for the 41st Police Precinct in the South Bronx which was nicknamed `` Fort Apache '' .
Also from 1981 is the horror film Wolfen making use of the rubble of the Bronx as a home for werewolf type creatures .
The plot revolves around a sinister construction corporation 's plans to depopulate , destroy and redevelop the Bronx , and a band of rebels who are out to expose the corporation 's murderous ways and save their homes .
The film is memorable for its almost incessant use of the phrase , `` Leave the Bronx ! ''
Many of the movie 's scenes were filmed in Queens , substituting as the Bronx .
Rumble in the Bronx was a 1995 Jackie Chan kung-fu film , another which popularised the Bronx to international audiences .
Last Bronx , a 1996 Sega game played on the bad reputation of the Bronx to lend its name to an alternate version of post-Japanese bubble Tokyo , where crime and gang warfare is rampant .
The CBS television sitcom Becker , 1998 -- 2004 , was more ambiguous .
The show starred Ted Danson as Dr. John Becker , a doctor who operated a small practice and was constantly annoyed by his patients , co-workers , friends , and practically everything and everybody else in his world .
It showed his everyday life as a doctor working in a small clinic in the Bronx .
Robin Williams played the physician ; Robert De Niro was one of the patients who emerged from a catatonic -LRB- frozen -RRB- state .
The home of Williams ' character was shot not far from Sacks ' actual City Island residence .
The Bronx has been featured significantly in fiction literature .
Kate Simon 's Bronx Primitive : Portraits of a Childhood is directly autobiographical , a warm account of a Polish-Jewish girl in an immigrant family growing up before World War II , and living near Arthur Avenue and Tremont Avenue .
Similarly , in Avery Corman 's book The Old Neighborhood -LRB- 1980 -RRB- , an upper-middle class white protagonist returns to his birth neighborhood -LRB- Fordham Road and the Grand Concourse -RRB- , and learns that even though the folks are poor , Hispanic and African-American , they are good people .
A substantial piece of the last part of the book is set in the resulting riotous trial at the Bronx County Courthouse .
However , times change , and in 2007 , the New York Times reported that `` the Bronx neighborhoods near the site of Sherman 's accident are now dotted with townhouses and apartments . ''
In the same article , the Reverend Al Sharpton -LRB- whose fictional analogue in the novel is `` Reverend Bacon '' -RRB- asserts that `` twenty years later , the cynicism of The Bonfire of the Vanities is as out of style as Tom Wolfe 's wardrobe . ''
Modern scholars , however , point out that Cicero -LRB- 106 -- 43 BCE -RRB- , who was most responsible for defining and popularizing the term humanitas , in fact frequently used the word in both senses , as did his near contemporaries .
Thus humanitas included two meanings from the outset and these continue in the modern derivative , humanism , which even today can refer to both humanitarian benevolence and to scholarship .
In 1765 , the author of an anonymous article in a French Enlightenment periodical spoke of `` The general love of humanity ... a virtue hitherto quite nameless among us , and which we will venture to call ` humanism ' , for the time has come to create a word for such a beautiful and necessary thing '' .
The latter part of the 18th and the early 19th centuries saw the creation of numerous grass-roots `` philanthropic '' and benevolent societies dedicated to human betterment and the spreading of knowledge -LRB- some Christian , some not -RRB- .
Humanism began to acquire a negative sense .
The Oxford English Dictionary records the use of the word `` humanism '' by an English clergyman in 1812 to indicate those who believe in the `` mere humanity '' -LRB- as opposed to the divine nature -RRB- of Christ , i.e. , Unitarians and Deists .
Zarathustra 's philosophy in the Gathas lays out a conception of humankind as thinking beings dignified with choice and agency according to the intellect which each receives from Ahura Mazda -LRB- God in the form of supreme wisdom -RRB- .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Sage kings such as Yao and Shun are humanistic figures as recorded .
So , to sage kings , people first , gods second '' ; Neishi Guo says , `` Gods , clever , righteous and wholehearted , comply with human . ''
Taoist and Confucian secularism contain elements of moral thought devoid of religious authority or deism however they only partly resembled our modern concept of secularism .
Thales questioned the notion of anthropomorphic gods and Xenophanes refused to recognise the gods of his time and reserved the divine for the principle of unity in the universe .
These Ionian Greeks were the first thinkers to assert that nature is available to be studied separately from the supernatural realm .
Pericles , the leader of Athens during the period of its greatest glory was an admirer of Anaxagoras .
Little of the written work of these early philosophers survives and they are known mainly from fragments and quotations in other writers , principally Plato and Aristotle .
The historian Thucydides , noted for his scientific and rational approach to history , is also much admired by later humanists .
He was also the first Greek philosopher to admit women to his school as a rule .
According to Petrarch , what was needed to remedy this situation was the careful study and imitation of the great classical authors .
For the next 70 years , however , neither Valla nor any of his contemporaries thought to apply the techniques of philology to other controversial manuscripts in this way .
Henceforth Renaissance humanism , particularly in the German North , became concerned with religion , while Italian and French humanism concentrated increasingly on scholarship and philology addressed to a narrow audience of specialists , studiously avoiding topics that might offend despotic rulers or which might be seen as corrosive of faith .
The influence of Terence 's felicitous phrase on Roman thinking about human rights can hardly be overestimated .
Thus , the stage was set for the adoption of an approach to natural philosophy , based on empirical observations and experimentation of the physical universe , making possible the advent of the age of scientific inquiry that followed the Renaissance .
They inveighed against the abuses of the Church , but not against the Church itself , much less against religion .
He hoped that he could do some good by winning earthly glory and praising virtue , inferior though that might be to a life devoted solely to prayer .
By embracing a non-theistic philosophic base , however , the methods of the humanists , combined with their eloquence , would ultimately have a corrosive effect on established authority .
Throughout the 1930s , Potter was an advocate of such liberal causes as , women 's rights , access to birth control , `` civil divorce laws '' , and an end to capital punishment .
The approach emphasizes an individual 's inherent drive towards self-actualization and creativity .
Other sources include the philosophies of existentialism and phenomenology .
Potter 's book and the Manifesto became the cornerstones of modern humanism , the latter declaring a new religion by saying , `` any religion that can hope to be a synthesising and dynamic force for today must be shaped for the needs of this age .
To establish such a religion is a major necessity of the present . ''
It developed during the fourteenth and the beginning of the fifteenth centuries , and was a response to the challenge of scholastic university education , which was then dominated by Aristotelian philosophy and logic .
Scholasticism focused on preparing men to be doctors , lawyers or professional theologians , and was taught from approved textbooks in logic , natural philosophy , medicine , law and theology .
If anything , there is recognition that living up to one 's potential is hard work and requires the help of others .
The focus is on doing good and living well in the here and now , and leaving the world a better place for those who come after .
In 1925 , the English mathematician and philosopher Alfred North Whitehead cautioned : `` The prophecy of Francis Bacon has now been fulfilled ; and man , who at times dreamt of himself as a little lower than the angels , has submitted to become the servant and the minister of nature .
It still remains to be seen whether the same actor can play both parts '' .
In the 1850s , Auguste Comte , the Father of Sociology , founded Positivism , a `` religion of humanity '' .
One of the earliest forerunners of contemporary chartered humanist organisations was the Humanistic Religious Association formed in 1853 in London .
This early group was democratically organised , with male and female members participating in the election of the leadership and promoted knowledge of the sciences , philosophy , and the arts .
The Ethical Culture movement was founded in 1876 .
The movement 's founder , Felix Adler , a former member of the Free Religious Association , conceived of Ethical Culture as a new religion that would retain the ethical message at the heart of all religions .
Ethical Culture was religious in the sense of playing a defining role in people 's lives and addressing issues of ultimate concern .
Polemics about humanism have sometimes assumed paradoxical twists and turns .
Postmodern critics who are self-described anti-humanists , such as Jean-François Lyotard and Michel Foucault , have asserted that humanism posits an overarching and excessively abstract notion of humanity or universal human nature , which can then be used as a pretext for imperialism and domination of those deemed somehow less than human .
Critics of antihumanism , most notably Jürgen Habermas , counter that while antihumanists may highlight humanism 's failure to fulfil its emancipatory ideal , they do not offer an alternative emancipatory project of their own .
Others , like the German philosopher Heidegger considered themselves humanists on the model of the ancient Greeks , but thought humanism applied only to the German `` race '' and specifically to the Nazis and thus , in Davies ' words , were anti-humanist humanists .
Such a reading of Heidegger 's thought is itself deeply controversial ; Heidegger includes his own views and critique of Humanism in Letter On Humanism .
For `` it is almost impossible to think of a crime that has not been committed in the name of human reason '' .
Yet , he continues , `` it would be unwise to simply abandon the ground occupied by the historical humanisms .
The freedom to speak and write , to organise and campaign in defence of individual or collective interests , to protest and disobey : all these can only be articulated in humanist terms . ''
The ad fontes principle also had many applications .
Richard Bauman writes :
`` The first is political , largely French in inspiration , and projects ` humanity as the hero of liberty ' .
The two themes converged and competed in complex ways in the 19th century and beyond , and between them set the boundaries of its various humanisms .
Some of this object 's mass merged with the Earth , significantly altering its internal composition , and a portion was ejected into space .
Some of the material survived to form an orbiting moon .
Some of this object 's mass merged with the Earth , significantly altering its internal composition , and a portion was ejected into space .
Some of the material survived to form an orbiting moon .
Outgassing and volcanic activity produced the primordial atmosphere .
During this time , the Earth 's crust cooled enough that rocks and continental plates began to form .
The continents later recombined to form Pannotia , 600 -- 540 Ma .
Throughout the early Paleozoic , the Earth 's landmass was broken up into a substantial number of relatively small continents .
The waters of the Cambrian period appear to have been widespread and shallow .
Continental drift rates may have been anomalously high .
Gondwana started the period in the equatorial latitudes and , as the period progressed , drifted toward the South Pole .
The Rheic Ocean was formed as a result of this .
By the end of the period , Gondwana had neared or approached the pole and was largely glaciated .
The event was preceded by a fall in atmospheric carbon dioxide -LRB- from 7000ppm to 4400ppm -RRB- which selectively affected the shallow seas where most organisms lived .
Evidence of these ice caps have been detected in Upper Ordovician rock strata of North Africa and then-adjacent northeastern South America , which were south-polar locations at the time .
Other minor oceans include Proto-Tethys , Paleo-Tethys , Rheic Ocean , a seaway of Iapetus Ocean -LRB- now in between Avalonia and Laurentia -RRB- , and newly formed Ural Ocean .
The period was a time of great tectonic activity , as Laurasia and Gondwana drew closer together .
The southern continents remained tied together in the supercontinent of Gondwana .
The remainder of modern Eurasia lay in the Northern Hemisphere .
Sea levels were high worldwide , and much of the land lay submerged under shallow seas .
Other minor oceans were Paleo-Tethys , Proto-Tethys , Rheic Ocean and Ural Ocean -LRB- which was closed during the collision with Siberia and Baltica -RRB- .
There was also a drop in south polar temperatures ; southern Gondwana was glaciated throughout the period , though it is uncertain if the ice sheets were a holdover from the Devonian or not .
In the same time frame , much of present eastern Eurasian plate welded itself to Europe along the line of the Ural mountains .
Other minor oceans were shrinking and eventually closed the Rheic Ocean -LRB- closed by the assembly of South and North America -RRB- , the small , shallow Ural Ocean -LRB- which was closed by the collision of Baltica , and Siberia continents , creating the Ural Mountains -RRB- and Proto-Tethys Ocean .
Large continental landmasses create climates with extreme variations of heat and cold -LRB- `` continental climate '' -RRB- and monsoon conditions with highly seasonal rainfall patterns .
Deserts seem to have been widespread on Pangaea .
Because of the limited shoreline of one super-continental mass , Triassic marine deposits are globally relatively rare ; despite their prominence in Western Europe , where the Triassic was first studied .
In North America , for example , marine deposits are limited to a few exposures in the west .
The Tethys Sea closed , and the Neotethys basin appeared .
Climates were warm , with no evidence of glaciation .
As in the Triassic , there was apparently no land near either pole , and no extensive ice caps existed .
In contrast , the North American Jurassic record is the poorest of the Mesozoic , with few outcrops at the surface .
Though the epicontinental Sundance Sea left marine deposits in parts of the northern plains of the United States and Canada during the late Jurassic , most exposed sediments from this period are continental , such as the alluvial deposits of the Morrison Formation .
The first of several massive batholiths were emplaced in the northern Cordillera beginning in the mid-Jurassic , marking the Nevadan orogeny .
Important Jurassic exposures are also found in Russia , India , South America , Japan , Australasia and the United Kingdom .
To the north of Africa the Tethys Sea continued to narrow .
Broad shallow seas advanced across central North America -LRB- the Western Interior Seaway -RRB- and Europe , then receded late in the period , leaving thick marine deposits sandwiched between coal beds .
Mid-ocean ridge activity -- or rather , the circulation of seawater through the enlarged ridges -- enriched the oceans in calcium ; this made the oceans more saturated , as well as increased the bioavailability of the element for calcareous nanoplankton .
These widespread carbonates and other sedimentary deposits make the Cretaceous rock record especially fine .
Other important Cretaceous exposures occur in Europe and China .
Laurasia became North America and Eurasia , while Gondwana split into South America , Africa , Australia , Antarctica and the Indian subcontinent , which collided with the Asian plate .
The Tethys Sea , which had separated the northern continents from Africa and India , began to close up , forming the Mediterranean sea .
In many ways , the Paleocene continued processes that had begun during the late Cretaceous Period .
During the Paleocene , the continents continued to drift toward their present positions .
Europe and Greenland were still connected .
The Antarctic region cooled down , and the ocean surrounding Antarctica began to freeze , sending cold water and ice floes north , reinforcing the cooling .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The northern supercontinent of Laurasia began to break up , as Europe , Greenland and North America drifted apart .
Though the North Atlantic was opening , a land connection appears to have remained between North America and Europe since the faunas of the two regions are very similar .
A brief marine incursion marks the early Oligocene in Europe .
During the Miocene continents continued to drift toward their present positions .
The formation of the Isthmus had major consequences on global temperatures , since warm equatorial ocean currents were cut off and an Atlantic cooling cycle began , with cold Arctic and Antarctic waters dropping temperatures in the now-isolated Atlantic Ocean .
Sea level changes exposed the land-bridge between Alaska and Asia .
The polar regions have since undergone repeated cycles of glaciation and thaw , repeating every 40,000 -- 100,000 years .
The sea level rise and temporary land depression allowed temporary marine incursions into areas that are now far from the sea .
Holocene marine fossils are known from Vermont , Quebec , Ontario and Michigan .
Other than higher latitude temporary marine incursions associated with glacial depression , Holocene fossils are found primarily in lakebed , floodplain and cave deposits .
Holocene marine deposits along low-latitude coastlines are rare because the rise in sea levels during the period exceeds any likely upthrusting of non-glacial origin .
Post-glacial rebound in Scandinavia resulted in the emergence of coastal areas around the Baltic Sea , including much of Finland .
The region continues to rise , still causing weak earthquakes across Northern Europe .
Their powers include the legitimized use of force .
The term is most commonly associated with police services of a sovereign state that are authorized to exercise the police power of that state within a defined legal or territorial area of responsibility .
Law enforcement , however , constitutes only part of policing activity .
Policing has included an array of activities in different situations , but the predominant ones are concerned with the preservation of order .
In Jin , dozens of prefects were spread across the state , each having limited authority and employment period .
They were appointed by local magistrates , who reported to higher authorities such as governors , who in turn were appointed by the emperor , and they oversaw the civil administration of their `` prefecture '' , or jurisdiction .
Under each prefect were `` subprefects '' who helped collectively with law enforcement in the area .
Some prefects were responsible for handling investigations , much like modern police detectives .
Prefects could also be women .
They adapted an existing brotherhood to the purpose of a general police acting under officials appointed by themselves , and endowed with great powers of summary jurisdiction even in capital cases .
The marshalcy dates back to the Hundred Years ' ` War , and some historians trace it back to the early 12th century .
The constabulary was regularised as a military body in 1337 .
Under King Francis I -LRB- who reigned 1515 -- 1547 -RRB- , the Maréchaussée was merged with the Constabulary .
The resulting force was also known as the Maréchaussée , or , formally , the Constabulary and Marshalcy of France .
The idea of a police , as it then existed in France , was considered as a potentially undesirable foreign import .
In building the case for the police in the face of England 's firm anti-police sentiment , Colquhoun framed the political rationale on economic indicators to show that a police dedicated to crime prevention was `` perfectly congenial to the principle of the British constitution . ''
Colquhoun published a book on the experiment , The Commerce and Policing of the River Thames .
It found receptive audiences far outside London , and inspired similar forces in other cities , notably , New York City , Dublin , and Sydney .
His other contribution was the concept of preventive policing ; his police were to act as a highly visible deterrent to crime by their permanent presence on the Thames .
Other Scottish towns soon followed suit and set up their own police forces through acts of parliament .
The Act established a force in each barony with chief constables and inspectors general under the control of the civil administration at Dublin Castle .
By 1841 this force numbered over 8,600 men .
Their job was apolitical ; to maintain the peace and apprehend criminals for the courts to process according to the law .
King João VI established the `` Intendência Geral de Polícia '' -LRB- General Police Intendancy -RRB- for investigations .
He also created a Royal Police Guard for Rio de Janeiro in 1809 .
In 1831 , after independence , each province started organizing its local `` military police '' , with order maintenance tasks .
The Federal Railroad Police was created in 1852 .
A national force , the Dominion Police , was founded in 1868 .
Initially the Dominion Police provided security for parliament , but its responsibilities quickly grew .
The merger of these two police forces in 1920 formed the world-famous Royal Canadian Mounted Police .
In the American Old West , policing was often of very poor quality .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Foucault cites Magdalene Humpert author of Bibliographie der Kameralwissenschaften -LRB- 1937 -RRB- in which the author makes note of a substantial bibliography was produced of over 4000 pieces of the practice of Polizeiwissenschaft however , this maybe a mistranslation of Foucault 's own work the actual source of Magdalene Humpert states over 14,000 items were produced from the 16th century dates ranging from 1520-1850 .
The reason , argued Chadwick , was that `` A preventive police would act more immediately by placing difficulties in obtaining the objects of temptation . ''
In the second draft of his 1829 Police Act , the `` object '' of the new Metropolitan Police , was changed by Robert Peel to the `` principal object , '' which was the `` prevention of crime . ''
Later historians would attribute the perception of England 's `` appearance of orderliness and love of public order '' to the preventive principle entrenched in Peel 's police system .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
These terms refer in variable ways to practices and forms for policing that , in some sense , transcend national borders .
This includes a variety of practices , but international police cooperation , criminal intelligence exchange between police agencies working in different nation-states , and police development-aid to weak , failed or failing states are the three types that have received the most scholarly attention .
There are also many interesting examples of cross-border policing under private auspices and by municipal police forces that date back to the 19th century -LRB- Nadelmann , 1993 -RRB- .
It has been established that modern policing has transgressed national boundaries from time to time almost from its inception .
Not a lot of empirical work on the practices of inter/transnational information and intelligence sharing has been undertaken .
He argues that transnational police information circuits help to `` compose the panic scenes of the security-control society '' .
Perhaps the greatest question regarding the future development of transnational policing is : in whose interest is it ?
At a more practical level , the question translates into one about how to make transnational policing institutions democratically accountable -LRB- Sheptycki , 2004 -RRB- .
Police officers often carry handcuffs to restrain suspects .
With the country having one of the highest rates of violent crime , president Jacob Zuma states that South Africa needs to handle crime differently from other countries .
Other common pieces of police equipment include flashlights/torches , whistles , police notebooks and `` ticket books '' or citations .
During the professionalism era of policing , law enforcement agencies concentrated on dealing with felonies and other serious crime , rather than broader focus on crime prevention .
Before Terry , every police encounter constituted an arrest , giving the police officer the full range of search authority .
Search authority during a Terry stop -LRB- investigatory stop -RRB- is limited to weapons only .
In contrast , the police are entitled to protect private rights in some jurisdictions .
Punjab is bordered by the Indian states of Jammu and Kashmir to the northeast and Punjab and Rajasthan to the east .
In Pakistan it is bordered by Sindh to the south , Balochistān and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa to the west , and Islamabad and Azad Kashmir to the north .
There are several mountainous regions , including the Sulaiman Mountains in the southwest part of the province , and Margalla Hills , Salt Range , and Pothohar Plateau in the north .
Since independence , Punjab has become the seat of political and economic power ; it remains the most industrialised province of Pakistan .
Its capital Lahore is a major regional cultural , historical , and economic centre .
The capital and largest city is Lahore which was the historical capital of the wider Punjab region .
Other important cities include Faisalabad , Rawalpindi , Gujranwala , Sargodha , Multan , Sialkot , Bahawalpur , Gujrat , Sheikhupura , Jhelum and Sahiwal .
In the acronym P-A-K-I-S-T-A-N , the P is for Punjab .
The Chief Secretary in turn reports to the Chief Minister .
In addition to these departments , there are several Autonomous Bodies and Attached Departments that report directly to either the Secretaries or the Chief Secretary .
The Indus Valley Civilization spanned much of what is today Pakistan and eventually evolved into the Indo-Aryan civilisation .
The Vedic civilisation flourished along the length of the Indus River .
This civilisation shaped subsequent cultures in South Asia and Afghanistan .
Punjab was part of the great ancient empires including the Gandhara Mahajanapadas , Achaemenids , Macedonians , Mauryas , Kushans , Guptas , and Hindu Shahi .
It also comprised the Gujar empire for a period of time , otherwise known as the Gurjara-Pratihara empire .
Agriculture flourished and trading cities -LRB- such as Multan and Lahore -RRB- grew in wealth .
It is a UN World Heritage site , valued for its archaeological and religious history .
The northwestern part of the South Asia , including Punjab , was repeatedly invaded or conquered by various foreign empires , such as those of Tamerlane , Alexander the Great and Genghis Khan .
However , Alexander had to encounter and reduce the tribes on the border of Punjab before entering the luxuriant plains .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Alexander then marched through Ghazni , blockaded Magassa , and then marched to Ora and Bazira .
Turning to the northeast , Alexander marched to Pucela , the capital of the district now known as Pakhli .
He entered Western Punjab , where the ancient city of Nysa -LRB- at the site of modern-day Mong -RRB- was situated .
Alexander invested many troops , eventually killing seventeen thousand Cathians in this battle , and the city of Sagala -LRB- present-day Sialkot -RRB- was razed to the ground .
Alexander left Punjab in 326 B.C. and took his army to the heartlands of his empire .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The Umayyad Caliphate was the second Islamic caliphate established after the death of Muhammad .
It was ruled by the Umayyad dynasty , whose name derives from Umayya ibn Abd Shams , the great-grandfather of the first Umayyad caliph .
Although the Umayyad family originally came from the city of Mecca , their capital was Damascus .
Muhammad bin Qasim was the first to bring message of Islam to the population of Punjab .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Punjab was part of different Muslim Empires consisting of Afghans and Turkic peoples in co-operation with local Punjabi tribes and others .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- In the 11th century , during the reign of Mahmud of Ghazni , the province became an important centre with Lahore as its second capital -LSB- citation needed -RSB- of the Ghaznavid Empire based out of Afghanistan .
Timur Shah Durrani , the son and viceroy of Ahmad Shah Abdali , was driven out of Punjab .
In Punjab and Kashmir , the Marathas were now major players .
These became a formidable military force against the Mughals and later against the Afghan Empire .
After fighting Ahmad Shah Durrani in the later eighteenth century , the Sikhs took control of Punjab and managed to establish the Sikh Empire under Maharaja Ranjit Singh , which lasted from 1799 to 1849 .
The capital of Ranjit Singh 's empire was Lahore , and the empire also extended into Afghanistan and Kashmir .
Bhangi Misl was the fist Sikh band to conquer Lahore and other towns of Punjab .
Syed Ahmad Barelvi a Muslim , waged jihad and attempted to create an Islamic state with strict enforcement of Islamic law .
Syed Ahmad Barelvi in 1821 with many supporters and spent two years organising popular and material support for his Punjab campaign .
He carefully developed a network of people through the length and breadth of India to collect funds and encourage volunteers , travelling widely throughout India attracting a following among pious Muslims .
In Jhelum 35 British soldiers of HM XXIV regiment were killed by the local resistance during the Indian Rebellion of 1857 .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
Trade and people-to-people contacts through the Wagah border are now starting to become common .
The spring monsoon has either skipped over the area or has caused it to rain so hard that floods have resulted .
June and July are oppressively hot .
In August the oppressive heat is punctuated by the rainy season , referred to as barsat , which brings relief in its wake .
The hardest part of the summer is then over , but cooler weather does not come until late October .
Punjabi is the provincial language of Punjab .
The language is not given any official recognition in the Constitution of Pakistan at the national level .
Punjabis themselves are a heterogeneous group comprising different tribes , clans -LRB- Urdu : برادری -RRB- and communities .
In Pakistani Punjab these tribes have more to do with traditional occupations such as blacksmiths or artisans as opposed to rigid social stratifications .
Punjabi dialects spoken in the province include Majhi -LRB- Standard -RRB- , Saraiki and Hindko .
The Government of Punjab is a provincial government in the federal structure of Pakistan , is based in Lahore , the capital of the Punjab Province .
Punjab has the largest economy in Pakistan , contributing most to the national GDP .
It is especially dominant in the service and agriculture sectors of Pakistan 's economy .
With its contribution ranging from 52.1 % to 64.5 % in the Service Sector and 56.1 % to 61.5 % in the agriculture sector .
It is also dominant in the manufacturing sector , though the dominance is not as huge , with historical contributions raging from a low of 44 % to a high of 52.6 % .
In 2007 , Punjab achieved a growth rate of 7.8 % and during the period 2002 -- 03 to 2007 -- 08 , its economy grew at a rate of between 7 % to 8 % per year .
Livestock and poultry production are also important .
The structure of a mosque is simple and it expresses openness .
The tile-work of Emperor Shah Jahan is of a richer and more elaborate nature .
The pictured wall of Lahore Fort is the last line in the tile-work in the entire world .
On these occasions devotees assemble in large numbers and pay homage to the memory of the saint .
Soul inspiring music is played and devotees dance in ecstasy .
It forms a part of the folk music through mystic messages .
Exhibitions and annual horse shows in all districts and a national horse and cattle show at Lahore are held with the official patronage .
It not only encourages and patronises agricultural products and livestock through the exhibitions of agricultural products and cattle but is also a colourful documentary on the rich cultural heritage of the province with its strong rural roots .
These postulates were first used in the discovery that Mycobacteria species cause tuberculosis .
Often , even clearly infectious diseases do not meet the infectious criteria .
It is less clear that a pure culture comes from an animal source serving as host than it is when derived from microbes derived from plate culture .
Epidemiology is another important tool used to study disease in a population .
For infectious diseases it helps to determine if a disease outbreak is sporadic -LRB- occasional occurrence -RRB- , endemic -LRB- regular cases often occurring in a region -RRB- , epidemic -LRB- an unusually high number of cases in a region -RRB- , or pandemic -LRB- a global epidemic -RRB- .
This is referred to as colonization .
Entrance to the host at host-pathogen interface , generally occurs through the mucosa in orifices like the oral cavity , nose , eyes , genitalia , anus , or the microbe can enter through open wounds .
While a few organisms can grow at the initial site of entry , many migrate and cause systemic infection in different organs .
Neither of these colonizations are considered infections .
Non-pathogenic organisms can become pathogenic given specific conditions , and even the most virulent organism requires certain circumstances to cause a compromising infection .
Some colonizing bacteria , such as Corynebacteria sp .
and viridans streptococci , prevent the adhesion and colonization of pathogenic bacteria and thus have a symbiotic relationship with the host , preventing infection and speeding wound healing .
Not all infectious agents cause disease in all hosts .
On the other hand , some infectious agents are highly virulent .
The prion causing mad cow disease and Creutzfeldt -- Jakob disease invariably kills all animals and people that are infected .
Conclusions about the cause of the disease are based upon the likelihood that a patient came in contact with a particular agent , the presence of a microbe in a community , and other epidemiological considerations .
The images are useful in detection of , for example , a bone abscess or a spongiform encephalopathy produced by a prion .
A sample taken from potentially diseased tissue or fluid is then tested for the presence of an infectious agent able to grow within that medium .
The size , color , shape and form of a colony is characteristic of the bacterial species , its specific genetic makeup -LRB- its strain -RRB- , and the environment that supports its growth .
Other ingredients are often added to the plate to aid in identification .
Plates may contain substances that permit the growth of some bacteria and not others , or that change color in response to certain bacteria and not others .
Bacteriological plates such as these are commonly used in the clinical identification of infectious bacterium .
Microbial culture may also be used in the identification of viruses : the medium in this case being cells grown in culture that the virus can infect , and then alter or kill .
Eukaryotic parasites may also be grown in culture as a means of identifying a particular agent .
Viruses are also usually identified using alternatives to growth in culture or animals .
In this case , xenodiagnosis involves the use of the vector of the Chagas agent T. cruzi , an uninfected triatomine bug , which takes a blood meal from a person suspected of having been infected .
The bug is later inspected for growth of T. cruzi within its gut .
Microscopy may be carried out with simple instruments , such as the compound light microscope , or with instruments as complex as an electron microscope .
A fluorescence microscope is then used to detect fluorescently labeled antibodies bound to internalized antigens within clinical samples or cultured cells .
This technique is especially useful in the diagnosis of viral diseases , where the light microscope is incapable of identifying a virus directly .
Other microscopic procedures may also aid in identifying infectious agents .
A cell is normally transparent under a microscope , and using a stain increases the contrast of a cell with its background .
The response of bacteria to different staining procedures is used in the taxonomic classification of microbes as well .
The Gram stain identifies the bacterial groups Firmicutes and Actinobacteria , both of which contain many significant human pathogens .
The acid-fast staining procedure identifies the Actinobacterial genera Mycobacterium and Nocardia .
Serological tests , if available , are usually the preferred route of identification , however the tests are costly to develop and the reagents used in the test often require refrigeration .
Some serological methods are extremely costly , although when commonly used , such as with the `` strep test '' , they can be inexpensive .
For example , immunoassay A may detect the presence of a surface protein from a virus particle .
Immunoassay B on the other hand may detect or measure antibodies produced by an organism 's immune system that are made to neutralize and allow the destruction of the virus .
This amplification of nucleic acid in infected tissue offers an opportunity to detect the infectious agent by using PCR .
These diseases are fundamentally biological poisonings by relatively small numbers of infectious bacteria that produce extremely potent neurotoxins .
There is usually an indication for a specific identification of an infectious agent only when such identification can aid in the treatment or prevention of the disease , or to advance knowledge of the course of an illness prior to the development of effective therapeutic or preventative measures .
In part , these studies on the appearance of HIV in specific communities permitted the advancement of hypotheses as to the route of transmission of the virus .
The development of molecular diagnostic tools have enabled physicians and researchers to monitor the efficacy of treatment with anti-retroviral drugs .
Thus , while there still is no cure for AIDS , there is great therapeutic and predictive benefit to identifying the virus and monitoring the virus levels within the blood of infected individuals , both for the patient and for the community at large .
As a result , the victims of this disease do not have the opportunity to travel very far from the initial infection zone .
Also , this virus must spread through skin lesions or permeable membranes such as the eye .
As a result of the above features , the spread of Ebola is very rapid and usually stays within a relatively confined geographical area .
In contrast , the Human Immunodeficiency Virus -LRB- HIV -RRB- kills its victims very slowly by attacking their immune system .
As a result , many of its victims transmit the virus to other individuals before even realizing that they are carrying the disease .
Despite the low interaction between discrete hubs , the disease can jump to and spread in a susceptible hub via a single or few interactions with an infected hub .
Thus , infection rates in small-world networks can be reduced somewhat if interactions between individuals within infected hubs are eliminated -LRB- Figure 1 -RRB- .
Later report from Nature demonstrated that the same genetic variants are also associated with the natural clearance of the genotype 1 hepatitis C virus .
Sometimes , multiple antibiotics are used in case there is resistance to one antibiotic .
Antibiotics only work for bacteria and do not affect viruses .
The most common classes of antibiotics used in medicine include penicillin , cephalosporins , aminoglycosides , macrolides , quinolones and tetracyclines .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
It also associated with higher preferences for health and attractiveness in mates .
Higher fertility rates and shorter or less parental care per child is another association that may be a compensation for the higher mortality rate .
There is also an association with polygyny which may be due to higher pathogen load , making selecting males with a high genetic resistance increasingly important .
Higher pathogen load is also associated with more collectivism and less individualism , which may limit contacts with outside groups and infections .
There are alternative explanations for at least some of the associations although some of these explanations may in turn ultimately be due to pathogen load .
Thus , polygny may also be due to a lower male : female ratio in these areas but this may ultimately be due to male infants having increased mortality from infectious diseases .
When present , however , these infections seem to tend to be confined to only small regions of the body .
The unusual texture of the bone around the wounds suggests they were afflicted by a short-lived , non-lethal infection .
Scientists who studied the skull speculated that the bite marks were received in a fight with another Herrerasaurus .
Other carnivorous dinosaurs with documented evidence of infection include Acrocanthosaurus , Allosaurus , Tyrannosaurus and a tyrannosaur from the Kirtland Formation .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The word Mriga , in many Indian languages including Malayalam , not only stands for deer , but for all animals and animal instincts -LRB- Mriga Thrishna -RRB- .
During one of his hunting expeditions , he accidentally killed Shravana , mistaking him for game .
During Rama 's exile in the forest , Ravana kidnapped his wife , Sita , from their hut , while Rama was asked by Sita to capture a golden deer , and his brother Lakshman went after him .
According to the Mahabharat , Pandu , the father of the Pandavas , accidentally killed the sage Kindama and his wife with an arrow , mistaking them for a deer .
venat . -RRB-
says , `` We forbid to all servants of God hunting and expeditions through the woods with hounds ; and we also forbid them to keep hawks or falcons . ''
In practice , therefore , the synodal statutes of various localities must be consulted to discover whether they allow quiet hunting or prohibit it altogether .
Similar to fox hunting in many ways is the chasing of hares with hounds .
Other sorts of foxhounds may also be used for hunting stags -LRB- deer -RRB- or mink .
Such events are often called `` drives '' .
Hunting in other areas of the country fell below the national average .
Some animals , such as wild rabbits or squirrels , may be utilised for fur or meat , but often no use is made of the carcass .
Which species are varmints depends on the circumstance and area .
Common varmints may include various rodents , coyotes , crows , foxes , feral cats , and feral hogs .
Sitting at your desk in front of your computer , clicking at a mouse , has nothing to do with hunting . ''
In addition there are at present no bag limits and the open season is comparatively very long -LRB- 5 months - October to February inclusive -RRB- .
As a result , the populations of the five major mammalian game species -LRB- red-rumped agouti , lowland paca , nine-banded armadillo , collared peccary , and red brocket deer -RRB- are thought to be quite low -LRB- although scientifically conducted population studies are only just recently being conducted as of 2013 -RRB- .
Various herons , ducks , doves , the green iguana , the gold tegu , the spectacled caiman and the common opossum are also commonly hunted and poached .
There is also some poaching of ` fully protected species ' , including red howler monkeys and capuchin monkeys , southern tamanduas , Brazilian porcupines , yellow-footed tortoises , Trinidad piping guans and even one of the national birds , the scarlet ibis .
There is presumed to be relatively very little subsistence hunting in the country -LRB- with most hunting for either sport or commercial profit -RRB- .
The local wildlife management authority is under-staffed and under-funded , and as such very little in the way of enforcement is done to uphold existing wildlife management laws , with hunting occurring both in and out of season , and even in wildlife sanctuaries .
There is some indication that the government is beginning to take the issue of wildlife management more seriously , with well drafted legislation being brought before Parliament in 2015 .
It remains to be seen if the drafted legislation will be fully adopted and financially supported by the current and future governments , and if the general populace will move towards a greater awareness of the importance of wildlife conservation and change the culture of wanton consumption to one of sustainable management .
Hunting advocates -LSB- who ? -RSB-
Some environmentalists assert -LSB- who ? -RSB-
In modern times , trophy hunting persists and is a significant industry in some areas .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
The scimitar-horned oryx followed suit , while the addax became critically endangered .
It also hosts the headquarters of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation -LRB- SAARC -RRB- .
Kathmandu is the core of Nepal 's largest urban agglomeration located in the Kathmandu Valley consisting of Lalitpur , Kirtipur , Madhyapur Thimi , Bhaktapur and a number of smaller communities .
Religious and cultural festivities form a major part of the lives of people residing in Kathmandu .
There are people of other religious beliefs as well , giving Kathmandu a cosmopolitan culture .
Historic areas of Kathmandu were devastated by a 7.8 magnitude earthquake on 25 April 2015 .
The city of Kathmandu is named after Kasthamandap temple , that stood in Durbar Square .
The two-storey structure was made entirely of wood , and used no iron nails nor supports .
According to legend , all the timber used to build the pagoda was obtained from a single tree .
The city is called `` Kasthamandap '' in a vow that Buddhist priests still recite to this day .
Thus , Kathmandu is also known as Kasthamandap .
This name is derived from two Sanskrit words - Kanti and pur .
The ancient history of Kathmandu is described in its traditional myths and legends .
He has brought some Gops with him and made Bhuktaman the king of Nepal .
Very few historical records exist of the period before the medieval Licchavis rulers .
According to Gopalraj Vansawali , a genealogy of Nepali monarchs , the rulers of Kathmandu Valley before the Licchavis were Gopalas , Mahispalas , Aabhirs , Kirants , and Somavanshi .
From Sankhu , they migrated to Yambu and Yengal -LRB- Lanjagwal and Manjupattan -RRB- and established the first permanent Buddhist monasteries of Kathmandu .
One of these barracks is still in use at Bhadrakali -LRB- in front of Singha Durbar -RRB- .
Descriptions of buildings such as Managriha , Kailaskut Bhawan , and Bhadradiwas Bhawan have been found in the surviving journals of travelers and monks who lived during this era .
For example , the famous 7th-century Chinese traveller Xuanzang described Kailaskut Bhawan , the palace of the Licchavi king Amshuverma .
The trade route also led to cultural exchange as well .
The artistry of the Newar people -- the indigenous inhabitants of the Kathmandu Valley -- became highly sought after during this era , both within the Valley and throughout the greater Himalayas .
Newar artists travelled extensively throughout Asia , creating religious art for their neighbors .
For example , Araniko led a group of his compatriot artists through Tibet and China .
Bhrikuti , the princess of Nepal who married Tibetan monarch Songtsän Gampo , was instrumental in introducing Buddhism to Tibet .
Rulers from Tirhut , upon being attacked by Muslims , fled north to the Kathmandu valley .
They intermarried with Nepali royalty , and this led to the Malla era .
Despite the initial hardships , Kathmandu rose to prominence again and , during most of the Malla era , dominated the trade between India and Tibet .
Nepali currency became the standard currency in trans-Himalayan trade .
These served as the capitals of the Malla confederation of Nepal .
These states competed with each other in the arts , architecture , aesthetics , and trade , resulting in tremendous development .
The kings of this period directly influenced or involved themselves in the construction of public buildings , squares , and temples , as well as the development of water spouts , the institutionalization of trusts -LRB- called guthis -RRB- , the codification of laws , the writing of dramas , and the performance of plays in city squares .
Architecturally notable buildings from this era include Kathmandu Durbar Square , Patan Durbar Square , Bhaktapur Durbar Square , the former durbar of Kirtipur , Nyatapola , Kumbheshwar , the Krishna temple , and others .
This marked the beginning of the modern era in Kathmandu .
Kathmandu was adopted as the capital of the Gorkha empire , and the empire itself was dubbed Nepal .
During the early part of this era , Kathmandu maintained its distinctive culture .
However , trade declined because of continual war with neighboring nations .
To the north the urban area extends into several Village Development Committees .
However , the urban agglomeration extends well beyond the neighboring municipalities , e. g. to Bhaktapur and just about covers the entire Kathmandu valley .
The agglomeration of Kathmandu has not yet been officially defined .
They have the three highest population densities in the country .
-LRB- 2011 census -RRB- .
The following data table describes the districts considered part of the agglomeration :
Of these , Kathmandu Valley is in the Warm Temperate Zone -LRB- elevation ranging from 1,200 -- 2,300 metres -LRB- 3,900 -- 7,500 ft -RRB- -RRB- , where the climate is fairly temperate , atypical for the region .
In the Kathmandu Valley , which is representative of its valley 's climate , the average summer temperature varies from 28 -- 30 °C -LRB- 82 -- 86 °F -RRB- .
Unpredictable weather is expected , given that temperatures can drop to 1 °C -LRB- 34 °F -RRB- or less during the winter .
Rainfall has been recorded at about 1,400 millimetres -LRB- 55.1 in -RRB- for the Kathmandu valley , and averages 1,407 millimetres -LRB- 55.4 in -RRB- for the city of Kathmandu .
On average humidity is 75 % .
The chart below is based on data from the Nepal Bureau of Standards & Meteorology , `` Weather Meteorology '' for 2005 .
The chart provides minimum and maximum temperatures during each month .
The annual amount of precipitation was 1,124 millimetres -LRB- 44.3 in -RRB- for 2005 , as per monthly data included in the table above .
The decade of 2000-2010 saw highly variable and unprecedented precipitation anomalies in Kathmandu .
This was mostly due to the annual variation of the southwest monsoon .
In contrast , 2001 recorded only 356 mm -LRB- 14 in -RRB- of precipitation due to an extraordinarily weak monsoon season .
The location and terrain of Kathmandu have played a significant role in the development of a stable economy which spans millennia .
The city is located in an ancient lake basin , with fertile soil and flat terrain .
Kathmandu 's trade is an ancient profession that flourished along an offshoot of the Silk Road which linked India and Tibet .
Other traditional occupations are farming , metal casting , woodcarving , painting , weaving , and pottery .
-LSB- which ? -RSB-
Manufacturing is also important and accounts for 19 % of the revenue that Kathmandu generates .
Garments and woolen carpets are the most notable manufactured products .
Kathmandu is famous for lokta paper and pashmina shawls .
Tourism is considered another important industry in Nepal .
Separate organizations were created in Kathmandu to promote this activity ; some of these include the Tourism Development Board , the Department of Tourism and the Civil Aviation Department .
Furthermore , Nepal became a member of several international tourist associations .
Establishing diplomatic relations with other nations further accentuated this activity .
The hotel industry , travel agencies , training of tourist guides , and targeted publicity campaigns are the chief reasons for the remarkable growth of this industry in Nepal , and in Kathmandu in particular .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB- Tourism is a major source of income for most of the people in the city , with several hundred thousand visitors annually .
Since then , tourism has improved as the country turned into a Democratic Republic .
In economic terms , the foreign exchange registered 3.8 % of the GDP in 1995/96 but then started declining -LSB- why ? -RSB-
.
Asan is a bazaar and ceremonial square on the old trade route to Tibet , and provides a fine example of a traditional neighbourhood .
With the opening of the tourist industry after the change in the political scenario of Nepal in 1950 , the hotel industry drastically improved .
Now Kathmandu boasts several luxury such as the Hyatt Regency , Dwarika 's , theYak & Yeti , The Everest Hotel , Hotel Radisson , Hotel De L'Annapurna , The Malla Hotel , Shangri-La Hotel -LRB- which is not operated by the Shangri-La Hotel Group -RRB- and The Shanker Hotel .
It holds biannual meetings to review , process and approve the annual budget and make major policy decisions .
The ward 's profile documents for the 35 wards prepared by the Kathmandu Metropolitan Council is detailed and provides information for each ward on population , the structure and condition of houses , the type of roads , educational , health and financial institutions , entertainment facilities , parking space , security provisions , etc. .
It also includes lists of development projects completed , on-going and planned , along with informative data about the cultural heritage , festivals , historical sites and the local inhabitants .
An iron tower was erected to monitor the city and watch for fire .
As a precautionary measure , firemen were sent to the areas which were designated as accident-prone areas .
In 1966 , a fire service was established in Kathmandu airport .
Over the years the city has been home to people of various ethnicities , resulting in a range of different traditions and cultural practices .
Tamangs originating from surrounding hill districts can be seen in Kathmandu .
More recently , other hill ethnic groups and Caste groups from Terai have come to represent a substantial proportion of the city 's population .
The ancient trade route between India and Tibet that passed through Kathmandu enabled a fusion of artistic and architectural traditions from other cultures to be amalgamated with local art and architecture .
The monuments of Kathmandu City have been influenced over the centuries by Hindu and Buddhist religious practices .
The architectural treasure of the Kathmandu valley has been categorized under the well-known seven groups of heritage monuments and buildings .
The literal meaning of Durbar Square is a `` place of palaces '' .
The outer quadrangle has the Kasthamandap , Kumari Ghar , and Shiva-Parvati Temple ; the inner quadrangle has the Hanuman Dhoka palace .
Kumari Ghar is a palace in the center of the Kathmandu city , next to the Durbar square where a Royal Kumari selected from several Kumaris resides .
Kumari , or Kumari Devi , is the tradition of worshipping young pre-pubescent girls as manifestations of the divine female energy or devi in South Asian countries .
In Nepal the selection process is very rigorous .
Serious illness or a major loss of blood from an injury are also causes for her to revert to common status .
Located on the banks of the Bagmati River in the eastern part of Kathmandu , Pashupatinath Temple is the oldest Hindu temple in Kathmandu .
The temple as it stands today was built in the 19th century , although the image of the bull and the black four-headed image of Pashupati are at least 300 years old .
The temple is a UNESCO World Heritage Site .
Shivaratri , or the night of Lord Shiva , is the most important festival that takes place here , attracting thousands of devotees and sadhus .
-LSB- citation needed -RSB-
This procedure is followed in other temples around India , which were sanctified by Adi Shankaracharya .
It is a very popular tourist site .
Thousands of prayer flags are hoisted up from the top of the stupa downwards and dot the perimeter of the complex .
This is among the oldest religious sites in Nepal .
-LSB- clarification needed -RSB- There are pentagonal Toran above each of the four sides , with statues engraved on them .
Behind and above the torana there are thirteen tiers .
The art objects are also seen in street corners , lanes , private courtyards and in open ground .
This amalgamation is also reflected in the planning and exhibitions in museums and art galleries throughout Kathmandu and its sister cities of Patan and Bhaktapur .
It is the most important museum in the country , housing an extensive collection of weapons , art and antiquities of historic and cultural importance .
Given its focus , the museum contains many weapons , including locally made firearms used in wars , leather cannons from the 18th -- 19th century , and medieval and modern works in wood , bronze , stone and paintings .
It has a variety of pieces including his personal belongings , letters and papers , memorabilia related to events he was involved in and a rare collection of photos and paintings of Royal family members .
Like the Tribhuvan Museum , it includes his personal belongings such as decorations , stamps , coins and personal notes and manuscripts , but it also has structural reconstructions of his cabinet room and office chamber .
The southern gate of the palace is at the crossing of Prithvipath and Darbar Marg roads .
This palace was the scene of the Nepali royal massacre .
After the fall of the monarchy , it was converted to a museum .
It seeks to document 50 years of research and cultural heritage conservation of the Kathmandu Valley , documenting what artists photographers architects anthropologists from abroad had contributed in the second half of the 20th century .
The actual structure of the Museum showcases restoration and rehabilitation efforts to preserve the built heritage of Kathmandu .
The design uses local brick along with modern architectural design elements , as well as the use of circle , triangles and squares .
Kathmandu is a center for art in Nepal , displaying the work of contemporary artists in the country and also collections of historical artists .
Patan in particular is an ancient city noted for its fine arts and crafts .
It also runs morning and evening classes in the schools of art .
The National Library of Nepal is located in Patan .
The library is in possession of rare scholarly books in Sanskrit and English dating from the 17th century AD .
It covers a wide range of subjects including history , law , art , religion , and philosophy , as well as a Sanskrit manual of Tantra , which is believed to be over 1,000 years old .
The 2015 earthquake caused severe damage to the Ministry of Education building , and the contents of the Kaiser Library have been temporarily relocated .
Kathmandu is home to Nepali cinema and theaters .
The M. Art Theater is based in the city .
Most of the cuisines found in Kathmandu are non-vegetarian .
However , the practice of vegetarianism is not uncommon , and vegetarian cuisines can be found throughout the city .
Consumption of pork was considered taboo until a few decades ago .
A fringe population of devout Hindus and Muslims consider it taboo .
The Muslims forbid eating buff as from Quran while Hindus eat all varieties except Cow 's meat as the consider Cow to be a goddess and symbol of purity .
Continental cuisine can be found in selected places .
It also has several outlets of the international ice-cream chain Baskin-Robbins
It is richer and contains tea leaves boiled with milk , sugar and spices .
Alcohol is widely drunk , and there are numerous local variants of alcoholic beverages .
Drinking and driving is illegal , and authorities have a zero tolerance policy .
However , shops and bars in Kathmandu widely sell western and Nepali beers .
In recent years , these festivals have found wider participation from other Kathmanduites as well .
As the capital of the Republic of Nepal , various national festivals are celebrated in Kathmandu .
Social regulation in the codes enacted incorporate Hindu traditions and ethics .
These were followed by the Shah kings and previous kings , as devout Hindus and protectors of Buddhist religion .
Many relatives who join the funeral procession also take bath in the Bagmati River or sprinkle the holy water on their bodies at the end of cremation as the Bagmati is believed to purify people spiritually .
Also , with the modernization of Newar Buddhism , various Theravada Bihars have been established .
Kirats who have migrated from other parts of Nepal to Kathmandu practice Mundhum in the city .
Sikhism is practiced primarily in Gurudwara at Kupundole .
An earlier temple of Sikhism is also present in Kathmandu which is now defunct .
Jainism is practiced by a small community .
The Baha'is also have classes for children at the National Centre and other localities in Kathmandu .
Christian missionary hospitals , welfare organizations , and schools are also operating .
Nepali citizens who served as soldiers in Indian and British armies , who had converted to Christianity while in service , on return to Nepal continue to practice their religion .
They have contributed to the spread of Christianity and the building of churches in Nepal and in Kathmandu , in particular .
Martyr 's Memorial League is also held in this ground every year .
Kathmandu is home to the oldest football clubs of Nepal such as RCT , Sankata and NRT .
Other prominent clubs include MMC , Machhindra FC , Tribhuwan Army Club -LRB- TAC -RRB- and MPC .
This fairly large network has helped the economic development of the country , particularly in the fields of agriculture , horticulture , vegetable farming , industry and also tourism .
Operated by the Civil Aviation Authority of Nepal it has two terminals , one domestic and one international .
Regionally , several Nepali airlines operate from the city , including Agni Air , Buddha Air , Cosmic Air , Nepal Airlines and Yeti Airlines , to other major towns across Nepal .
KMC 's constant endeavor is to enhance its interaction with SAARC countries , other International agencies and many other major cities of the world to achieve better urban management and developmental programs for Kathmandu .
